As more and more network addresses come into use, there is concern about the growth in the number of routing tables entries. Historically, IP addresses were organized into three commonly used classes—Classes A, B, and C. Engineers quickly identified the problems associated with exhaustion of class B addresses and the increasing number of Class C address entries in routing tables. Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) treats multiple contiguous Class C addresses as a single block that requires only one entry in a routing table. An Internet Protocol (IP) address is a number that is typically written as four numbers separated by periods. When information is sent from one network or node to another, the packet of information includes the destination IP address. Because the IP deals with inter-networking, the IP address is based on the concept of a network address and a host address. The network address indicates the network to which a computer is connected, and the host address identifies the specific computer on that network. The IP address uniquely identifies a computer connected to the Internet. host address identifies the specific computer on that network. In its memory, the router contains a “routing table’ which contains information specifying all of the IP addresses of other networks. The router compares a packet’s destination IP address with the information contained in the routing table to determine the network to which the packet should be sent. In order to ensure that packets from one network can reach any other network, the Router must include an entry for each network it is connected to. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics.. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list contains links to the full- Text document files. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO reports is to go to: www.gao.gov/news/press-releases/news-reporters-and-public-officials-get-a-look-at-what-the-general-accounting-office-is-examining. FCC believes the appropriate means to collect information on Internet backbone networks at the present time is through informal and experimental efforts, which are currently under way. Because of the trend towards convergence in the communications marketplace and the nation’s increasing reliance on the Internet, FCC may need to periodically reassess its data collection efforts. If a more formal data collection program is deemed appropriate, FCC should exercise its authority to establish such a program. We provided a draft of this report to the FCC, NTIA of the Department of Commerce, and DOJ for their review and comment. FCC and NTIA officials stated that they were in general agreement with the facts presented in the report. A trial program for voluntary reporting of outages by providers not currently required to make such reports to FCC, such as Internet backbone providers. A focus group of the Council will evaluate the effectiveness of the program upon its completion and analysis of trial data. We were told that, due to concerns by some Internet providers about reporting network outages to the FCC, some providers may not report outages. A recommendation on outage reporting of these networks will be made by the Council after it has completed its study. agreement with the facts presented in the report. Technical comments provided by FCC, NTIA and DOJ officials were incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report for 14 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional committees, the Chairman, FCC; the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information, Department of Commerce. We will also make copies available to others upon request. Market participants described increasing choice of providers and lower prices as evidence of the competitiveness of the market. Factors that may reduce competition in this market or cause other problems include the limited number of Tier 1 providers, the limited choice ofproviders in rural areas, the manner in which Internet addresses are assigned, and the lack of control or knowledge about the movement of traffic across backbone networks. We were also told that the choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet concerns by some Internet providers about reporting network outages to a governmental agency. development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the Internet. According to many of the company officials we interviewed, there appears to be ample deployment of fiber optic cable in Internet backbone networks to support high bandwidth services. Concerns were expressed to us that shortcomings in the local telephone market were likely to intensify in the future due, in part, to the increase in demand for high-speed Internet services. We were told that capacity continues to be built by backbone providers and others and that backbone networks’ capacity will not be a bottleneck for the deployment of broadband applications. future due, in part, to the increase in demand for broadband applications and content. We found that some companies are offering services to address this problem by attempting to bypass incumbent telephone companies’ facilities. However, the majority of these efforts are focused on business customers in urban areas. Metropolitan fiber rings are being constructed as an alternative to using incumbent carrier services. Business customers purchase a direct connection to the fiber ring, which is connected directly to the backbone point of presence. For example, we found: limited broadband capabilities in local telephone markets could stall certain new applications. Incumbent local telephone companies have stated that the rollout of DSL service is hampered by the cost of reengineering parts of the network and existing regulations that require them to sell piece parts of their networks to competitors at cost-based rates. Legislation is pending in the 107th Congress that would address these concerns, and proponents of this legislation have said that this would help DSL roll-out in the U.S. and around the world. other high speed access lines—which are often used to link businesses (such as an ISP) to an Internet backbone point of presence. Some companies we spoke with expressed concern about slow or limited deployment of high-speed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) service in residential areas. Incumbent local carriers, on the other hand, have stated that there is considerable competition in the provision of special access service. Wireless direct access is also becoming available that will enable a company’s data traffic to bypass local telecommunications infrastructures. The Internet has evolved from a nascent but promising information tool to a 21st century medium central to commerce and communications for Americans and citizens the world over. There is a strong expectation that traditionally regulated services are already migrating to the Internet. No evidence came to light in the course of this study to suggest that the long-standing hands-off regulatory approach for the Internet has not worked or should be modified. The implications of convergence and greater future reliance on the Internet are at present largely unknown. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Unlike telecommunications services, the provision of Internet backbone service is not regulated. Congress maintained this distinction when it enacted the Telecommunications Act of 1996. No provisions were contained in the 1996 act pertaining to Internet backbone services. However, the treatment of these more established communications services and infrastructures under the Communications Act of 1934 has indirectly affected the burgeoning Internet medium. The act provided FCC and states the authority to take actions to encourage the deployment of advanced telecommunications capability. It sought to increase competition in other communications sectors, primarily the local telephone market. concerns, and proponents of this legislation have stated that this will advance the deployment of broadband in residential and rural areas. Opponents of the legislation believe the bill will not foster increased deployment ofbroadband services and may stifle competition in the local telephone market. In the 6 years since the federal government ended its sponsorship of a key backbone network, the Internet has changed the way people of the world live, work, and play. Other bills have been introduced in Congress proposing various other approaches and strategies to accelerate the Deployment of high-speed data services. and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large business users. Once on an Internet backbone network, digital data signals that were split into separate pieces or “packets” at the transmission point are separately routed over the most efficient available pathway and reassembled at their destination point. The standards that specify most data transmissions are known as the Internet Protocol (IP) Suite. Under part of this protocol, streams of packets are routed to their destination over themost efficient pathway. Other aspects of the protocol facilitate the routing of packets to their appropriate destination by examining the 32-bit numeric.  latency and the loss of data packets due to traffic congestion is a consequence of the current protocols for transmitting Internet traffic. As transmissions of time-sensitive applications over the Internet become increasingly common in the future, these problems may become particularly acute. Before such broadband content can be provided, both the backbone and the local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth. Of adequate quality. Also, more broadband content is expected to be transmitted over theInternet.of adequatequality. A few of those we interviewed noted that these applications can run well across the Internet. control and encryption. Companies reduce reliance on backbone service by caching frequently used content on their servers. “Internet2’ is a partnership of universities, industry, and government formed to support research and the development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the Internet. The Internet is not viewed as conducive to supporting research capabilities of high-speed technologies and other advanced functions, so alternative methods for such research have emerged. In addition, companies have emerged that specialize in caching frequently accessed content and storing it in varied geographic locations. New Internet services, such as video streaming and voice telephone calls over the Internet, are expected to become increasingly common in the coming years. Both Internet backbone networks and local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth and technical capabilities to support such services. At present, many backbone networks are not well designed to provision such “time-sensitive” services. Companies have emerged to build and provide services over networks that do not rely as much on traffic exchange across networks, the authors say. The adaptability of backbone networks for new services such as Internet-based voice and video is a key question. telephone networks—and the quality of Internet services can be compromised when high levels of traffic flow lead to congestion. Several of the market participants we interviewed were particularly concerned about their ability to understand where and why problems have occurred. Because the Internet is a network of interconnected networks with little data available or reported on service disruptions or outages, finding the source, cause, or reason for a problem may be the source and cause of a problem. Several ISPs noted that they receive service level guarantees from their backbone provider but that collecting remuneration for “downtime” is difficult. was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of quality for Internet services. We were told that this difficulty is related to the way that the Internet is engineered. Internet traffic is exchanged among providers on a “best efforts” basis. However, the Internet was not engineered to enable extremely high quality service at all times, as are telephone networks. The quality of Internet services can be compromised at any time, according to experts who spoke to CNN and other news outlets on the condition of anonymity. NRIC V is in the process of evaluating and will report on the reliability of “packet- switched’ networks. The council is also examining issues related to interconnection and peering of Internet backbone providers. We found that participants in Internet markets have begun to address latency and reliability problems in Internet backbone networks. For example, NRIC V will be evaluating the sufficiency of the best efforts of the Internet backbone provider’s “backbone-to-backbone” network. Most companies we interviewed in rural areas purchased “transport’ services to connect to an Internet backbone network. Sometimes transport was used to move data traffic to a nearby city that was not very far away. The majority of officials from these companies told us that the quality of Internet service is not diminished by transporting traffic across such distances. The one disadvantage of distant transport noted by several providers, however, was cost. Some company officials noted that it generally costs more to purchase transport to a distant location. Members of Congress are often concerned about whether telecommunications services reach rural areas. Several representatives of companies we interviewed noted that there are less Internet backbone facilities running through rural areas and fewer points of presence in those areas. As such, purchasers of backbone connectivity in rural areas may have fewer choices among providers than their counterparts in more urban locations. One point made by two rural providers is that rural areas sometimes have subsidized networks (e.g., state networks or networks funded, in part, by governmental subsidy) trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. To obtain information from a wide variety of participants within the Internet backbone market, we visited locations in 12 states with varying characteristics. We included large and small cities and rural areas from various regions of the country. Other criteria used for selection of areas were proximity to Internet points of presence, which are access points to the Internet, and proximity to network access points (NAP), which are points where Internet backbones interconnect. Also considered were the presence of other features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks. it generally receives a block of IP addresses from among the addresses that are assigned by ARIN to that backbone provider. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons. It presents unique problems for smaller ISPs and other entities. If an entity seeking IP addresses cannot utilize a large block of address issued by. ARIN, the entity must obtain their addresses from. among the allocations made by ARin to their Internet backbone. provider. The method of allocating IP addresses in large blocks enables backbone routers to operate efficiently. It makes it difficult for router for traffic routing purposes is substantially reduced. Spoke also told us that it makes it difficult for smaller entities to switch backbone providers. If an ISP were to change its backbone provider, it would generally have to relinquish its block of IP addresses and get a new block of addresses from the new backbone provider. Several ISPs and end users with whom we spoke said that changing address space can be time consuming and costly. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of their backbone provider's IP address block. We found that the degree of difficulty in changingaddress space depends on how an individual company’s computer network is configured. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of customers due to a change of IP addresses. A few also told us that it is not uncommon for an ISP to retain a relationship with its original backbone provider. It appears, therefore, that customers’ feelings of being tied to a provider may lessen the effective level of competitiveness in this market. A concern among several market participants we interviewed was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of connectivity. Is it possible to guarantee a customer a given amount of connectivity? Most residential users dial in to an ISP over a telephone line. Small business users may also connect to a backbone network through an ISP. Large businesses often purchase dedicated lines that connect directly to Internet backbone networks. Several ISPs and end users expressed concern about the manner in which Internet addresses are allocated. providers have points of presence in varied locations, although they concentrate these facilities in more densely-populated areas. Two companies specifically mentioned that they had or were planning to move their facilities to more urban locations because of the cost of distant transport. IP addresses for North America are allocated by the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) There are many Internet backbone providers offering service in the United States. Boardwatch reports 41 backbone providers with a national network and many other regional backbones. Approximately five to eight of these national providers are considered to be “Tier 1” backbone providers. A Tier 1 provider is defined by Boardwatch as having a network of wide geographic scope, having anetwork with many IP addresses, and many regional networks. Two types of facilities are used for the exchange of data traffic by interconnected Internet backbone providers. The first type of facility, known as a “network access point” (NAP), enables numerous backbone providers to interconnect with each other at a common facility. Internet data traffic is also exchanged by backbone providers at “private” interconnections. In a ‘peering’ relationship, backbone providers exchange data destined only for each other’s network generally without the imposition of a fee.  congestion and poor quality of connections at the NAPs led backbone providers to engage in “private interconnection.” Private interconnection refers to the exchange of traffic at a place other than a NAP. Of 17 backbone providers with whom we spoke, 15 used both N APs and private interconnections. Only one company said that it was likely to make greater use of Naps in the future. the majority of Internet traffic exchange occurs at private interconnection points, we found. Spoke said that some NAPs were not well managed. Some NAP technology was not “scalable’ — that is, beyond some level, it was very costly to increase the amount of traffic that could be exchanged. If traffic exchange at a NAP became congested, service quality could be compromised. Two typical problems that congestion causes include latency (delay in the transmission of traffic) and packet loss (when transmitted data are actually lost and never reach their destination). For example, one backbone provider told us that the loss of packets had sometimes reached 50 percent. We found that it is generally not viewed as economical for a backbone provider to peer with a less geographically dispersed backbone provider. Even if there were equal traffic flows, the larger provider will tend to carry traffic a further distance. When backbones C and D exchange traffic, C must carry the traffic much farther on the return path before it can hand off the data packets to D. The “tiering” of Internet backbone providers and the dual system of peering and transit agreements have caused controversies. In a peering arrangement, two backbone providers agree to exchange traffic destined only for each others’ networks. By the mid to late-1990s, another financial arrangement known as “transit’ emerged. While peering generally entails traffic exchange between two providers without payment, transit entails payment by one provider to another for carrying traffic. Currently, there is a segregation of backbone providers into “tiers.” The top tier or “Tier 1” providers generally peer with each other and sell transit to smaller backbone providers. We found no official data source that could provide information to allow an empirical investigation of the nature of competition in the Internet backbone market. Neither FCC nor NTIA collect data on the provision of Internet backbone services. DOJ often collects data for merger-specific analyses, but such data are not publicly available. Neither the Bureau of Labor Statistics nor the U.S. Census Bureau currently collects data directly on Internet backbone providers. The choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet backbone networks may be limited. features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks, state Internet Service Provider (ISP) associations, or Native American reservations. In the selected localities, we conducted 55 semistructured interviews with participants in the Internet backbone market between January and June 2001. We interviewed eighteen Internet backbone providers of varying size; two miscellaneous Internet companies that provide backbone-like twenty-four Internet size; eight end users of backbone services, including a college, a state government, corporations, and providers of content and Web hosting. for purposes of conducting interviews to support this study. In some cases, our request for an interview was declined, our telephone contacts were not returned, or we were unable to schedule an interview after repeated discussions with company officials. In addition to the information collected through interviews, we also conducted technical, legal, and regulatory research on the characteristics and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Each individual network or node that is connected to the Internet is identified by an Internet Protocol (IP) address—a number that is typically written. Market participants we interviewed described the Internet backbone market as competitive. No official data sources were identified that would provide information on the structure and competitiveness of the market. Even though there have been bankruptcies and consolidation in this market, a few new backbone providers have entered the market in the recent past. Some backbone providers are filling market niches by offering customers additional or unique services to complement their backbone services. Some stated that it is difficult to guarantee their own clients a certain level of service if they receive few guarantees themselves. The success of the Internet, as evidenced by its growth, evolution, diversity, and cooperative structure, has occurred with minimal government involvement. We interviewed officials and obtained documents from the Federal Communications Commission, the Department of Justice, the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the Census Bureau. We also interviewed two national Internet industry trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. If you have any questions about this report, please call me at 202- 512-2834. Despite the Internet’s success and the competitiveness of the Internet backbone market, several issues of concern regarding this market were raised to us during the course of our study. Market participants noted the importance of Tier 1 backbone providers and the potential for reduced competition if consolidation were to occur at the Tier 1-provider level. The inability of backbone customers to ascertain the causes of service degradation or traffic disruptions was also expressed to us, along with concerns about the adaptability of the internet to new services. Reps of ISPs and end users we interviewed throughout the country described the Internet backbone market as competitive. Most of these providers stated that they have several choices of backbone providers from which to obtain services. A few ISPs and other purchasers of backbone services also noted that the extensive choice of providers enables them to engage in “multihoming” — purchasing backbone services from more than one provider. Most non-Tier 1 backbone providers stated they can purchase transit from a backbone providers. It appears that only the 5 to 8 Tier 1 backbone. providers are viewed as competitors for primary backbone connectivity. Whom we spoke expressed concerns about their inability to peer with the largest providers. We were also told that peering policies should be made public. Some backbone providers with whom we spoke stated that the market is competitive, and transit rates have been decreasing. We found that some non-Tier 1 backbone providers do not want to peer With the largest backbone providers.. Some providers said they already had posted or soon would be posting their peering. policies on their Web sites or otherwise making them publicly available. The recent economic downturn in the communications sector may portend a further shakeout of backbone providers. Without quality interconnection, customers may have an incentive to buy service from the largest provider with the best-connected network. This would give the larger provider a competitive advantage, which in turn could cause the market to ‘tip’ More and more users would choose connectivity from the larger network, risking a monopolization of the industry. The FCC Working Paper and the Antitrust Division of DOJ have noted that in industries like the Internet backbone market, interconnection among carriers is critical to the quality of service consumers receive.