An operating room nurse assigned to a forward surgical team in Iraq had an unexpected medical situation and was evacuated out of theater. Theater officials requested a replacement from U.S. Army Forces Command. The individual identified as a replacement could not deploy for at least 30 days. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade identified an operating room Nurse that it could borrow from another unit in theater until the replacement arrived. After the replacement nurse arrived in theater, the Operating room nurse on loan returned to the unit the individual came from. Backfilling involves the identification and deployment of medical personnel into theater. Cross-leveling involves the temporary relocation of personnel from one unit in theater to another. For example, a dentist assigned to a brigade combat team in southern Iraq was evacuated out of theater for medical reasons. Given the backlog of needed dental work, commanders expressed concern about losing a dentist. In response, Army Forces Command initiated an effort to identify another dentist not in Iraq who was eligible to deploy to fill this need. The process typically takes about 45 days. Cross-leveling can present risk to medical operations in theater, especially when conducted on a recurring basis. Army officials told us that they are willing to accept some risks in order to mitigate other risks they believe are higher. "We recognize that risk cannot be eliminated; it can only be managed," said 1st Medical Brigade commander, Lt. Gen. James C. "Jim" Ritchie. "Cross- leveling in particular requires the assessment of risk associated with the personnel gap and the gap that would be created" The 9l5th Forward Surgical Team was authorized to deploy to Iraq in September 2009 with three general surgeons. Instead, it deployed with only one surgeon for the first 90-day rotation. Army data show the magnitude of these unfilled gaps or late arrivals for the reserve components ranged from about 3 percent to 7 percent from January 2008 to July 2010. As a result of the personnel gaps, Task Force surgeons temporarily relocated medical personnel already in theater from other medical units to the 9 l5th. About 4 percent of mobilized Army reserve component 90-day medical rotators did not deploy to theater or arrive in theater on time for 2008. In 2009, that figure reached 7 percent (38 medical providers out of 519) and through the first 6 months of 2010, this figure was over 3 percent. Unfilled reserve component personnel requirements can have serious consequences depending on the needed medical specialty. Medical commanders in theater typically cross-level to fill short-term temporary personnel gaps, although medical officials in needs arose. It can take 120 to 180 days to identify, notify, and then mobilize an Army reservist to fill an unfilled requirement. The Army’s 90-day rotation policy is intended to ease the financial burden of deploying reserve medical personnel and help retain them. It can be challenging to fill the gap before the start of the next 90- day rotation. To mitigate other risks they believe are higher, the Army is taking steps to mitigate the risk of injury or death to reservists. DOD has established five levels of medical care to treat injured or sick military personnel. Each level provides progressively more intensive treatment. The military has integrated more advanced medical care into the first three levels of care. Splitting medical units, such as level 3 combat support hospitals and level 2 forward surgical teams, in order to locate them in more areas increases the opportunities to provide advanced emergency care quicker and could save more lives, according to documents from the 28th Combat Support Hospital. The number of surgical sites has increased due to the emphasis on providing troops access to surgical care. Level 4 provides the full range of preventative, curative, acute, convalescent, restorative and rehabilitative care. An example of a level 4 facility is Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany. Level 5 – U.S. definitive care. This level provides the same level of care as alevel 4 facility, but most typically is located in the continental United States. Examples include Walter Reed Army Medical. Center in Washington, D.C.; National Naval Medical Center. in Bethesda, Maryland. Not all patients progress through all five levels of care. Joint and service definitions for each level of care vary marginally. For purposes of this report, we focused primarily on level 2 and level 3 facilities and their personnel. The U.S. command structure in Iraq and Afghanistan has evolved over time. In 2009, the designation of level 2 was established. The designation was changed to level 3 in 2011. The level 2 facilities provide the most comprehensive and advanced medical care in Iraq, the report says. and the degree to which current practice of splitting medical units has filtered into medical doctrine has been limited. Army planners have adjusted medical personnel requirements for forward surgical teams to account for changes in these smaller nonstandard medical unit reconfigurations. The Army would benefit by fully updating the organization of medical units concerning their size, composition and use, as applicable, to incorporate current practice, the authors say. They note that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from the commanders, and we noted in our report the Army Medical Department Center and School has updated its forward surgical team field manual. Report, the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade—the medical unit that provided oversight over medical units in Iraq before being replaced by Task Force 807th Medical Brigade. Report noted that splitting full-sized combat support hospitals into smaller parts can create medical personnel gaps in certain specialties. Report also went on to note that personnel with these smallercombat support hospitals are spread so thinly that when personnel take leave or are evacuated out of theater due to injury, the medical brigade has to make difficult decisions on where to find needed personnel. 60 minutes of injury, survival rates increase significantly. Studies show that for those severely injured or wounded, 90 percent do not survive if advanced medical care is not provided within 60 minutes. Medical officials in Iraq acknowledged that Army doctrine and the organizational design of medical units were top issues that needed to be updated to better reflect the current practice of splitting medical units such as combat support hospitals. According to an Army regulation, the Army maintains a lessons learned program to, among other the Army’s preparedness to conduct current and future operations. told us in a separate interview that medical doctrine, specifically the organizational design for both personnel and equipment, should be assessed and updated. These officials said that the splitting of combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams has gained acceptance over time but should be examined given how counterinsurgency doctrine is implemented in Iraq. Officials with the Surgeon Office in Iraq said that flexibility in the doctrine is critical, but that doctrine needs to reflect the realities of operations on the ground and the degree to which current practice of splitting medical teams is accepted. Army doctrine, which is the starting point for defining and planning a unit’s capabilities, has not been updated fully to reflect these changes in theater. Army theater commanders have reconfigured the composition of field hospitals and forward surgical teams by breaking them down into smaller stand-alone units. By being in more geographical areas, these critical life-saving medical units are better able to achieve their goal of providing advanced emergency medical care.areas to save lives. For example, as of December guidance could have if there were a sizeable increase in the number of DOD deployed civilians. As of December 2009 the Task Force 28th Combat Support Hospital in Iraq was split to be at three separate sites in Iraq. Theater medical commanders split these units because they found that the standard design configuration was no longer suitable for the model of care. Army medical officials have been developing specialized personnel documents to staff these medical units to identify the medical skill sets now needed to operate split medical units across multiple locations for counterinsurgency operations. The process is difficult and it came about because current doctrine and organizational design were not sufficient to address the capabilities needed for splitting medical units. their size, composition and use, as applicable, to incorporate current practices of splitting and reconfiguring deployed medical units in theater. DOD also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense and appropriate DOD organizations. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604. units, that are not known in advance. In sourcing requests through the emergent process, requirements are prioritized according to a force allocation decision model. While emergent requirements are considered within the model’s general framework, each request for forces is individually evaluated as it is received. Officials focus on whether or not forces are ready and available to fill the request rather than trying to determine the relative priority of the request, as is done at the Global Force Management Boards for rotational requirements. its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For the rotational force management process, requirements are identified 2 years in advance. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, medical. personnel and unit requirements are included in the Global Force Management Allocation Plan. The plan provides an approach for U.S. Central Command, the services, and the services’ force providers to manage the sourcing of. rotational requirements, such as the Balad Theater Hospital in Iraq or a combat support hospital in Afghanistan. facilitated through Global Force Management Boards, which are typically held on a quarterly basis. The product of these Global Force management boards is the Global Forcemanagement Allocation Plan, a document that is approved by the Secretary of Defense. The plan lays out known requirements, review and endorse sourcing recommendations and associated risk and risk mitigation options, and then to prioritize and meet the requirements as appropriate. It authorizes force allocations, and the plan is the product of a quarterly meeting of general officers from interested parties. organizations and offices we contacted, see table 1. We conducted this performance audit from August 2009 through January 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Defense (DOD) uses its Global Force Management process to meet its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For more information, visit the Defense Department’s website at: http://www.dod.mil/. DOD directive and theater guidance differ with regard to their eligibility for routine medical care. Theater guidance for Iraq and Afghanistan states that DOD civilians are eligible for emergency care but most routine care for them is subject to availability. Medical officials in Afghanistan told us that they provide routine care to U.S. federal civilians on a space-available basis, and that they would not turn away any person with injuries that presented a danger to life. The previous version of DOD Directive 1404.10 indicated civilians designated as emergency essential employees would be eligible for care at the same scope provided to military personnel. It is unclear what level of care deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. A DOD directive governing medical care for DOD deployed civilians is inconsistent with in-theater guidance. DOD relies on its own deployed civilians to carry out or support a range of essential missions, including logistics support, maintenance, intelligence collection, criminal investigations, and weapon systems acquisition. About 2,600 DOD civilian. employees were deployed to Iraq, and about 2,000 DOD. civilian employees were deployment to Afghanistan according to DOD’s April 2010 report. The extent of routine medical care available to DOD deployed civilians is unclear due to inconsistent guidance. Theater commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan are providing quicker access to advanced emergency medical care by placing more medical units in more geographical areas to save lives. Inconsistent guidance could potentially impact the medical personnel requirements planning process if medical officials in theater are uncertain about deployed DOD civilian employees’ access to routine care. The Army official agreed that if there is an inconsistency between departmental guidance and theater guidance, it should be examined. at the same level and scope provided to military personnel. In addition, we found that the theater guidance document for care in Afghanistan provided additional guidance that is inconsistent with both the DOD directive and with guidance provided elsewhere in the document. One section of the guidance stated routine care for all civilians was to be provided subject to availability. The other section said routine care would be provided for deployed DOD civilians in accordance with a previous issuance of DOD guidance. We found that this guidance was inconsistent with the previous DOD directive. DOD agreed that the Commander of U.S. Central Command should revise its guidance to clarify the level of care that deployed civilians should receive. Theater operational and medical officials determine how many and the types of medical personnel needed to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan through an ongoing assessment. DOD has continued to assess its need for medical personnel in theater based on the requirements of the mission and a variety of medical data and has made adjustments to meet specific theater needs to achieve the goal of providing advanced life-saving care quickly. Theater officials identify new medical personnel requirements and regularly reevaluate existing medical personnel. Officials use this information to increase or decrease the number of medical personnel in line with demand for medical services. For example, DOD medical officials conducted an analysis to determine the need for cardiovascular specialists in Iraq and Afghanistan based on, among other variables, the volume of cardiovascular-related medical evacuations in theater. Officials also analyze gaps and risks in the medical care structure under different possible scenarios. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/. medical care to the increased number of U.S. military personnel in theater, including a theater hospital and a preventative medicine unit. During the offensive in Bastion, Afghanistan, officials relocated some mental health providers in Afghanistan to Bastion for the duration of the heightened operational tempo. To further assess the need for specific types of medical specialists in a given unit and across the theater, medical officials analyze data from the Joint Theater Trauma Trauma database. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. information on the availability and readiness of both active and reserve forces. Risk assessments include violations of the services’ rotation policies regarding the required time at home for servicemembers. The the processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within and across medical specialties (e.g., orthopedic surgeons, critical care nurses, and psychiatrists), to comply with service guidelines. The services maintain a healthy inventory of medical specialists to meet the needs of the U.S. military. All of the Services identified critical care nurse, physician assistant, psychiatry and clinical psychology as high-demand specialties. its Global Force Management process. Once the Secretary of Defense designates a service to meet a medical requirement, that service identifies and selects units and personnel to fill the requirement. Medical officials in theater continually assess the number and the types of military medical personnel they need to support ongoing contingency operations in the theater. More information on the Global Force management process and the services’ personnel filling processes can be found in appendix II. The process was designed to provide insight into the availability of U.S. military forces to deploy. physician assistant, psychiatry, and clinical psychology as high-demand specialties. The services use unique yet similar processes to identify and select medical units and personnel to fill requirements for Iraq and Afghanistan. Each service’s medical personnel processes allow for the deployment of medical personnel from fixed military treatment facilities to support contingency operations. In addition, the processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within the services to help ease the burden on the armed forces in Iraq andAfghanistan. The processes for filling requirements all result in a unit and its personnel deploying to an operational theater to carry out a mission. benefit from integrating these lessons systematically into Army doctrine and the design of medical units. Updating doctrine and organizational design of these split medical units used in theater could help to assure that these units will be resourced with the needed number and mix of medical personnel. To enhance medical units’ preparedness to conduct current and future operations given the changing use of combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams in Iraq and Afghanistan, we recommend that the Secretary of the Army direct the Army Medical Department to update its doctrine. military medical personnel in Iraq and Afghanistan to support ongoing operations. We analyzed DOD and service policies and processes that govern the determination of medical personnel requirements. We compared a current DOD directive regarding medical care for DOD civilian employees and theater-level guidance regarding medical Care for U.S. federal civilians. We interviewed officials, including officials with the medical task forces and Surgeons’ offices in Iraq, Afghanistan about the current use and composition of medical units in theater. For the third objective, we reviewed the approaches used by Army theater medical commanders to meet medical Personnel requirements when gaps in needed personnel coverage occurred. GAO examined the Department of Defense’s efforts to identify and fill its military medical personnel requirements in support of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. We interviewed officials with the Joint Staff, U.S. Joint Forces Command, and the military services’ force providers. We obtained information on DOD’S Global Force Management process and how the services identify medical units and personnel to fill these requirements. We assessed the reliability of the data by interviewing the agency official responsible for collecting and summarizing the data. The theater commanding general can submit a request for forces through DOD’s Global Force Management process. Two Army sustainment brigades deployed to Afghanistan with their authorized medical personnel but did not have enough medical personnel to provide full support to their convoys and forward locations. In response, Task Force 62nd Medical Command in Afghanistan requested additional forces for these two brigades. Officials told us that DOD met this requirement by deploying 22 Air Force medics to Afghanistan. Medical officials in Iraq and Afghanistan said they must consider two operational limitations which affect how many medical personnel they formally request. Commanding generals of U.S. Forces-Iraq and United States Forces-Afghanistan are advised by a lead surgeon on medical policy and procedures. Each theater also has a medical task force that consist of professional staff members who coordinate care in theater. The theater surgeon and medical task forces command mostly Army medical facilities. For example, the Air Force operates a theater hospital in Balad, Iraq but coordinates closely with the task force medical brigade in Iraq. The positions of United States forces- Afghanistan Surgeon and the commander of the task Force medical command in Afghanistan are filled by the same individual. determine if the request for additional medical forces takes precedence over the need for other types of personnel already in theater. If so, they decide which personnel will redeploy out of theater to stay within the authorized force cap. High demand for medical personnel in certain specialties also plays a role in decisions about whether to request medical forces. For example, officials in Iraq determined that 16 additional veterinary food inspectors were needed for food safety inspections. But they did not formally initiate that request due to the current shortage of these specialists. Gaps in medical capabilities can occur when medical providers do not deploy as expected for reasons such as resignation. Medical personnel gaps can also occur when individual medical personnel need to leave the unit. According to medical officials in theater, when these gaps occur, Army commanders use two approaches to fill those gaps. The Army is using two approaches in Iraq and Afghanistan to fill medical personnel gaps, officials say. The military is also using a combination of approaches in Afghanistan and Iraq to fill gaps in medical personnel. The cap on the total number of U.S. forces allowed in Iraq and Afghanistan requires theater commanders to balance the number of medical personnel they request. For instance, officials in Afghanistan told us that when they initiate requests for additional personnel, the requesting unit is asked to offset the increase in forces on a one-to-one basis within the unit. If they are unable to do so, operational and medical officials determine if the request for additional medical forces takes precedence increases in numbers of DOD deployed civilians. About 4,000 medical personnel were in Iraq and about 6,000 were in Afghanistan at the end of July 2010. The United States’ military presence in Iraq is scheduled to end no later than December 31, 2011. As of September 2010, about 104,000 U.S. military personnel were deployed in Afghanistan, according to administration estimates. Figure 1 shows the breakdown of all military medical personnel inIraq and Afghanistan by service at the start of July. The DOD has established a database of medical personnel by service.