difficult tasks for USDA, such as reengineering business processes and establishing reliable and secure methods of transmitting and storing all electronic records. USDA officials working on these activities believe that these tasks can be accomplished by the December 18 deadline. E-File Act requires USDA to continue providing services in the traditional way to customers who choose not to use the Internet. CBAs must support dual service delivery functions--one electronic and one paper-based. identified how much funding and staff resources will be needed to fully implement the act. The CBAs decided not to issue any press releases publicizing the new e-file Web site. USDA said that it fully supports reproduced in appendix II. USDA agreed that it had problems meeting the act’s initial December 18, 2000, deadline for deploying electronic forms on the Internet. USDA also stated that successful implementation of the act will require continued funding, along with understanding and support of the USDA's programs or “owners” of the business being transformed. We conducted our review at USDA headquarters in Washington, D.C., and at key agency offices involved in e- file activities. USDA has not assigned a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and carrying out implementation for both CBAs and RMA E-File Act requirements. USDA has not yet developed and documented a comprehensive e-file implementation plan. USDA stated that OCIO will continue to ensure that the Secretary is fully informed on the department’s progress in meeting the E- file requirements. The department did not specify when and how progress will be reported to the Secretary nor how accountability for results will be ensured. the Internet and submitting required reports on initial e-file activities and plans to Congress. However, implementing full e-filing capabilities for all its farm service customers by the deadlines set by the act poses a far more complex and difficult challenge. A component critical to the success of any such initiative is the necessary authority and responsibility to manage it across different departmental entities. No single official has been so designated. Also, a comprehensive implementation plan is critical to help the department achieve a more consistent approach possible. USDA is preparing to implement plans in accordance with the GPEA. To address their e-file requirements, the CBAs had two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s preparing plans. purchased an on-line common forms software tool for selected a total of 219 forms. The report lacked specifics on activities and milestones, dependencies among USDA activities, and needed resources. It also did not assign a senior-level official with overall accountability for managing and ensuring the implementing disparate e- file activities. with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to Representative Eva Clayton, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, Nutrition, and Forestry, House Committee on Agriculture. Senator Richard Lugar, Chairman, and Senator Tom Harkin, Ranking Member, Senate Committee on agriculture. Representative Larry Combest, Chairman,. Representative Charles Stenholm, Ranking minority Member, House committee on Agriculture; Representative Tom Davis, Chairman. Vice Chairwoman, and Representative Jim Turner, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Technology and Procurement Policy, House Committee on Government Reform. We will also send copies to the Honorable Ann M. Veneman, Secretary of Agriculture; the Hon honorable Mitchell E. Daniels, Jr., Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Should you have any questions on matters discussed in this article, please contact us at tips@cnn.com.  Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders by mail: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Orders by visiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using the phone number below. from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Web site: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.htm e-mail: fraudnet@gaO.gov 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) or call the toll-free number at (1-800) 456-6000. two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s December 18, 2000, deadline. CBAs purchased an on-line common forms software tool for creating electronic forms, selected forms to post on the Web, and designed and begun implementing a common Internet Web site. At the time of our November briefing, the CBAs still needed to obtain OMB approval for each electronic form, complete testing of the Web page, train county-based field staff in the new e-file procedures. USDA selected 219 forms (57 from FSA, 6 from NRCS, and 156 from RD) to post on the Web. USDA believes customers can complete these on their own with assistance only from form completion instructions. USDA coordinated with OMB to develop a user-friendly format and are working to obtain OMB approval for each new electronic form. Designed and is implementing a common Internet Web site that can utilize a single Internet address to provide user access with common search and retrieval functions. to be done to meet the December 18 deadline. USDA’s CBAs provide services such as farm loans and conservation assistance. Under the E- File Act, these agencies were required to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system by December 18, 2000. The law further mandated that by June 20, 2002, agricultural producers be would be required to carry out them out. RMA began work on the required December 1, 2000, plan for allowing agricultural producers the option of obtaining, over the Internet from approved insurance providers, all forms and other information. By June 20, 2002, agricultural producers be able to file paperwork electronically with USDA if they choose to do so. RMA administers the federal crop insurance program, which helps protect producers against losses due to drought, flooding, and other unavoidable causes. By December 1, 2000, it was to submit to Congress a plan for enabling producers to obtain forms and information, such as crop insurance applications and production and yield reports, over the Internet. Implementation of the plan is to be completed by December 1,. 2001. NRCS, Rural Development, and County-based Agencies to establish electronic filing and retrieval system. Provides separate requirements for the CBAs and RMA. an Internet-based system enabling agricultural producers to access all forms and shall submit all forms on a request.request. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here.