The Guam Integrated Military Development Plan considered both existing and former DOD land areas for potential use to accommodate realignment actions. DOD owned about 40,000 acres of land in Guam at the time of this review—approximately 29 percent of the island. Funding uncertainties, operational challenges, and community impacts may not only affect the development of the Guam master plan but also increase costs for the U.S. government. DOD’s has begun efforts to create a successful partnership and coordinate with other federal departments and agencies, the Government of Guam says. legislature had approved $228 million for planning and initial construction funds for force posture realignments, including efforts for project planning in Guam. DOD officials also expressed concern regarding the department’s ability to obtain a continuous flow of funds adequate to pay its share of the current $13 billion cost estimate for military buildup on Guam. Future DOD operations may be constrained on Guam if improvements are not made to Guam's infrastructure. Government of Japan has agreed to provide $700 million for utilities infrastructure on DOD bases in Guam, but this funding is neither intended nor is it sufficient. and officials—was initiated on March 7, 2007. DOD officials said that additional time is needed to fully address the challenges related to funding uncertainties, operational requirements, and Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements. At the same time, DOD has not established a comprehensive and routine process to keep Congress informed on its progress dealing with these issues. Congress is not in a position to help ensure the best application of limited federal funds and the leveraging of all available options for supporting Base in Guam.  Guam provides strategic flexibility, freedom of action, and prompt global action for the Global War on Terrorism, peace and wartime engagement, and crisis response. About 29 percent of the land is controlled by DOD (see fig. 2), 52 percent is privately owned, and 19 percent is under the supervision of the Government of Guam. In 2003, the Senate Appropriations Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been properly funded. The U.S. military says Guam is an integral part of DOD’s logistical support system. optimistic that the study, which will include environmental limitations, facility requirements, real estate requirements, and estimated costs, will result in the identification and development of new training areas. The effects of the increase in military forces, in terms of population and military infrastructure, on Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements have not been fully addressed. The current population of Guam is estimated to be 171,000, and the projected future military population could increase it by more than 15 percent. The active duty military personnel and dependent population is estimated at 14,195 in Guam. required to support the development on Guam. The increased demand for workers may require workforce training for the local population. Foreign workers would have to temporarily enter the United States on temporary nonagricultural workers visas, capped at 66,000 per year. DOD officials have already indicated that visa waivers might be needed in order to mitigate limitations on the number of visas allowed into the U.S. each year. Other challenges associated with an increase of foreign workers in Guam include providing support facilities and services, such as housing and medical care. support facilities and services, such as housing and medical care for these workers, as well as possible social tensions between the local population and foreign workers because of job competition. The effects of the increased demand on Guam’s roads, port capabilities, and utility services have not been fully addressed. DOD officials and the Guam Integrated Military Development Plan identified several infrastructure areas that are in need of improvements. For example, the Government of Guam has estimated that it will cost about $2.6 billion to improve the local infrastructure to accommodate forecasted military and civilian growth.  Guam is located in an area of the Pacific commonly referred to as Typhoon Alley, where on average 31 tropical storms develop annually. Earthquake risk in Guam is caused by the island’s proximity to the Mariana Trench, which leads to earthquakes throughout the region. The construction costs for Guam are 2.64 times more expensive than the baseline average presented in the DOD Facilities Pricing Guide. The area cost factors identify Guam as one of the more expensive locations for military construction in comparison with other locations in the United States and its territories. The environmental impact statement will examine the potential environmental effects associated with relocating Marine Corps command, air, ground, and logistics units from Okinawa to Guam. Examine the Navy’s plan to enhance the infrastructure, logistic capabilities, and pier/waterfront facilities to support transient nuclear aircraft carrier berthing at Naval Base Guam. Evaluate placing a ballistic missile defense task force (approximately 630 servicemembers and 950 family members) in Guam. Under NEPA and the regulations for implementing NEPA established by the Council on Environmental Quality, an impact statement must include a purpose and need statement. A new carrier pier with additional capabilities will need to be constructed in order to accommodate this plan. Most of the aircraft from the aircraft carrier will also require temporary beddown at Andersen Air Force Base. The Army is also planning on basing a ballistic missile defense task force in Guam, though the size and mix of this task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. Funding requirements for the military buildup on Guam are yet not fully identified and may be difficult to meet given other priorities and existing funding constraints. The Navy is planning on periodically berthing an aircraft carrier in Guam. The support facilities needed for this ship are still being determined. According to Navy officials, a new carrier pier with a heliport will be built on the island. The exact size and mix of the Army missile defense task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still to be determined.to Guam. However, in the absence of information, it will be difficult to provide an accurate assessment of specific facility requirements to support the Guam realignment actions.  Guam is strategically located in the Pacific Ocean approximately 3,810 miles southwest of Honolulu, Hawaii. It is 1,600 miles east of Manila, the Philippines; and 1,560 miles southeast of Tokyo, Japan. Given its strategic location, Guam is an integral part of DOD’s military operations in the Asia-Pacific region. The U.S. has deployed a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier at Yokosuka Naval Base, Japan; deployment of a transportable ballistic missile defense radar system; and relocation of training activities. The failure or delay of one plan outlined in the Defense Policy Review Initiative may affect another. DOD officials expect that if the Futenma replacement facility in Okinawa is not built, the Marine Corps relocation to Guam may be delayed. The Government of Japan may encounter challenges in funding its share of the Marine corps move considering Japan’s other national priorities and its commitments associated with funding several other major realignments of U.S. forces in Japan. At the time of our review, the Japanese legislature had approved $228 million for planning and initial construction. $13 billion cost estimate includes costs to move Marine Corps forces from Okinawa to Guam. Government of Japan has agreed to contribute about $6.1 billion to develop facilities and infrastructure on Guam. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected on Guam at current estimated levels. DOD agencies, such as the Defense Logistics Agency and Defense Education Activity, that will help support the services’ influx of personnel, missions, and equipment to Guam will likely incur additional costs. U.S. forces are relocating units to other areas, including Guam. This initiative also includes a significant reduction and reorganization of the Marine Corps posture on Okinawa, Japan. More than 10,000 marines and their dependents will remain stationed in Okinawa after this relocation. The Marine Corps is still determining the specific mix of units and capabilities needed to meet mission requirements on both Guam and Okinawa, officials say. The move is part of a larger effort to reposition U.s. forces to respond better to regional crises. Marine Corps officials expect there will be additional facility repair costs periodically as a result of damage from typhoons and seismic shocks. Existing training facilities and ranges on Guam are not sufficient to meet the training requirements of the projected Marine Corps force. The Marine Corps estimated additional costs for strategic lift operating from Guam to be nearly $88 million annually. A DOD analysis of training opportunities in Guam concluded that no ranges are suitable for the needs of the projecting Marine Corps Force because of inadequacy in size or lack of size. PACOM coordinates East Asia and South Asia; EUCOM coordinates much of sub- Saharan Africa and Europe. CENTCOM coordinates efforts in the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, and Central Asia. There are 13 cooperative security locations throughout Africa that historically have been identified in the EUCOM master plan. The new U.S. Africa Command eventually will encompass the entire continent of Africa except for Egypt, which will continue to fall. Not shown are Northern Command, in Africa is shared among three combatant commands. Not shown are Northern Command, which coordinates activities in North America, and Southern Command. Northern and Southern Commands have significantly fewer facilities outside of the United States than the other regional commands in the Pacific, Europe, and Central Asia. There are also four functional unified combatant commands that are assigned worldwide functional responsibilities not bounded by geography. Special Operations Command, Strategic Command, Joint Forces Command, and Transportation Command are included in this list. The U.S. Central Command is based in Washington, D.C. In addition, we did not include Southern and Northern Commands in our analysis because these commands have significantly fewer facilities overseas than the other regional commands. We conducted our review from September 2006 through July 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to the contact named above, Nelsie Alcoser, Kate Lenane, Erika Prochaska, Roger Tomlinson; and Cheryl Weissman made major contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Last year, EUCOM’s master plan did not explain the potential effect of implementing base realignment and closure recommendations on the movement of troops from Germany to bases in the U.S. This year, PACOM discussed this topic as well as the progress of bilateral negotiations with Japan and challenges associated with this realignment. EUCOM and Army officials told us that any delay in the implementation of baserealignment andclosure recommendations would cause them to delay movement of Army servicemembers and their families.  CENTCOM’s master plan discussed efforts to solicit host nation contributions and the amount of coordination and support that is needed from DOD, the State Department, and Congress. EUCOM provided information on North Atlantic Treaty Organization contributions and discussed a burden-sharing arrangement with the Government of Norway. CENTCOM also provided host nation estimates and explained that its efforts to attain host nation funding were ongoing. This year, all of the commands described the effects of other defense activities on implementation of their master plans. master plan stated that the United States signed individual agreements with the governments of Romania and of Bulgaria in 2005 and 2006. EUCOM also provided additional details, such as the mission, planned capabilities, equipment and aircraft, and population. Furthermore, EUCOM provided a status of ongoing transformation realignments in its area of responsibility, including listing the return of facilities to host nations and changes to its basing categories. The master plans also described recent efforts to proceed with formal negotiations with the Governments of Poland. government has received approximately $592 million since 1989 in residual value and payment-in-kind compensation from property returns in EUCOM’s area of responsibility. EUCOM continues to aggressively seek compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. As EUCOM continue to return facilities in Germany, Italy, and Iceland, this figure may increase. Accordingly, we continue to believe that residual value should be addressed in the master plans. The master plan did not describe the challenges the command faces in addressing training limitations for the Seventh Air Force in South. of Africa except for Egypt, which will continue to fall under CENTCOM’s area of responsibility. Discussions are ongoing on the possible headquarters location and what kinds of military forces would be assigned to the command. This year, CENTCOM officials emphasized that infrastructure requirements in their master plan directly supported and responded to ongoing operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. In contrast, during our review of the overseas master plans in 2005, none of the commands did not fully explain the potential effects of such operations on other installations. forces from Seoul and other locations. Last year, CENTCOM did not report any environmental issues. This year, EUCOM identified areas for cleanup, groundwater investigation, and monitoring. CENTCOM’s master plan identified funding requirements for a wastewater treatment plant and a water treatment and distribution system at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan, in hopes of avoiding potential environmental problems. The extent to which there were no environmental issues last year in the command's area of responsibility has not been determined. The amount of contamination at one site did not present an unacceptable risk to human health or the mission. such as precise facility requirements and costs, time frames for an end state, base categories, host nation funding levels, and effects of other defense activities. For example, CENTCOM provided information on supplemental appropriations for facilities and projects at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan. This year, all of the commands categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating categories. All of the regional commands identified their precise facility requirement and costs for fiscal year 2008 and for fiscal years 2009 through 2013, and reported estimated facility sustainment costs. focus first on the mission and then on requirements by providing the type of mission the site has, the unit that it could host, and its role in the region. All of the commands provide similar information for their main operating bases, forward operating sites, and cooperative security locations. Even with the department’s effort to update the plans, there are still some areas that need to be addressed, such as the need to strengthen capabilities for rapid and flexible response in the central Asian states, the report says. categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating base, forward operating site, and cooperative security location. The commands also supplemented the information on base categories with detailed data on the installations’ capabilities, overall mission, population, and types of equipment and facilities located at each site. For example, CENTCOM and EUCOM also identified adjustments to the base categories, such as redesignating a main operating Base as a forward operating Site or consolidating two cooperative security locations into one.EUCOM also provided specific details on the capabilities of each base. security locations into one. EUCOM also provided specific details on sites no longer considered cooperative security locations in Bulgaria, Romania, and Poland. Sites with no operational importance and a commercial facility readily available for military use that did not require U.S. investment or presence. End state date. This year, all of the commands identified a common strategic end state date of 2013, which identifies the last fiscal year of the construction time frame. It provides users a more complete and clearer basis for tracking progress in meeting the command infrastructure objectives. The Seventh Air Force in South Korea may be unable to maintain combat capability in the long term because of a lack of adequate air-to-surface ranges. For decades, the Government of South Korea has attempted to relocate the Koon-Ni range. In May 2007, officials said that some progress had been made in addressing the Air Force’s training challenges in South Korean. In contrast, the PACOM plan described the training limitations involving bombing and live fire training ranges and the effects of airspace access restrictions in Japan on training. Department agrees validated training requirements that are affected by force posture transformation plans should be addressed in overseas master plans. Nonprogrammed and nonvalidated training limitations experienced by service components were not appropriate for inclusion in the overseas commands’ risk assessment. U.S. Forces Japan provided information on training limitations in its area of responsibility, while the Pentagon did not respond to a request for comment on the issue. The Pentagon said it is not aware of any nonprogrammed or non validate training limitations. and the effects of airspace access restrictions in Japan on C-130 training. In addition, noise and land use sensitivities and maneuver area limitations in Okinawa require U.S. forces to deploy to other Pacific Rim locations to supplement their training, which results in additional transportation requirements and costs. The plan also discussed efforts by U.s. Forces Japan and the Government of Japan to engage in bilateral discussions to address training shortfalls and explore solutions. We have previously recommended that overseas regional commands address residual value issues and that PACOM explain how it plans to address existing training. Corps force, because of inadequacy in size or lack of availability. The services are in the process of conducting a training study that includes Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific, officials stated that live fire artillery training, amphibious landings, and tracked vehicle operations will be challenging. Still, they are optimistic that the study, which will include environmental limitations, facility, facility and other factors, will be successful. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Japan anticipates the Government of Japan will continue to decrease these funds. PACOM did not identify specific host nation funding from the Defense Policy Review Initiative. EUCOM provided information on North Korea, including the Land Partnership Plan and Yongsan Relocation Plan for its bilateral agreements in South Korea. USFK provided details on current realignment efforts, including South Korea’s approval of the Land partnership plan and the Yongsan relocation plan for bilateral agreements. U.S. military construction funds to support realignment costs not paid by the Japanese government.  PACOM’s master plan updated information on the results of the Defense Policy Review Initiative. U.S. Forces Japan anticipates the Government of Japan will continue to decrease funds for the Japanese facilities improvement program. The replacement of the Marine Corps Air Station Futenma in hopes that it will lessen the effect of military aviation operations on the local citizens of Japan. For example, this year: PACOM.may increase or decrease U.s.-funded costs for future infrastructure changes. In addition, PACOM identified decreasing funds for. the Japanese Facilities improvement program, historically the source of major construction on U.N. bases in Japan. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected to be direct contributions. The remaining $3.3 billion will consist of investment incentives for family housing and on-base infrastructure, such as utilities, which over time could be recouped by Japan in the form of rent or service charges. For example, the Government of Japan will finance construction of family housing units in Guam, but these construction costs will be reimbursed by payments from the servicemembers’ housing allowance. In September 2001, DOD issued its Quadrennial Defense Review Report. Report called for developing a permanent basing system that provides greater flexibility for U.S. forces in critical areas of the world. President Bush announced what has been described as the most comprehensive restructuring of U.s. military forces overseas since the end of the Korean War. The integrated global presence and basing strategy is the culmination of various DOD studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study, the overseas bases study and the overseas force structure study. studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study, the overseas presence study, and the U.S. global posture study. In 2004 the United States and Japan began a series of sustained security consultations aimed at strengthening the U-S.-Japan security alliance. DOD’s Defense Policy Review Initiative established a framework for the future of U.s. force structure in Japan designed to create the conditions to reduce the burden on local Japanese communities and create a continuing presence for U.N. forces. PACOM’s plan did not address training limitations in South Korea and Japan. OSD recognized that further changes will result as it continues to implement the global defense plans. This year”s master plans incorporated key changes associated with the continuing evolution of U.S. overseas basing strategies and requirements. There is not a requirement for them to do so. However without such explanations and linkage, it was difficult to determine the extent to which the master plans were coordinated and synchronized with other defense plans and activities. U.S. PACOM’s master plan discussed the progress of dynamic realignment initiatives, which will relocate military personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. This year, DOD forecasted changes for next year's master plans involving the development of a new command responsible for Africa, which is expected to be established by September 30, 2008. The President announced in February 2007 that the U.S., military will establish a new, separate U.s. Africa Command to enhance security cooperation, extend humanitarian assistance. approval of the Land Partnership Plan and Yongsan Relocation Plan and efforts to coordinate the transfer of U.S.-vacated bases. EUCOM’s master plan identified specific information on efforts to close or return installations, such as Naval Air Station Keflavik, Iceland. Officials expect these efforts will accelerate the return of vacated facilities and areas to the Government of South Korea. The plan also recognized that current U.s. basing may not adequately support our review of the overseas master plans in 2005. personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. In addition, PACOM described the importance of relocating 8,000 marines and their dependents from Okinawa to Guam. PACOM provided information updating the status of the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan, including a list of U.S. military camps and sites returned to the Government of South Korea. EUCOM’s master plan stated that the United States signed individual agreements in Eastern Europe through a network of forward operating sites and cooperative security locations. We met with officials from OSD and each of the following commands and agencies: U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM), U. s. Army Pacific, U.s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific. We also met with the commander of Naval Forces Korea and the head of Naval Facilities Engineering Command-Pacific, Japan. We were also briefed on the status of Forces Korea, the Status of Forces Agreement Office, and other issues affecting the military in the region. For more information on OSD, go to: www.osd.org. that PACOM explain how it plans to address existing training limitations in our prior reports. We believe that identifying these issues would make Congress aware of potential challenges to obtaining residual value and to training U.S. forces in South Korea. Even though our prior recommendations have not been fully addressed, we continue to believe that they have merit and that Congress would benefit from disclosure of this information. In July 2006, the Senate report accompanying the fiscal year 2007 military construction appropriation bill directed DOD to provide a master plan on the military buildup in Guam. the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam. identify the exact size and makeup of the forces to be moved to Guam and the associated infrastructure required. address the various challenges associated with the military buildup. In comments on a draft of this report, the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Installations and Environment responded that congressional action is not necessary. We are sending copies to the Secretaries of Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and the Director, Office of Management and Budget. Copies will be made available to others upon request. GAO is not recommending executive action. Congress should consider requiring the Secretary of Defense to ensure that future overseas master plans address the extent to which the regional commands are seeking residual value compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. Future PACOM plans should address existing training limitations in its area of responsibility and the potential effects of those limitations on infrastructure and funding requirements, GAO says. To help ensure the best application of limited federal funds and the leveraging of all available options for supporting the military buildup on Guam until DOD prepares a master plan, Congress should require DOD to report periodically to all the defense committees. Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides information on projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for the Guam realignments. Additional time is needed for DOD to address several challenges before JGPO can develop a Guam master plan. The exact size and makeup of the forces to move to Guam and the housing, operational, quality of life, and services support infrastructure required are not yet fully known and are expected to be identified and assessed during the parallel environmental a master plan on the military buildup in Guam. GAO reviewed DOD's master planning effort for Guam as part of its annual review of DOD’s overseas master plans. The Guam master plan is scheduled to be completed in 2008, at which time a copy will be provided to congressional defense committees. DOD faces a variety of funding challenges, operational challenges, and community impacts that may both affect the development and timing of the Guam plan. The plan cannot be completed until the environmental impact statement is completed, a process that could take until 2009, Congress may not see the master plan for another 2 years. overseas regional commands and to provide the congressional defense committees with a report each year giving an assessment of the plans. As initiatives for expanding U.S. military presence on Guam began to emerge, the Senate Appropriations Committee noted the ambitiousness of the military construction program. In July 2006, the committee recommended deferral of two military construction projects at Andersen Air Force Base that were included in the President’s budget request until such time as they can be incorporated into a master plan for Guam. In August 2006, OSD directed the Navy to establish JGPO to facilitate, manage, and execute requirements associated with the rebasing of Marine Corps assets from Okinawa to Guam. The office’s responsibilities include integration of operational support requirements, development, program, and budget synchronization; oversight of the construction; and coordination of government and business activities. At the time of our review, J GPO and the Department of the Interior had formed a federal interagency task force in order to coordinate efforts to address issues relating to commerce, transportation, environment, and other areas. and other areas. In 2006, we reported that the master plans did not always explain how their implementation could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. In our prior work, we found that while DOD’s master plans generally exceeded the reporting requirements established by Congress, opportunities existed for the plans to provide more complete, clear, and consistent information and to present a more definitive picture of future requirements. JGPO falls under the direct oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Installations and Environment. established a comprehensive and routine process to keep Congress informed on its progress in dealing with these issues. In July 2006, PACOM issued its Guam development plan—a notional document describing the future development of the military services basing strategies and requirements. While the Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides the best available information on the projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for future Guam realignments, DOD officials told us that their planning effort was still in its initial phases with many key decisions and challenges yet to be addressed. notional document describing the future development of the military services on Guam over the next decade and beyond. The plan is based upon a notional force structure that was used to generate land and facility requirements for basing, operations, logistics, training, and quality of life. DOD officials told us that the plan was not a master plan because it did not include specific information on facility requirements, associated costs, and a timeline for specific actions. The functional and base support requirements will be based on the type, size, and number of units that will relocate to Guam. The Navy issued a public notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement on March 7, 2007. According to DOD officials, the results of the environmental statement could take up 3 years to complete. The statement will affect many of the key decisions on the exact location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development. It must include a purpose and need statement, a description of all reasonable project alternatives and their associated environmental impacts (including a “no action” alternative), and an analysis of theenvironment of the area to be affected or created by the alternatives being considered. Federal agencies such as DOD are required to obtain the comments of any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law or certain special expertise. Until an agency issues a final environmental impact statement and record of decision, it generally may not take any action concerning the proposal that would either have an adverse environmental impact or limit the project's ability to do its job. The agency is also required to seek comments from appropriate state and local agencies, Native American tribes, and any agency that requested that it receive such statements. In 2005, we reported that without more complete, clear, and consistent reporting, Congress lacked the complete picture it needed to evaluate the annual military construction funding request. This year, the plans provided a much more comprehensive description of challenges and the potential effects on implementation. All of the regional commands describe to varying degrees the status of recent negotiations and agreements with host nations in their fiscal year 2008 master plans. In our review, we explained how these challenges could have an effect on infrastructure and funding requirements. In 2005, we found that none of the commands fully explained the status of or challenges to finalizing host nation agreements. These agreements depend largely on the political environment and economic conditions in host nations. The resulting agreements may increase or decrease U.S.-funded costs for future infrastructure changes. This year, the commands reported host nation funding levels at the project level for fiscal year 2008 and at the aggregatelevel for fiscal years 2009 through 2013, which provided users a better basis to determine the extent to which U.s. funding is needed for facility requirements. Master plans do not address the issue of residual value. U.S. government has received approximately $592 million since 1989 in residual. DOD officials believe that residual value cannot be readily predicted and therefore should not be assumed in the master plans. However, since these issues vary by host nation and may not be clear to all users of the plans, we continue to believe that OSD should require commands, at a minimum, to explain the issues with obtaining residual value in each host nation.. which commands are seeking residual value compensation. DOD already provides status reports on its residual value negotiations to the Committees on Appropriations and Armed Services. We continue to believe that the Secretary of Defense should require commands to explain the issues with obtaining residual value from each host nation and report the implications for U.S. funding. Our recommendation to Congress is grounded in the fact that residual value issues vary by host nation. and thus may not be clear enough to all users of the plans. We were aware of these reporting requirements, but these reports do not provide users. of the master plans the kind of information needed to address their concerns. Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been updated to reflect the new realities of the post-Cold War world. Committee has also expressed concern about the use of military construction budget authority for projects at bases that may soon be obsolete because of changes being considered in overseas presence and basing. In Senate Report 108-82, the Senate Appropriations Committee directed DOD to prepare detailed, comprehensive master plans for the changing infrastructure requirements for U.S. military facilities in each of its overseas regional commands. The military construction appropriation request for fiscal year 2008 included approximately $21.3 billion for military construction and family housing. As of fiscal year 2006, DOD had 3,731 installations, with 766 installations located overseas. In recent years, DOD has been undergoing a transformation to develop a defense strategy and force structure capable of meeting changing global threats. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The fiscal year 2008 overseas master plans have been updated to reflect our prior recommendations for improving the plans. The extent to which the commands provide information involving environmental activities provides the users of the plans with the ability to compare and comprehend how costs have varied and how these costs may affect planned U.S. funding levels. For example, PACOM’s force structure plans are linked to the military buildup on Guam. CENTCOM’S increased troop strength and facilities in Iraq and Afghanistan are also linked to ongoing operations. In 2004, before DOD issued its initial overseas master plans, we reported that various factors could affect the funding of U.S. infrastructure overseas. At that time, we recommended that the overseas regional commands address these and other factors in the development of their plans. This year’s plans provide information to respond to most of our prior recommendations. But they do not address residual value, that is, the value locations of bases and other facilities in the overseas area of responsibility. The plans generally incorporate key changes associated with the continuing evolution of US overseas basing strategies. European Command, U.S. Army Europe, and Special Operations Command. In general, we discussed the reporting requirements contained in OSD’s guidance, host nation agreements and funding levels. We also analyzed available reports, documents, policies, directives, international agreements, guidance, and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing changes in overseas defense basing strategies and requirements. To see firsthand the condition of the bases, go to www.cnn.com/cnndefense. facility requirements and costs, environmental remediation issues, and other issues affecting the implementation of the plans. We compared them to equivalent responses in other plans; formed conclusions as to the completeness, clarity, and consistency of the latest plan’s responses. We also discussed with DOD officials our observations and recommendations, specific reporting requirements, and whether improvements in the guidance and reporting were needed. We interviewed cognizant officials from DOD about the various changes and challenges that were identified within the Plans. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4523. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The GAO staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. to determine the extent to which the fiscal year 2008 overseas master plans have changed since last year.