Historically, Central California's San Joaquin River supported large Chinook salmon populations. Since the Bureau of Reclamation's Friant Dam became fully operational in the 1940s, much of the river's water has been diverted for agricultural uses. In 1988, a coalition of conservation and fishing groups. advocating for river restoration to support Chinook. salmon recovery sued the bureau of. Reclamation, which owns and from rivers. Today Central Valley spring-run Chinook Salmon are listed as threatened under the ESA. Native fall and late-fall-run chinook salmon continue to spawn in small numbers. Historical spawning runs may have exceeded 200,000 fish annually, ascending the river as far as Mammoth Pool. For several years after Friant Dam was in place, spring Chinook successfully spawned in habitat below the dam. However, the spring-run Chinook population had declined from historic levels before construction and full operation of the Friant unit of the Central Valley Project. It appears from California Department of Fish and Game records that a viable spring- run population existed well into the 1940s with returns ranging from 2,000 to 56,000. The Settlement states that if legislation is not enacted by December 31, 2006, the Settlement may become void at the election of a party. To date, no party has officially elected to void the Settlement. Title X of H.R. 146 (the 111 th Congress) contains a revised version of this legislation. Revisions address direct spending and restoration flow provisions (§§ 10004 and 10009) The parties hoped implementing legislation would be enacted prior to adjournment of the 109 th Congress. However, numerous entities who were not party to the Settlement objected to the legislative proposal. The Settlement bills were reintroduced in the 110 th Congress as H.R. 24 and S. 27. Hearings were held in both houses of Congress; however, the legislation was not enacted. Implementation of the Settlement calls for construction of numerous projects and other activities that could cost between $250 million and $1.1 billion. Federal funding for these projects and activities is sought by the parties and the federal government. No action was taken on the bills before adjournment of the 109 th Congress. Friant Division serves irrigation and water districts in the Fresno, Kern, Madera, Merced, and Tulare counties. By the late 1940s, Reclamation's operation of Friant Dam had caused long stretches of the river to dry up. Portions of the San Joaquin River upstream of its confluence with the Merced River remain mostly dry today, except during flood events. The diverted water helped develop and continues to support a diverse agricultural economy from north of Fresno to Bakersfield. Friant Dam is one of the largest federal dams of the Bureau of Reclamation's Central Valley Project (CVP) in California. The Settlement calls for new releases of water from Friant Dam to restore fisheries in the San Joaquin River. Full implementation of the Settlement would require congressional authorization and appropriations. Title X of H.R. 146, which passed the Senate March 19, 2009, contains a SanJoaquin River Restoration Settlement party issues, see CRS Report RL34237. The Settlement Agreement and subsequent implementing legislation are the culmination of nearly two decades of discussion, argument, and study on whether and how to restore fisheries below Friant Dam. The stated goals of the Settlement are twofold: to restore and maintain fish populations in "good condition" and to reduce or avoid adverse water supply impacts. To accomplish these goals, the Settlement calls for numerous actions, some of which need congressional authorization and appropriations. If Congress does not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement. A U.S. District Court judge has since ruled that operation of Friant Dam violates state law because of its destruction of downstream fisheries. Faced with mounting legal fees, considerable uncertainty, and the possibility of dramatic cuts to water diversions, parties agreed to negotiate a settlement instead of proceeding to trial on a remedy regarding the court's ruling. Most long-term water service contractors who receive the diverted water were added to the case shortly thereafter as defendant intervenors. In September the parties reached a settlement. The San Joaquin Valley (SJV) is an eight-county region extending 250 miles from Stockton in the north to Bakersfield in the south. Agriculture in these areas is highly dependent on irrigation; much of the irrigation water is surface water supplied by the Friant Division. Many growers also use groundwater, conjunctively managing their surface and groundwater supplies. This conjunctive management improves seasonal and multi-year water reliability for growers. The SJV faces significant environmental and natural resource challenges. users and third parties. A key legislative issue is how to finance Settlement implementation, specifically how to resolve congressional Pay-As-You-Go (PAYGO) issues. Other challenges are how to achieve the Settlement's dual goals of fisheries restoration and water management, and how to address concerns of stakeholders not party to the Settlement. This report provides a brief overview of the Settlement, its legal history, and the legislative context in which implementing legislation is being considered. For more information on fisheries restoration, water management and funding, see CRS Report RL34237, San Joaquin River Restoration. Settlement Agreement. San Joaquin River restoration Settlement legislation was first introduced in early December 2006 ( H.R. 6377 and S. 4084 ); however, no action was taken on the legislation. An agreement was reached to address certain third party interests; in exchange, these third parties agreed to support new legislation. Although many parties who had opposed the draft legislation in September 2006 supported the new legislation, other parties emerged that were not part of the new agreement, resulting in further opposition to Settlement legislation. Direct spending funding mechanisms included in the legislation would typically require a budgetary offset under congressional PAYGO rules. While short-term (10 year) direct spending in H.R. 146 has been reduced substantially compared with earlier versions of the legislation, the budget effects of the Legislation in its entirety are still at issue for some. An overall complication for Congress in considering San Joaquin Settlement legislation is that although the Settlement aims to end a 19-year lawsuit and is sought by the parties, it is contemplated under the Settlement. March 19, 2009, contains a San Joaquin River Restoration Settlement implementation provision. The legislation had previously been considered and passed the Senate as Title X of S. 22. Under the Settlement, increased water flows for restoring fisheries would reduce diversions of water for off-stream purposes, such as irrigation, hydropower, and municipal and industrial uses. The quantity of water used for restoration flows and the quantity by which water deliveries would be reduced are related, but the relationship would not necessarily be one-for-one. San Joaquin River management ties into other CVP management decisions, as well as state and local water systems. Recent court decisions regarding the health of threatened Delta Smelt have constrained water exports and may constrain future exports. The degree to which some of the water management goals identified by the CVP can be achieved is an issue. An issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement would be how the San Joaquin river is managed in the future. The CVP and State Water Project (SWP) are operating under regulations that limit the amount (and timing) of water that can be exported south out of the Bay-Delta. Reclamation is operating the dam in violation of California state fish and game code. The implications of this decision are far reaching for California water management. Several broad policy issues are raised by the Settlement. These issues partially derive from constraints imposed by the pressure to react to a settlement responding to a judicial ruling, as opposed to managing or legislating on an issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement. The settlement is expected to be completed by the end of the year. It will provide a framework for future water management decisions in California. The court did not declare what amount of water was necessary to satisfy the law or declare any other type of relief. The court set a 2006 trial date to determine a proper remedy. Faced with the prospect of a court-imposed remedy, and mounting legal challenges, Reclamation decided to appeal the decision. The appeal was denied and the court ruled that Reclamation had violated the state law. The case was heard in front of the California Supreme Court in San Francisco. The decision was handed down on November 14, 2005. of the wettest years, flood water releases could provide a significant amount of the restoration flows, thereby lowering the reduction in deliveries to agricultural and municipal users. In some years, restoration flows released in late winter and early spring may free up space for additional runoff in Millerton Lake. Regardless of the specifics of how much water might be released for fisheries restoration vis-à-vis water diverted for off-stream purposes, there will be impacts to existing surface and groundwater supplies in and around the Friant Division Service Area. The parties (NRDC et. al., Reclamation et al., and Friant long-term water service. contractors) began a series of settlement negotiations in late 2005, and came to a tentative agreement in June 2006. The terms of the Settlement were then vetted with selected stakeholders, finalized, and presented to Congress in September 2006. A key legislative issue is how to implement the Settlement. The Settlement Agreement was accepted by the District Court on October 23, 2006. Some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement, and which may have more severe consequences for area water users and third parties. with primarily Class II supplies, or in the driest of years. The future of water resource management in the Central Valley is not just conjunctive water management, but multi-year management with the financial resources to make it happen. Whether Congress addresses this issue—in California and elsewhere—given current water resource authorization and appropriations practices and a restrictive budgetary climate remains to be seen. While the issues discussed here have confronted prior Administrations and Congresses, a Settlement Agreement was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted. was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted, ultimately resulting in the difficult choices facing Congress today. This is a common dilemma for resource agencies implementing projects and programs which are based on societal and political trade-offs made decades ago. It is hard to say what is fair or just when such significant trade-off were made, causing harm to some, but providing benefit to others who then made financial and livelihood decisions based on the trade offs. The decision was ultimately made by the Supreme Court.