We reviewed documentation, interviewing EIA staff, and consulting with stakeholders. We determined the EIA data to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. While forecasts are subject to inherent uncertainties, we found these forecasts to be reasonable for describing potential conditions of the domestic refining industry. We identified some differences in the metrics reported in the four forecasts and did not make direct comparisons in these instances. We conducted this performance audit from November 2012 to March 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Retail prices for regular gasoline averaged $3.63 per gallon in 2012, the highest annual average price when adjusted for inflation since 1976. Retail prices have declined in 2013, but are still near historic highs. According to EIA data, increases in crude oil costs have been the largest component of the recent increases in gasoline prices. The refining component of prices—including labor, materials, energy, and other costs of the refining—is the largest contributor to price increases. In 2012, refineries received the majority of their crude oil by pipeline (over 50 percent) and by tanker vessel (37 percent) The outlook of the U.S. refining industry depends on future domestic consumption of petroleum products, which is uncertain. Economic growth tends to increase consumption, and EIA’s forecast scenario with higher economic projected to exceed global consumption. IEA projects refining capacity may grow even faster, resulting in excess capacity of nearly 15.5 million barrels per day by 2020, in contrast to an estimated 4.8 million barrels by 2020. The difference is equivalent to about eight average-size U.s. refineries. Consumption of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel peaked in 2007 and declined by over 8 percent through 2012. EIA estimated that petroleum product consumption increased in the first 11 months of 2013 compared with the first 10 months of 2012. Shifts in consumer behavior and demographic trends may reduce consumption. Higher prices for crude oil and petroleum products tend to decrease consumption of these products. fuel consumption is expected to be stable to slightly increasing through 2020, but not returning to high levels of the past. Most of the system of crude oil pipelines in the United States was constructed in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s to accommodate the needs of the refining sector and demand centers. Emerging crude oil production centers in Western Canada, Texas, and North Dakota have strained the existing pipeline infrastructure. Some refineries may not have been able to take full advantage of crudeOil production increases or had to rely on other more expensive crude oil transportation options such as truck, rail, or barge. For example, two of the refineries recently installed facilities to enable them to receive crude oil from North Dakota or Canada by rail. EIA data, while refinery receipts of crude oil by these methods of transportation is a small percentage of total receipts, they have increased 57 percent from 2011 to 2012. Infrastructure constraints have, according to EIA, contributed to discounted prices for some domestic crude oils. Increasingly, the crude oil being produced in the United States and Canada has different characteristics from the crude oils that some domestic refineries are configured to use. Production of new domestic crude oil has tended to be light and sweet, whereas a portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour. U.S. production of crude oil reached its highest level in 1970 and generally declined through 2008. Much of the increase in crude oil production has been from shale and other formations, such as the Bakken in North Dakota and the Eagle Ford in Texas. From 2005 through 2012, total Canadian crude oil recent years increased by 32 percent and U.S., imports from Canada increased almost 50 percent. The rapid growth in U.s. and Canadian crudeOil production has lowered the cost of crudeOil for some domestic refiners that have the access to process these crude oils. Sea that was historically about the same price as West Texas Intermediate. Those refineries able to take advantage of these lower priced crude oils have benefited because crude oil costs are the largest cost for refiners. Some of the growth in production has been in areas with limited transportation linkages to refining centers. The development of domestic and Canadian crude oil production has created some challenges for U.S. crude oil transportation infrastructure. Most refineries may not have been able totake advantage ofThese crude oils to the same extent for two key reasons.  horizontal drilling techniques and hydraulic fracturing have increased U.S. crude oil and natural gas production. As shown in figure 7, monthly domestic crude oil production has increased by over 55 percent through September 2013 compared with average production in the past five years. hydraulic fracturing is a process that injects a combination of water, sand, and chemical additives under high pressure to create and maintain fractures in underground rock formations that allow oil andnatural gas to flow. It is used to extract oil from shale formations that were previously considered to be inaccessible because traditional techniques did not yield sufficient amounts. The upstream segment consists of the exploration for and production of crude oil. The midstream segment includes pipelines and other infrastructure used to transport crude oil and refined products. The downstream segment includes the refining and marketing of petroleum products such as gasoline and heating oil. Biorefineries produce renewable fuels that are blended with petroleum products at wholesale terminals before being distributed to consumers. To varying degrees, refiners may primarily operate refineries, or may be integrated, participating in various other related industry segments, such as renewable fuels. One barrel of crude oil can be processed into varying amounts of gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and other petroleum products. Through the addition of specialized equipment, refineries can be optimized to produce greater proportions of specific types of products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry consists of firms of varying sizes that, in addition to operating refineries, may also have operations in other related industry segments: (1) the transportation sector; (2) the home heating sector; and (3) the liquefied petroleum gases industry. There were 143 petroleum refineries in the United States as of January 2013, with a capacity to process 17.8 million barrels of crude oil per day. Most refining capacity (almost 90 percent) is located in the Gulf Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. These refineries employed over 70,000 people in 2013. Refineries process crude oil into products primarily through a distillation process that separates crudeOil into products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry is one of the largest industries in the world. EIA data indicate that as domestic consumption has declined, refiners have looked to foreign markets to sell products. Since 1949, the United States had been a net importer of petroleum products. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product exports in 2020 is above 2010 levels. The extent to which domestic refiners are able to export their products will depend on the competitiveness of U.S. refiners compared with foreign refiners, the authors say. The authors say the industry’s future competitiveness is uncertain and that foreign markets present both challenges and opportunities. The United States recently exported more petroleum products than other leading exporters. Exports of petroleum products represented 7 percent of refinery production in 2007. Major markets for U.S. exports include Central and South America, Mexico, and Europe. EIA scenarios project export levels from 2.6 to 3.4 million barrels per day by 2020, a relatively wide range.. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product. exports will remain strong, according to most of the EIA and IHS forecasts. This report provides information on the domestic petroleum refining industry and its market and regulatory environment. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. Based on our research and information from stakeholders, we identified five key regulations that were recently strengthened or proposed. The Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard was identified as one of the key regulations to be addressed. We also asked agency officials and other stakeholders we contacted to recommend studies. We conducted searches of various databases, such as ProQuest and PolicyFile, for studies since published 2009. Stakeholders and information we reviewed suggest that various factors may affect the U.S. refining industry’s future competitiveness. IEA data indicate that competition from foreign refiners may increase as global refining capacity is projected to exceed global consumption. New Middle Eastern refineries are intended to be export facilities and may present increased competition to U.s. refiners. In addition, regulatory uncertainty can affect refiners’ competitiveness if it inhibits the industry from making investments that are attractive to foreign purchasers. The domestic petroleum refining industry has been and is expected to continue to be affected by several profound changes. Some of these changes, such as the growth in crude oil production in the United States and Canada, are reshaping the industry and creating new business opportunities. To take advantage of some of these opportunities, refiners and other market participants will need to upgrade refineries to be able to process different crude oils or to build pipelines or rail connections to move more crude oil from production to refining centers. Not all of the key regulations we reviewed would be expected to affect the industry’s competitiveness. CAFE and GHG vehicle standards do not impose requirements on refiners. RFS and Tier 3 standards could impose requirements with potential associated costs on some refiners, but they would not apply to exported fuels. In general, U.S. refineries are among the most sophisticated in the world and have generally been optimized to produce large proportions of cleaner-burning gasoline. The IEA has pointed out that refiners in many parts of the world face challenges. U.S. and Canadian crude portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour crude oils. Some refineries can use these crude oils, but some have invested in new equipment in order to do so. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards and the RFS have likely recently contributed to declining consumption of petroleum fuels, and compliance with the R FS has increased costs for some refiners. Overall, Overall, after decades of generally increasing domestic consumption of. petroleum products, consumption has declined since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic market for refiners, according to several stakeholders we contacted. The recession of 2007 to 2009 reduced economic activity and demand for gasoline. Stakeholders and information we reviewed also cited the effect of more stringent fuel economy standards and the RFS. The refining industry has shifted sales to export markets amid a declining domestic market. On average, the United States exported almost 1 million barrels per day of domestic petroleum products from 2000 through 2005. The U.S. market is important for domestic refineries because they have historically primarily sold their products domestically. The five key environmental regulations affecting the domestic refining industry that we reviewed are concerned with various health, environmental, and other issues. Current regulations do not require existing facilities to take any steps to control GHG emissions unless they undertake a major modification. Examples of major modifications at a refinery include a significant expansion of crude oil processing units. The LCFS would change the mix of fuels and vehicles in California to reduce emissions throughout the fuel ‘life cycle’ The goal of the LCFS is to reduce the level of carbon in transportation fuels by reducing the overall carbon intensity (CI) score for each fuel. The CI score is used to reflect each fuel’s life cycleGHG emissions. Under LCFS refiners can meet the CI reduction targets using a variety of low carbon fuel technologies. The original LCFS statewide reduction targets for gasoline, diesel, and their substitutes started at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 10 percent by 2020. In 2013 a state Court of Appeal found that CARB must correct certain aspects of the procedures by which the LCFS was originally adopted. CARB officials subsequently announced a regulatory package would be proposed in 2014, and that the 2013 standards will remain in effect through 2014.  LCFS is the subject of several ongoing lawsuits, which resulted in a 4-month delay in some regulatory activities. A study conducted by a consultant on behalf of industry says the legal challenge is creating uncertainty that discourages new investments by industry. EPA officials also explained that, in some cases, delays can occur when the refinery applicant has not provided EPA with the proper information to proceed with processing the permit. The Clean Air Act requires that EPA approve or deny such permits within 12 months of receiving a complete application. California refiners have thus far been able to comply with LCFS requirements by blending lower carbon intensive renewable fuels. Stakeholders and a refining industry trade association told us that California refiners could face higher costs or compliance challenges unless CARB adjusts future low carbon fuel requirements. CARB has estimated that the cost of LCFS on gasoline and gasoline- substitute fuels is likely to range between an increase of and a decrease of $1.5 billion per year. The decisions CARB makes with respect to the LCFS may affect California refiner’s ability to stay in business and compete with refiners in other states and countries. Refiners can also generate credits—which can be banked and traded—if their use of low carbon fuels results in greater-than-required carbon intensity reductions. CARB estimated that the 2020 targets would reduce GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector in California by 10 percent in 2020. EPA estimated that renewable fuels blending is required to double by 2022, which EPA estimated would reduce gasoline and diesel demand by 13.6 billion gallons, equivalent to about 10 percent of consumption in 2012. The extent to which these regulations will reduce future consumption depends on actions by regulators and market and other developments. According to several stakeholders, RFS compliance has been most difficult for refiners with less of a retail presence, known as merchant refiners. EPA officials told us that the RFS program affects all refiners equally because obligations are the same regardless of whether refiners blend renewable fuels themselves or purchase RINs. For example, an ExxonMobil official said that RIN costs did not have a significant impact on the company’s financial performance during the second quarter of 2013 because ExxonMobil meets the majority of its obligation by blending its renewable fuels itself. To demonstrate compliance with the RFS, refiners and importers must provide sufficient RINs for the volume of gasoline and diesel they produce for use in the contiguous United States and Hawaii. For example, to comply with the 2013 total renewable fuels standard, a refiner selling 100 million gallons of gasoline would have to provide 9.74 million total Rins to EPA. Refiners and other obligated parties with more RINS than needed to meet the year’s blending standard can hold them for use the following year. we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To demonstrate compliance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) annual blending requirements under the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), refiners use renewable identification numbers (RIN), which we refer to in this report as credits. A RIN is a unique 38-character code that renewable fuel producers and importers assign to each gallon of renewable fuel produced. RINs reflect the cost of renewable fuels compared with the petroleum fuels they displace. Prices for corn-based ethanol increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in RIN prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuels, referred to as the “blend wall” EPA officials told us that high corn prices, which made ethanol more expensive relative to gasoline, also contributed to higher Rin prices during this period. to blend or use renewable fuels by purchasing credits. These credits can be freely traded, and prices for credits are established based on the market. In 2013, prices for these credits increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July before declining to about $0.20 per gallon as of mid- November 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in credit prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuel. 2013 to EPA’s statements expressing its desire to address the blend wall. While the RFS applies to all refiners in the same way, effects of rising or falling RIN prices may vary depending on each refiners’ situation. RFS may increase costs for some refiners depending on the percentages of renewable fuels required by EPA and on other factors. The blend wall may remain a concern into the future because statutory renewable fuel blending requirements continue to increase while the consumption of petroleum products is expected to increase only slightly. Blending more than 10 percent ethanol with gasoline (called E10) is affected by constraints such as the limited availability of vehicles that can use higher ethanol blends. EIA: Higher ethanol blends are less widely available than E10 and must be priced at a discount to encourage greater consumption. EPA officials recently said the blend wall would be reached in 2014 when about 13.2 billion gallons of E10 could be consumed. Blending additional renewable fuels can be difficult and costly once the blending wall is reached. EPA is authorized to waive the RFS levels established in the act if the Administrator determines that implementing the requirement would severely harm the economy or environment. The major source of renewable fuels has traditionally been ethanol produced from corn. The increased cultivation of corn for ethanol, its conversion into renewable fuels could affect water supplies, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity, the authors say. According to EPA, achieving RFS’ statutory blending levels in 2022 could result in total benefits of between $13 and $26 billion. not subject to RFS requirements, or increase exports to nations where the RFS does not apply. The RFS has contributed to the declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels. As a result, refiners and other industry participants have blended increasing amounts of renewable fuels. According to EIA, increased ethanol use since 2007 displaced over 4 billion gallons of gasoline, or about 3 percent of gasoline consumption in 2012. As discussed previously, decreases in consumption affect refiners by decreasing the size of the domestic market. Congress established the RFS in light of concerns such as climate change and the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil. The potential for RFS to reduce petroleum-based fuel consumption will depend on the percentages finalized by EPA. The Administrator of EPA is authorized to waive RFS levels established in on actions by regulators and market and other developments. For example, as discussed above, EPA has proposed to reduce renewable fuel requirements for 2014 due to an inadequate supply. The proposal could be affected by legal challenges, as well as market infrastructure. RFS annual standards are issued on time. We provided drafts of this report to DOE, DOT, and EPA for review and comment. The three agencies provided technical comments on early or final drafts, which we incorporated as appropriate. EPA also provided a letter in which it generally agreed with our findings and recommendations and clarified three topics discussed in the report. Based on our work, refiners that purchase credits for compliance. differed from EPA's views on the effects of compliance with the RFS, we found. The RFS has had three main effects on the domestic petroleum refining industry. Compliance has increased costs, declining domestic consumption, and investment uncertainty. EPA has been late in issuing annual RFS standards, and several factors contribute to the delays. The outlook of the U.S. refining industry will also depend on the extent to which some key regulations—RFS, Tier 3, stationary source GHG requirements, and LCFS—increase costs for refiners. The requirements on domestic refiners from the key regulations we reviewed generally are expected to have a greater effect in the future. nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. Stakeholders included representatives from refining companies, environmental organizations, consultants, and officials from federal and state agencies. We also visited several refineries of selected refining companies. Because we used a nonprobable sample, the views of these stakeholders are not generalizable to all potential stakeholders, but they provide illustrative examples of the range of views. For example, to select refiners, we considered the size and location of their refineries, and whether they were vertically integrated or merchant refiners. proposed: (1) the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard regulations, (2) the Department of Transportation's Corporate Average Fuel Economy, and (3) the state of California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard. We reviewed agency regulatory impact assessments and industry and other studies on the effect of these regulations on industry. Other regulations may also affect the industry. We also summarized the results of semistructured interviews with a nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. EPA officials say delays in issuing RFS standards have largely been due to the length of the regulatory development process. Interagency review process is to ensure that regulations are consistent with the President’s priorities, among other things, and that decisions made by one agency do not conflict with the policies or actions taken or planned by another. Under the public review process, EPA must publish a proposed standard in the Federal Register, provide the public with the opportunity to review and comment on the proposal, and address comments received before finalizing the regulation. EPA has not met its statutory deadlines under the RFS in the five annual standards since 2009. EPA officials told us that they develop RFS regulations using the same procedures used for developing all EPA regulations. EPA has not conducted a systematic review of its experience issuing RFS Regulations to identify the underlying causes of repeated delays and has not identified changes, the authors say. The authors recommend that EPA and other agencies track their performance for developing significant regulations against targeted milestones to identify opportunities for improvement. They found that monitoring actual versus estimated performance could help agency managers identify steps in the process that account for substantial time. EPA tracks 14 milestones as it develops proposed rules and additional milestones in developing final regulations. For example, EPA tracks when its senior management approves of a document describing the scope of the regulation and the analytical work necessary to develop it. In comments to our 2009 report, EPA stated that it used an internal tracking system along with additional information to develop regulatory management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA stated at the end of the 2009 report that it uses an agency-wide Action Development Process to develop proposed rules. EPA proposed the 2014 standards on November 29, 2013, and EPA officials told us that they plan to finalize the standards in Spring 2014. The RFS compliance period is set by statute to be a full calendar year, and delays do not change this compliance period. As a result, when the RFS standards are issued late, the industry has less time to plan or contractual constraints, among various other factors, that could result in different outcomes in the short run. EPA stated that it adjusted the 2013 deadline to provide additional time to demonstrate compliance. EPA has not issued annual RFS standards on time since 2009. Uncertainty can affect the market climate within which these investment decisions will be made. EPA may waive the statutory volumes in whole or in part according to statutory criteria, which EPA has identified as potentially factoring in the blend wall, market developments, and other issues. However, EPA has missed the annual deadline for issuing annual standards under the RFS in most years. Most recently, EPA issued 2013 standards in August 2013—over 8 months late. are issued late, the industry has less time to plan and budget effectively. EPA delays in issuing RFS standards are important because delays do not change refiners’ compliance periods accordingly. Uncertainty among refiners, renewable fuel producers, and other market participants about how EPA will address the blend wall can affect investment decisions and ultimately the availability and prices of the fuels they produce. We recommend that the Administrator of the EPA take the following two actions: Assess past experience to identify the underlying causes of delays and develop a plan to address them. stationary sources that trigger GHG emissions thresholds. Since 2011, construction of any new refineries and certain refineries that are modified have generally been subject to the use of the “best available control technology’ The best available controlTechnology is determined for each facility based on an analysis of available technologies considering cost and other factors. For refineries, this could involve the installation of heat recovery units, which capture and use otherwise wasted heat in the refinery process. A refining company representative expressed concerns to us about the lengthy permitting process to authorize GHG emission increases. well as costs for vehicle manufacturers to improve the emissions performance of vehicles. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to take certain steps to address emissions from stationary sources, including refineries. EPA recently issued rules concerning how GHGs are to be included in certain existing permitting processes. Since 2011, construction on the Keystone XL pipeline in Texas has been delayed by two months. The pipeline is expected to be completed in time for the start of the 2016 presidential campaign. The project is expected in time to meet the president's goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent by 2016. Without such analyses and a plan to address the underlying causes of the delays, EPA risks repeating them. Tier 3 standards were proposed on May 21, 2013, and EPA announced final standards on March 3, 2014. Stationary source GHG requirements have been burdensome to refiners. EPA officials told us they were aware of only three refineries that have received majorSource GHG permits since the GHG permitting program began in 2010. The other key regulations that we reviewed have had minimal effects to date. with the agency for comment. EPA stated that the final Tier 3 program is very similar to what it proposed, though EPA made some changes based on public input and updated its analyses. EPA provided technical comments to incorporate information from the final rule which we incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We were not able to obtain stakeholder and other views on the finalTier 3 rule for this report. See appendix IV for EPA’s letter. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30. future delays would contribute to investment uncertainty and higher costs for refiners. EPA officials said that they did not believe delays have affected market participants. The extent to which the RFS increases costs in the future could also be affected by the outcome of any relevant litigation and of legislative proposals to change the Rfs or how EPA implements it. According to EPA, to meet the Tier 3 fuel sulfur standards, refiners would need to install or install or upgrade to meet Tier 3 sulfur standards. The RFS is expected to be implemented by the end of 2015. and places no requirement on existing refineries unless they undertake a major modification. EPA entered a settlement in which the agency agreed to develop national performance standards for GHG emissions from new and modified refineries. Although EPA has no current schedule to issue these standards, EPA committed in its settlement to issue them. A stakeholder told us that until EPA clarifies its approach for NSPS, many refiners will not comply with the new standards. The standards could impose more strict controls involving higher costs at refineries, he said. Under Tier 3 fuel sulfur standards, refiners would need to install or upgrade hydrotreating capacity or take other steps to reduce the sulfur content in fuels. EPA projected that 67 out of 108 refineries would modify or purchase some equipment. An industry study of the Tier 3 proposal estimated that the regulation would increase costs by up to $0.09 per gallon for the highest-cost refinery. Several of the refining industry representatives we contacted expressed concerns that stationary source GHG requirements could become more stringent in the future. during model years 2011-2025. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to establish certain standards for new motor vehicles and fuels to address air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. According to EPA, more than 149 million Americans experience unhealthy levels of air pollution. Cars and light trucks are significant contributors to air pollution, and EPA estimated that the Tier 3 standards will reduce pollution from cars and trucks by about 20 percent. The standards will also reduce the sulfur content of gasoline. estimated that the Tier 3 standards will reduce pollution from such sources. The standards set more stringent tailpipe emission standards for new vehicles. By 2030, annual emission reductions would generate annual benefits of between $6.7 and $19 billion and prevent up to 2,000 premature deaths annually. EPA estimated that the vehicle and fuel standards would cost approximately $1.5 billion in 2030, including costs for refiners to install and operate equipment to remove sulfur from gasoline, and costs for vehicle manufacturers to improve the emissions. CAFE standards are administered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) CAFE standards require that vehicle manufacturers meet fleet-wide average fuel economy standards for vehicles. NHTSA and EPA put the national program into place by issuing coordinated regulations covering vehicle model years 2012 to 2025.by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, equal to taking about 27 million vehicles off the road. Although the CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards are distinct, their targets were aligned for compliance purposes. industry by reducing the consumption of petroleum fuels, and compliance with the RFS has recently increased costs for some refiners. The other three key environmental regulations we reviewed have had minimal effects to date because they have either not yet been implemented or have generally not affected the industry in a major way. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards will require more efficient vehicles in the future, which may reduce future consumption of fuels. EPA estimated that the model year 2012-2025 standards are projected to reduce U.S. consumption of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels per day by 2025. EPA estimated that the 2011-2025 standards may save consumers and businesses $1.7 trillion. The standards may reduce oil consumption by 12 billion barrels, and reduce GHG emissions by 6 billion metric tons over the lifetime of the vehicles sold. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA has the authority to set the standards for vehicles sold during model years 2011- 2025. For more information on the standards, visit EPA.gov/fueleconomy or go to www.epa.gov. so, namely the cost for the renewable fuel compared to the petroleum fuel it displaces. In addition to the individual named above, Christine Kehr (Assistant Director), Elizabeth Beardsley, Catherine Bombico, Keya Chateauneuf, Nirmal Chaudhary, Quindi Franco, Cindy Gilbert, Katharine Kairys, Michael Kendix, Armetha Liles, and Alison O’Neill made key contributions to this report. GAO-12-732. Oil and Gas: Information on Shale Resources, Development, and Environmental and Public Health Risks. 2009. Federal Rulemaking: Improvements Needed to Monitoring and Evaluation of Rules Development as well as to the Transparency of OMB Regulatory Reviews. 2009. Energy Markets: Refinery Outages Can Impact Petroleum Product Prices, but No Federal Requirements to Report Outages Exist. 2008. Energy markets: Increasing Globalization of Petroleum Products Markets, Tightening Refining Demand and Supply Balance, and Other Trends Have Implications for U.S. Energy Supply, Prices, and Price Volatility. 2007. Vehicle Fuel Economy: Reforming Fuel Economy Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light Trucks. this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and to the Secretaries of Energy and Transportation and the Administrator of the EPA. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao,gov.