DOD has made significant investments in its military prepositioning programs. The services have collectively used an average of over $1 billion each year to operate and maintain these assets. Prepositioned assets have been used extensively to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army spent $386.1 million in fiscal year 2005 for storage and maintenance of prepositioned. assets, including $76.5 million for assets in South Korea and $38.3 million for. assets in Southwest Asia. The military services have prepositioning programs to store combat or support equipment and supplies near areas with a high potential for conflict. The Army’s program involves three primary categories of stocks: combat brigade sets, operational projects, and war reserve sustainment stocks stored at land sites and aboard prepositioned ships around the world. The Air Force prepositions stocks of war reserve supplies to meet initial contingency requirements and to sustain early deploying forces. Most of the military services store equipment and. supplies in Southwest Asia, the Pacific theater, Europe, and aboardPrepositioning ships. Temporary shelters are available in a range of sizes, materials, and features. They can be acquired faster than permanent facilities, which may take several years to plan, fund, and build. The military services have made prior use of temporary shelters in several locations, for both prepositioned and non-prepositioned equipment. For example, the Marine Corps uses temporary humidity-controlled facilities in Florida to store some of its prepositioning assets awaiting maintenance and upload.tested every 30 months, vehicles stored without humidity control require exercising every 12 months. One of the benefits of humidity control is avoiding or at least minimizing these increased maintenance requirements. The Army National Guard began the initial phase of a humidity-controlled storage program in 1994. The sheltering and preservation effort will save a total of about $1.2 billion, officials say. Most of the projected savings is based on having to perform less maintenance on equipment that is being preserved better in humidity- controlled facilities. For example, whereas combat vehicles need to be exercised and road tested every 30 months, vehicles stored without humidity control require using corrosion data regarding non-prepositioning programs. At the Army’s prepositioning afloat facility in Goose Creek, South Carolina, equipment is stored outside during the time it is not undergoing maintenance. In South Korea, Army officials told us the lack of available land limits their ability to construct new, or expand existing, facilities. Although building additional storage will require Army investment, the use of humidity-controlled storage will be cheaper and more efficient than building new storage space. The amount of time equipment is storage outside ranges, on average, from 1 month to more than 3 months. Army and Marine Corps have taken some measures to reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets. Army could increase its use of storage facilities for land-based assets, authors say. Most of the equipment drawn for military operations in Iraq during 2003 had been stored in humidity-controlled facilities. Army officials told us that the use of humidity- controlled facilities is effective at minimizing equipment corrosion and maintaining high readiness levels, they say. The Army is currently storing a substantial amount of equipment in such facilities. When prepositioned equipment was drawn by Army and Marine Corps units in military operations in Iraq during 2003, it was reported to be in good working condition and was not degraded by corrosion. Army officials from the 3rd Infantry Division have stated that with the exception of rubber seals on some vehicles, prepositioning equipment entering Southwest Asia was in good shape and had minimal, if any, corrosion. Sheltering assets, especially sheltering in humidity-controlled facilities, has been shown to be a key anticorrosion practice. As of April 2006, the Army was storing outside nearly all of its prepositioned assets (numbering about 11,000 items) in maintenance and experienced a total of $1.2 million in corrosion-related damage. Army officials in South Korea noted that it costs more to maintain equipment that is stored outside in part because the equipment needs to be inspected three times more often than equipment in humidity-controlled storage. In Kuwait, Army officials said that even with the additional planned storage facilities, substantial amounts of equipment will still be stored outdoors. The Army is storing a significant amount of land-based prepositioned assets outdoors without adequate sheltering. At these locations, assets are left relatively unprotected from moisture, sand, and other elements that contribute to corrosion. At Camp Carroll in South Korea, about 30 percent of the Army’s Heavy Brigade Combat Team equipment is stored outdoors in an often damp and humid region. Army officials told us that the equipment had been poorly maintained and, as a result, experienced many significant defects and readiness shortfalls. exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good operating condition it was when first uploaded about 2 years previously. With the exception of minor hydraulic leaks and o-ring deterioration, the equipment was generally free of corrosion problems. The primary measure to reduce corrosion of Army and Marine Corps prepositioned assets has been the use of humidity-controlled storage facilities. Most of the prepositioning equipment has been moved to a new location in the South Korean port city of Pusan, where it will be used for military exercises. Army and Marine Corps policies require that repaired equipment be restored to good condition. Army maintenance regulations require prepositioned equipment to be maintained at “10/20” standards. Marine Corps policy indicates that all equipment generally will be in “Code A” condition at the time it is placed in storage. equipment meeting this standard would have little to no corrosion, Marine Corps officials said. For equipment stored on theprepositioned ships, inspections are conducted on a periodic basis. had minimal, if any, corrosion. These officials said they did not experience any corrosion that affected their ability to perform operations. Officials with the 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force said the equipment on the prepositioning ship USNS Lummus that was used in a 2004 training exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good condition as it was in 2004. The equipment was in a high state of readiness and could not recall any instance where corrosion affected their. ability to do their jobs. U.S. troops in Southwest Asia are likely to magnify the effects of corrosion on military equipment. Higher rates of corrosion result in increased repairs and replacements, drive up costs. Collection of corrosion data for prepositioned equipment could better enable the Army and Marine Corps to support similar corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts in their prepositioning programs. Effectively addressing corrosion onprepositioned stocks of equipment can enable the services to achieve significant cost savings and increase readiness and safety for rapidly fielding combat-ready forces. We reviewed a wide range of reports and other documentation on Army and Marine Corps prepositioned equipment. In almost every instance, this corrosion information was not available, we found. Army determined that about $8.7 million (31 percent) of the estimated $28 million spent to restore this equipment to serviceable condition was used to address corrosion-related problems. Marine Corps officials estimated that corrosion costs make up at least 50 percent of the $110,000 needed, on average, to repair motorized equipment. Corrosion-related data that could enhance efforts to prevent and mitigate corrosion of prepositioned assets is unavailable. Army and Marine Corps consider collection of this information to be a low priority and, consequently, do not systematically collect it. Marine Corps officials said that the desire for the collection of corrosion information applies to all Marine Corps activities, including prepositioning programs. The mission of the Marine Corps’ Corrosion Prevention and Control Program is to reduce maintenance requirements and costs associated with corrosion. Officials from both the Army and the Marine Corps said that corrosion is routinely treated as part of the overall maintenance process. For example, Army officials at Camp Carroll, South Korea, told us that corrosion observed on the engine blocks in 5-ton trucks would be repaired during maintenance performed on the entire engine and would not be noted in the maintenance logs. According to Marine Corps officials, corrosion information has value but not enough to be included with more critical information, such as the amount of corrosion on equipment. on prepositioned assets and support additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. DOD concurred with our recommendations that the Army consider the feasibility of using temporary shelters, including humidity-controlled facilities. DOD did not provide specific information on planned actions, milestones, and resources for implementing the recommendations. With respect to the Marine Corps, DOD stated that collection of adequate data is not a matter of ‘if’ but ‘when’ The Army and Marine Corps should collect and use corrosion-related data to support additional. corrosion Prevention and Mitigation efforts. Estimates of corrosion costs DOD-wide have ranged from $10 billion to $20 billion annually. DOD and the military services did not have an effective management approach to mitigate and prevent corrosion, authors say. Having corrosion data helps the department learn what works so it can be more effective in reducing corrosion, they say. The Army and Marine Corps have taken some measures to reduce the that collection of adequate data is not a matter of being a low priority but a funding issue, the authors add. information systems needed to better collect, track, report, and manage efforts to prevent and mitigate corrosion. We interviewed officials and obtained documentation at the following locations: Office of the Secretary of Defense Corrosion Policy and Oversight Office Headquarters, Department of the Army U.S. Army Materiel Command, Fort Belvoir, Virginia Tank-Automotive and Armaments Command, Warren, Michigan, and Rock Island, Illinois. U.s. III Army Corps, Fort Hood, Texas. preservation effort will save a total of about $1.2 billion through fiscal year 2010. Army officials cited similar results after collecting corrosion data on Hellfire missile launchers. The types and areas of the launchers that were most prone to corrosion were identified and documented. Based on this research, maintenance technicians knew better to look for corrosion and how to control it before it worsened. The Army Missile Command’s tactical missile program executive office attributed a large portion of its $3.2billion overall long-term life cycle savings to the effort. Battalion Afloat, Goose Creek, South U.S. Forces Korea, Yongsan Garrison, South. Army Field Support Battalion Far East, Camp Carroll, Materiel Support Center Korea. 19th Theater Support Command, Camp Walker, Daegu, South Korea. Army Pacific, Fort Shafter, Hawaii. Marine Corps Headquarters, Quantico, Virginia. Navy Inspector General Naval Air Systems Command, Fort Detrick, Maryland. Navy Expeditionary Medical Command, Cheatham Annex, Headquarters, Seventh Air Force, South Korean. reviewed available data for inconsistencies and discussed the data with DOD and service officials. We determined that the data used for our review were sufficiently reliable for our purposes. The report is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions, please contact me at (202) 512- 8365.. The GAO is sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the. Secretary of the Army, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from across the U.S. and around the world. Click here for more travel snapshots from around the country and the world, and click here for a gallery of photos from around Europe and the Middle East, as well as a selection of images from CNN iReporters around the globe. To see more iReport snapshots, visit CNN.gov/Travel.