We selected projects that were either completed or had already carried out substantial planning. The potential universe of projects contained 10 completed projects including: Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion Light Rail. We also included 3 ongoing transit projects as part of the universe: Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector and Houston Metro North and Southeast Corridor pilot projects. This eliminated the John F. Kennedy Airtrain, Portland MAX Airport Extension, and Las Vegas Monorail projects. We applied three of four criteria from FTA’s Report to Congress to the remaining projects, including (1) project costs were reduced, (2) project duration was shortened, and (3) project quality was maintained. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion were eliminated. Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Largo Metrorail Extension was also eliminated. These projects were selected because they are recent examples of ongoing and completed transit projects in the U.S. that incorporated greater private sector involvement. This eliminated the D.C. Metro Transit Authority’s Largo Metro Rail Extension, which was scheduled to go into service in 2015. It also eliminated two of the remaining three completed projects, including the Minneapolis-St. Paul Metro. its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program in 2007: Bay Area Rapid Transit. The Oakland Airport Connector project is to be a 3.2-mile system that will connect the Oakland International Airport to the rest of the transit system. Lower-than-expected ridership predictions due to the economic climate, among other factors, led BART to move forward with a different alternative approach for its project. This eliminated the South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades, Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Transit Minimum Operating Segment 1 and Minimum operating Segment 2. to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one bidder are less competitive and can result in less attractive bids. Bay Area Rapid Transit negotiated with the sole remaining bidder on costs for nearly a year but then let the Request for Proposals expire with no proposals submitted. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Regional Transportation District’‘s Transportation. to encourage the participation of multiple b biders. For example, two contractors withdrew during the negotiation period due to concerns about the project affordability. Houston Metro's North and Southeast Corridor projects are to provide improved access to Houston’s Central Business District. The project is using a design- build-finance-operate-maintain approach, which includes financing by the private sector. The private sector partner will be selected through a competitive proposal process to deliver and operate the project under a long-term agreement. In sector potentially has a greater incentive to make efficient design decisions because it can be held responsible for the condition of a transit project for longer durations. out some construction activities in advance of their receiving a full funding grant agreement. Houston Metro officials told us that FTA required them to submit and resubmit entire project documents to FTA multiple times, which led to delays. FTA officials said the length of time for reviews depends on a number of factors, most importantly the completeness and accuracy of the project sponsor’s submissions, and that project sponsors could help to avoid such delays by improving their submissions. For example, FTA officials stated that Houston Metro’S projects have changed repeatedly, thus requiring multiple submittals. In the U.S., the private sector has played a more limited role in the delivery and financing of transit projects than in some other countries. Since 2000, seven New Starts projects were completed using alternative approaches. No completed New Starts have been able to add value to transit projects through improved management and innovation in a project’s construction, maintenance, and operation. When the long-term responsibilities of transit operations and maintenance are transferred, theprivate sector potentially has a greater incentive to make efficient design. cost and schedule benefits. The South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades saved 4 to 6 years by completing all upgrades as a single project, but incurred slightly higher costs than estimated for the conventional design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors may be able to benefit from certain efficiencies and service improvements by transferring long-term responsibility of transit operations and maintenance in addition to design and construction to the private sector. DOT’s 2007 Report to Congress on transit public-private partnerships stated that the privatesector may be can add value to transit projects through improved management. Project sponsors, stakeholders, and transit experts told us that potential cost and time savings can be key incentives for using alternative approaches. Minnesota Metro Transit’s Hiawatha Corridor (one of the seven completed New Starts projects that used an alternative approach) was completed 12 months ahead of schedule compared to using the conventional design-bid-build approach. It can potentially reduce the total cost and duration since a single contractor can concurrently perform project activities that would typically be carried out consecutively by multiple contractors. Denver Regional Transportation District and the private sector completed the Transportation Expansion project 22 months ahead of schedule and within budget. In the United Kingdom, the three Docklands Light Railway extensions were built using design-build-finance-maintain approaches. However, the use of alternative approaches does not guarantee cost and schedule benefits. For example, the design- build approach used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers saved an estimated $25 million to $38 million since early completion led to avoided administration costs. planned or in their early stages, we are retaining our recommendations. FTA officials provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and DOT. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at flemings@gaO.gov or (202) 512-2834. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. audit from October 2008 through October 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the individual named above, Steve Cohen, Assistant Director; Jay Cherlow; Patrick Dudley; Carol Henn; Bert Japikse; Joanie Lofgren; Maureen Luna-Long; Amanda K. Miller; Tina Paek; Amy Rosewarne; Tina Won Sherman; and Jim. Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and Establishing a Clear Federal Role. Highway Public-Private Partnerships: More Rigorous Up-Front Analysis Could Better Secure Potential Benefits and Protect the Public Interest. Public Transportation: Improvements Are Needed to More Fully Assess Predicted Impacts of New Starts Projects. Highway Highways: Increased Reliance on Contractors Can Pose Oversight Challenges for Federal and State Officials. Highways and Transit: Private Sector Sponsorship of and Investment in Major Projects Has Been Limited. Report: Pilot Projects Could Help Test Solutions to Long-standing Concerns with the EEO Complaint Process. Public Transportation: Better Data Needed to Assess Length of New Starts Process, and Options Exist to Expedite Project Development. High Speed Passenger Rail: Future Development Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and Establishing an Estimate of the Costs and Benefits of High Speed Rail in Washington, D.C. The report was written by Tina Paek, Amy Rosewarne, Tina Won Sherman, and Jim Wozny. Investment in Major Projects Has Been Limited. GAO-04-419. Washington, D.C.: March 25, 2004. Back to Mail Online home. Back into the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the pageYou came from: Back to thepage you came From. Backto the page You came from,. Back tothe page you were from, Back to The page you arrived from.Back to the pages you camefrom, Back To The Page You Came From. FTA may want to use existing, long-standing tools to incorporate more flexibility in the New Starts process to help facilitate transit projects that use alternative approaches. Without an evaluation plan to assess the results of its pilot program, FTA may also lose some valuable information Congress intended the agency to obtain through the pilot program’s establishment. We provided a draft of this report to DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use of these existing tools in the future. yet granting project sponsors any major streamlining modifications to the New Starts process. FTA does not have an evaluation plan to accurately and reliably assess the pilot program’s results, including the effect of its efforts to streamline New Starts projects for pilot project sponsors. We have previously reported that to evaluate the effectiveness of a pilot program, a sound evaluation plan is needed and should incorporate key features including: well-defined, clear, and measurable objectives; measures that are directly linked to the program objectives; criteria for determining pilot program performance. including design-build and design- build-finance-operate-maintain because of the lack of early commitment of federal funding for the projects. Use of these tools is not without risk. We found that the governments of the United Kingdom and Canada use conditional approvals to help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. The United States does not use these tools as much as it should. We have previously noted that Letters of Intent could be misinterpreted as an obligation of federal funds when they only signal FTA’s intention to obligate future funds. FTA has employed a contractor to determine whether risk is effectively transferred from the public to private sector for its pilot program projects. FTA can also use Letters of Intent to signal an intention to obligate federal funds at a later date when funds become available. Early Systems Work Agreements obligate a portion of a project’s federal funding so that project sponsors can begin preliminary project activities before a full funding grant agreement is awarded. From a public FTA still has the ability to further experiment with the use of existing tools that could encourage a greater private sector role. DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed to consider our recommendations and provided comments through e-mail from FTA officials. In their comments, FTA officials stated that the agency has ongoing and planned efforts as part of its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program that they believe address the intent of our recommendations. For example, they said they have made use of tools such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements in the past in order to streamline the New Starts process, and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use. The office is intended to offer outreach, professional capacity building, technical assistance, and decision-making tools for highway-related public-private partnerships. In addition, FTA officials told us that they have plans to develop an online toolset for employees to help them provide technical assistance to project sponsors. This assistance is to include checklists to help determine whether a project should use an alternative approach, risk matrices that provide an overview and explanation of risks transferred using such an approach, and a financial feasibility model that can be used to quantitatively compare the use of an alternative. FTA can offer concurrent project approvals into preliminary engineering and final design. The modification of any of FTA’s New Starts requirements and oversight tools will be on a case-by-case basis if FTA determines enough risk is transferred to and equity capital is invested by the private sector. These include Letters of No Prejudice that allow a project sponsor to incur costs with the understanding that these costs may be reimbursable as eligible expenses (or eligible for credit toward the local match) should FTA approve the project for funding at a later date. New Starts program by Deloitte, commissioned by FTA to review the New Starts process and identify opportunities for streamlining or simplifying the process. Study found that FTA’s risk-assessment process delayed project development. Consultants to the Dulles Silver Line project sponsor told us that through the New. Starts program through the FTA, they were able to get the project off the ground. The study found that the New starts process is perceived by project sponsors as intensive, lengthy, and burdensome. It also found that New Starts’ prescribed review times of 30 and 120 days are apparently arbitrary. considered transferring more risk to the private sector to meet FTA’s threshold to waive certain New Starts evaluation requirements, but decided against doing so. While it may be too early for FTA to grant major streamlining modifications with the other two pilot projects, FTA still has the ability as part of its pilot risk to consider granting major modifications to streamline its New Starts requirements. Despite this apparent impasse, FTA sill has the unique opportunity to take advantage of the fundamental characteristic of a pilot program to gain valuable insight. project sponsors with some level of relief, including expediting its risk assessment and providing Letters of No Prejudice earlier than traditionally allowed in the New Starts process to Houston Metro. The Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector pilot project, which FTA has also done for non-pilot program projects. FTA has only assessed the Houston Metro pilot project to determine the extent to which FTA could streamline the New starts process. Houston Metro officials said that they considered transferring more risk to the private sector to meet the needs of the project. The Dulles Silver Line is using the design-build approach with partial funding of the local share coming from area businesses generated through a tax-increment financing district. The New Starts project approval process may also limit other potential benefits, such as enhanced efficiencies and design improvements, when transit projects use alternative approaches. For the East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects, Denver officials told us that these additional costs stem from a lack of funding available in a surface transportation authorization period rather than FTA's New Starts requirements. The Federal Highway Administration has carried out three pilot programs that have allowed projects to move more efficiently through its grant process. These pilot projects waived certain aspects of the federal-aid highway procurement provisions. One of these pilot programs is cited as having helped pave the way for design-build to become the standard project delivery approach in highway projects. Another pilot program allowed the Federal Highway administration to waive regulations and policies so project sponsors in two states could contract with the private sector at a much earlier point in the project development cycle than was previously allowed. The Federal Aviation Administration uses Letters of Intent in its Airport Improvement Program to establish multiyear funding schedules. The Federal Highway Administration grants early conditional approvals to highway project sponsors seeking Transportation Infrastructure Finance. The FAA has granted 90 of these multiyear awards since 1988. The agency says the letters of intent allow project sponsors to proceed with greater certainty regarding future federal funding compared to the broader program and also help prevent project stops and starts. Also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations use similar conditional approvals. project, respectively. One project, the Las Vegas Monorail, a 4-mile fixed-guideway system serving the resort corridor along Las Vegas Boulevard in Nevada, was financed with tax-exempt revenue bonds issued through the state of Nevada and with contributions from the area resorts and hotels. No completed New Starts projects have been privately financed and therefore, none of these projects have used private equity financing. There have been very few examples of completed non-New Starts-funded new fixed-Guideway projects that have been private financed. and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds, and defined conventional project delivery to refer to the design-bid-build approach. We defined innovative financing to include loan or credit assistance such as the Transportation Infrastructure Financing and Innovation Act, Private Activity Bonds, Tax Increment Financing, State Infrastructure Banks, Grant Anticipation Notes, and Revenue Bonds. Finally, we defined alternative financing to referring to public-private partnerships that involve private equity capital such as concession agreements and defined alternative approaches as ones that transfer greater risk to the private sector. The New Starts grant process is closely aligned with the conventional design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors and other stakeholders for Denver Regional Transportation District’s East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects told us that the private sector must maintain its financial commitment to a project for up to several months. FTA has yet to grant three pilot project sponsors any major streamlining modifications of the New Starts project approval process, such as the awarding of concurrent approvals into the New starts phases, the authors say. The costs of delays may also contribute to additional project costs borne by the public sector. For the East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects, Denver Regional Transportation District officials also told us that since enough design work will be completed during the New Starts preliminary engineering phase, no additional design work is needed. However, as required by New Starts, they will again prepare the design documentation for the final design and full funding grant agreement approval phases, potentially contributing to schedule delays. FTA officials said that the resubmission of the documentation is necessary because the project will need to be fully funded before construction can begin. Denver Regional Transportation District officials anticipate adhering to the sequential and phased New Starts approach to its project. However, following this approach will likely increase the cost of the project. FTA officials told us that these additional costs stem from a reauthorization of the existing transportation bill, the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users. Management and Budget, and congressional review of the full funding grant agreement for the project will be key to the project's success. Congress authorized FTA to establish the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. Pilot program allows FTA to study projects that incorporate greater private sector involvement through alternative project delivery and financing approaches. Only one of the pilot projects is expected to incorporate private equity capital. FTA has agreed to provide all three pilot program project sponsors with some level of relief, including expediting its because of its sequential and phased structure, FTA’s New Starts program is incompatible with transit projects that use these approaches, the authors say. FTA identifies and recommends new fixed-guideway transit projects for federal funding. Over the last decade, the New Starts program has resulted in funding over $10 billion. The New Starts project approval process is not entirely compatible with transit projects that use alternative approaches in that the process is sequential and phased with approvals granted separately and at certain decision points. However, we and other stakeholders debt for large transit projects due to tight lending conditions. We have previously identified FTA’s New Starts grant program as a model for other federal transportation programs because of its use of a rigorous evaluation process. Using criteria set by law, FTA evaluates potential transit projects and assigns ratings to them annually. FTA uses the evaluation and rating process to decide which projects to recommend to Congress for funding. The sequential and phased New Starts project approval process can create schedule delays as project sponsors await federal approval. The amount of time it takes for FTA to determine whether a project can advance can be significant.. A 2007 study on the New Starts program by Deloitte, commissioned by FTA to review the availability of appropriations, noted that a project meets all the terms of a full funding grant agreement. Consideration of the public interest in transit may refer to the many stakeholders in public-private partnerships. No definition of public interest exists at the federal level, nor does federal guidance identify public interest considerations in transportation. Stakeholders include public transit authorities, transit agency employees, mass transit users and members of thepublic who may be affected by a public/private partnership. The public interest refers to the due diligence that FTA typically conducts as a public entity with a financial interest in a transit project. project sponsors have delivered transit projects using a wider range of alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships. According to World Bank officials, the United Kingdom and Canada are leading countries for private equity investment in transit, and the United States. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors, private sector participants, international stakeholders, and experts regarding the competitive procurement process and robust concession agreements. We also examined international mechanisms that were implemented for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands Light Railway, London Underground. FTA’s pilot program is expected to demonstrate potential benefits to using alternative approaches in transit. Project sponsors cited a range of potential benefits, such as achieving cost and time savings, as well as potential advantages to the public sector. As more transit projects use alternative approaches, FTA may not be able to readily accommodate these approaches, ultimately disadvantaging transit project sponsors that seek to deliver their projects more quickly and efficiently. We recommend that the Secretary of Transportation direct the FTA Administrator to take the following actions: Incorporate greater flexibility, protect the public interest through the use of standardized contracts, technical assistance, and financial assessments. Our scope was limited to identifying the primary issues associated with using public- private partnerships for transit infrastructure. We defined traditional financing to include federal grants, state and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors and private sector participants about their experiences with alternative financing and procurement in transit projects. We collected and reviewed descriptions of the projects, copies of the concession or development agreements, planning documents, and documentation related to the financial structure. GAO: Federal policy toward considering transit projects that use alternative approaches has created an opportunity for states to reexamine their own public-private partnership policies. FTA defines alternative approaches as those that increase the extent of private sector involvement beyond the conventional design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors told us that they may better meet cost and schedule targets as well as achieve cost and time savings by transferring risks to the private sector. GAO: It is critical that the public interest is protected and federal funding is spent responsibly. Government officials and consultants that perform financial assessments, such as Value for Money analysis, cautioned that the assessments are not without limitations. Officials and consultants told us that these analyses are inherently subjective and rely on assumptions that can introduce bias. In the United Kingdom, an “optimism bias” of cost overruns is added to the public sector comparator in part to account for this. Some countries have further protected the public-private partnership in the past to protect the taxpayer from being overcharged. In the United Kingdom, Value for Money analysis includes qualitative factors such as the viability, desirability, and achievability of the project in addition to the quantitative factors. Provinces such as Canada’s British Columbia and Australia's Victoria also include qualitative factors in their financial assessments. Project sponsors can assess if one public-private partnership option is more advantageous than another if it is decided that private participation in a project is beneficial. A sensitivity analysis developed for the Canada Line suggested that project costs could have varied from $47 million more to $270 million less than expected. The use of quantitative and qualitative public interest tests and tools before entering into transit public-private partnerships can help lay out the expected benefits, costs, and risks of the project. Not using such tools can potentially allow aspects of the public interest to be overlooked. For example, a Value for Money analysis is a tool used to evaluate if entering into a project as a public- private partnership is the best project delivery option. The United Kingdom, and British Columbia in Canada, among others, require avalue for money analysis for all transportation projects. Value for Money assessment was also completed for the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport Connector at the request of FTA. Value for Money tests are often done by comparing the costs of doing a proposed project as a public-private partnership against an estimate of the cost of procuring that project using a public delivery model. The tests examine not only the economic value of a project, but also the social and political value of the project as well as the potential benefits of a public/private partnership. Some countries have further protected the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by establishing quasi- governmental entities to assist project sponsors in implementing these arrangements. Entities such as Partnerships UK, Partnerships Victoria, and Partnerships BC are often fee-for-service and associated with Treasury Departments on the provincial and national levels. These quasi-governmental entities all develop guidance such as standardized contracts and provide technical assistance to support transit projects using alternative approaches. The United Kingdom’s standard contract outlines requirements as well as factors to consider from a project's service commencement through termination. delivery or alternative financing) or both of our established definitions. We determined that we would collect the most valuable and relevant information from countries that share a similar political and cultural structure to the United States. Given our limited resources, we decided to select only two of the three remaining countries. We ultimately identified Canada and the United Kingdom for our international site visits. Issues discussed in the report related to the interpretation of foreign law, including the character of public-private partnership agreements, were evaluated as questions of fact based upon interviews. project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that allow for flexibility under certain circumstances. For example, Houston Metro’s North and Southeast Corridor projects’ concession agreement incorporated this flexibility by including an operations and maintenance agreement for the first 5 years after service begins. According to a consultant that works on the project, this approach was chosen in part because the project sponsor wanted an option to revisit the contract. Periodically revisiting terms, or shorter concession periods, can also allow for changes such as system extension. have been avoided if the initial concessions had been shorter. Shorter concession periods are being used as a means to revisit terms and rebid if desired. Denver Regional Transportation District’s draft concession agreement includes clauses specifying both triggers that could lead to default and terms of compensation in case of default. For example, termination provisions detail the condition of the transit asset at the end of the concession when it is abandoned. For more information on how to get involved in this type of project, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/transit/how-to-get-involved-in-a-transit-project-you-can-help. If low performance continues over a period, the project sponsor can terminate the concession agreement and rebid the project to another private partner. Project sponsors we interviewed also protect the public interest in transit public-private partnership and other alternative approaches through the incorporation of private equity capital. When a private sector partner finances a project using equity capital, the private sector uses payments received from theproject sponsor to repay its costs plus provide a return on investment. The public interest is further protected by this integration transit asset at the end of the concession when it is transferred back to the project sponsors. The public interest is further protected by this integration of responsibilities. The bank lender and concessionaire provide additional project oversight through the monitoring of cost overruns and schedule delays, among other issues. To better protect the public interest, project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that protect public interest. For the Croydon Tramlink, the private sector partner contributed 30 percent of project costs. In the case of the Canada Line, theprivate sector partner did not miss any of its 400 payment milestones. the private sector can potentially benefit through gains achieved in refinancing their investments and these gains can be substantial. The governments of the United Kingdom as well as Victoria and New South Wales, Australia, require that any refinancing gains achieved by private concessionaires generally be shared with the government. Some foreign governments have recognized the importance of protecting the public interest in public-private partnerships through the use of quantitative and qualitative public interest assessments. We have previously reported that more rigorous, up-front analysis could better secure potential benefits and protect thepublic interest. to accommodate changes over time such as extensions, service changes, and technology upgrades. In the United Kingdom, the project sponsor for Manchester Metrolink had to break two existing public-private partnership concession agreements to accommodate extensions to its system. Consultants to the Manchester project told us that breaking a concession agreement can be very expensive and can damage the relationship between project sponsor and private sector partner. Similarly, to accommodate increased ridership, theproject sponsor for Docklands Light Railway decided to build platform expansions. The Manchester Metrolink Phase II light rail project was a 17-year concession agreement wherein the private partner had responsibility to design, construct, finance, operate, and maintain this project. The private partner provided over one-half of the project’s funding for construction. The public sector terminated the concession to further expand the system. The concession was ultimately bought by Transport for London. The London Underground maintenance projects included agreements entered into between London Underground and two private sector partners. The project was designed to connect two of the city's existing stations. The Lewisham Extension was the United Kingdom’s first transportation public-private partnership for both project delivery and financing. The Croydon Tramlink light rail project was a 99-year design- build-finance-operate-maintain agreement to develop the new system. In this project, payments to the private sector partner during operations were based entirely on ridership revenue, but the project sponsor retained the authority to set fares. Additionally, if a transit project is built as an extension of an existing system, the privatesector partner may not want to operate a single segment of the system. countries for private equity investment in transit, and the United Kingdom has the most experience using different public-private partnership models. International projects also generally require a government subsidy to supplement farebox revenues for construction as well as operations and maintenance. The Docklands Light Railway serves a redevelopment area east and southeast of London. Transport for London, the public sector project sponsor, used three separate design-build-finance-maintain concession agreements to construct system extensions and operate trains over the entire system. a greater private sector role in transit projects. The United Kingdom’s Department for Transport grants a conditional approval. If the agreed-upon cost, schedule, and risk transference are not met, the government withdraws its funding. We also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations have experience withdrawing funding when such conditions have not been met. Similarly, Transport Canada officials told us that it makes process. to state its intent to provide federal funds to a transit project. Project sponsors have encouraged early and sustained interaction with the private sector to test the project’s marketability and whether and in what form private sector participation is advantageous. Such feedback can be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants. Minnesota Metro Transit told us that input from the privatesector produced several good ideas that were incorporated into the project, such as a shared risk fund to provide an incentive for the private Sector to reduce construction delays. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential items to select bidders. Far from completion, and still working through the New Starts project approval process. Project sponsors have attempted in part to protect the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by ensuring the use of competitive procurement practices. These practices are not unique to alternative approaches and are sometimes used in conventional procurements. for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands Light Railway, London Underground, Manchester Metrolink, and Nottingham Express Transit in the United Kingdom and the Canada Line in Vancouver, Canada. permitting risk to the private sector. The private sector partner spent more than $30 million dollars over a 10-year period and never obtained final approval to proceed with construction. Transit projects that use alternative approaches may also introduce transaction costs to the project sponsor through legal, financial, and administrative fees in addition to higher-priced financing in cases where the transit project is privately financed. According to officials we interviewed, transit public-private partnerships often require the advisory services of attorneys, financial experts, and private consultants. partner may not want to operate a single segment of a publicly owned system. According to officials, private investors are reluctant to assume ridership risk of any portion of a system operated by an entity they do not control. In many cases, the private sector partner would need the authority to increase or decrease transit fares based on ridership trends and the number of transit users. Most project sponsors retain the right to set fares, officials told us, because raising fares involves political considerations, including equity for low-income transit users and riders. Ridership risk may be difficult to transfer to the private sector if transit project sponsors are reluctant to forfeit full fare-setting authority. The Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport Connector project initially tried but ultimately was unable to transfer ridership risk. Most project sponsors retain the right to set fares and are unwilling to forfeit fare- Setting fares can lead to increased project costs or schedule delays, according to transit experts. The Denver Regional Transportation District chose not to transfer Ridership risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects given that it wanted to retain the fare control. The Canada Line light rail project in the Vancouver area is a 35-year design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession agreement. The project is in the ninth year of its contract. A separate entity was created to oversee the project’s development and the private partner provided one-third of the revenue. The private partner assumed some risk that actual ridership would not reach forecasted levels. Along with this transfer of risk, the private sector was also given the ability to set fares. In the 1800s, the private sector played a central role in financing early transportation infrastructure development in the U.S. In following years, transportation infrastructure Development became almost wholly publicly funded. More recently, there has been a move back towards policies that encourage more private and public blending of funding, responsibility, and control in transportation projects. The federal government has progressively relaxed restrictions on private participation in highway and highway and rail projects in the past few years, according to a report by the Center for American Progress. A greater private sector role in transit projects can also potentially offer certain advantages to the public sector. Denver may have more financing flexibility by potentially extending the payments 20 years longer than if a bond were used. With a longer payment period, project stakeholders told us that the transit agency could conserve funds in the short term to help it construct other new transit projects on time. Also, alternative approaches may help ensure more predictable funding for maintenance, the report says. The report was written by the Denver Regional Transportation District and the Center for Transportation Studies. fees for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ request for proposals submittals. In addition to transaction costs, public-private partnerships incur added costs when the private sector provides the financing for the project. The municipal bond market in the United States generally provides public transit agencies a cheaper source of funding because they can borrow more cheaply. Officials also stated that the effects of the recent economic recession and failed credit markets have stymied the privatesector’s ability to raise revenues and provide affordable long-term debt for large transit projects. The Nottingham Express Transit light rail project used a 27-year contract to design, build, finance, operate, and maintain a new transit line. One of the two private sector partners subsequently went bankrupt, and the concession agreement was then taken over by Transport for London. Some projects have also incorporated standards that link to increased ridership to provide incentives for the private sector partner to provide good customer service. The draft concession agreement for Denver’s Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects incorporate levels of payment deductions that accelerate when low performance persists. services of attorneys, financial experts, and private consultants to successfully execute the steps necessary to finalize the project’s agreement. These additional services and transaction fees represent additional public sector costs that the conventional project delivery approach may not necessarily require. For example, the project sponsor for the London Underground spent the equivalent of $112 million to cover legal expenses, financial services, and administrative fees. Denver Regional Transportation District anticipates spending $15 million in advisory fees for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ Denver's East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects initially had a 700-page design specification document for their commuter rail vehicles. After industry review and feedback that the specifications would lead to customized vehicles that would be expensive and difficult to operate and maintain, the project sponsor responded by creating a 15-page performance specifications document for the vehicles. When specifications are focused on performance, bidders can offer a range of design and technology options as well as follow best practices that meet overall project objectives, an advisor says. design details be included and that this requirement can prohibit a project sponsor from instead leaving such design specifications to the private sector. This may limit the ability to find innovative and cost-effective solutions for the project. Due to the New Starts requirements, another project sponsor told us that it had been discouraged from using an alterative project delivery approach again after having had what it called a 'positive experience' with New Starts. When a project sponsors specifies the exact number of vehicles, the privatesector partners must incorporate that design detail into their scope, whether or not that exact number is really needed. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential elements agreed upon by the public agencies funding the project as a basis for negotiating with potential bidders. Project sponsors that we interviewed seek to protect the public interest in alternative approaches through an emphasis on performance. Performance specifications focus on desired project performance ( such as frequency of train arrivals at a station) and not design details (such as the type of train). Project sponsors and consultants told us that detailed specifications that have been in conventional project delivery approaches can restrict what bidder can offer. or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances could occur that would require more specific design specifications. Project sponsors have also sought to use performance standards to protect the public interest. These standards are what the private sector partner must meet to be compensated during the project’s construction, operations, and maintenance phases. If theprivate sector partner does not meet the standards, then it is penalized with no, reduced, or delayed payments, and penalties can escalate if poor performance continues. Standards for construction include delivering a completed project or project element. be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants. Project sponsors then conduct a request for qualified bidders to gain more detailed input from the private sector on a project. The request can establish a higher threshold of responsibility for private partners compared to traditional procurements in which a private partner is selected based primarily on bid price. Thus, sustained and iterative interaction between the project sponsor and theprivate sector can refine the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to use the funds. competitive procurement practices are generally required to be used for federal funding. European Union countries are required to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one are sometimes used in conventional procurements and are sometimes called "alternative approaches" to traditional procurement. The public sector receives the best bid when using these partnerships and approaches, project sponsors say. They say maximizing the use of these competitive procurement practices helps to ensure that the public sector gets the best price for its work. The U.S. Department of Defense says it has no plans to change its procurement practices. for construction include delivering a completed project or project element within a set schedule. For example, the Canada Line private sector partner had 400 milestones that it needed to complete and have certified in order to continue to receive timely payments during the project’s construction period. Performance standards for operations and maintenance, also called key performance indicators, cover all aspects of service including the availability, frequency, and reliability of service and conditions of facilities. London Underground chose to emphasize keyperformance indicators in four areas: availability, capability, ambience, and service points. extent of private sector involvement beyond the conventional design-bid-build project delivery approach. These alternative approaches contemplate a single private sector entity being responsible and financially liable for performing all or a significant number of functions in connection with a project. With these alternative approaches, many of the project risks that would these alternative approach are transferred to or shared with the private sector. In transferring responsibility and risk for multiple project elements to the privatesector partner, the project sponsor often has less control over the procurement and may earn a financial return commensurate with the risks it has assumed. Denver Regional Transportation District originally planned to transfer all environmental remediation risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ long-term design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession. When the project sponsor decided to retain one aspect of the environmental risk related to several unknown remediation elements, the private sector dropped the cost estimate of transferring the remaining environmental risk from $25 million to $9 million. According to project sponsors, this transfer of ridership risk was done to induce the concessionaire to increase ridership by providing quality customer service. private partnerships (see table 4). One limitation is that some project risks should not be transferred to the private sector. For example, it may be too costly for project sponsors to transfer certain risks, such as ridership and environmental remediation. Ridership risk refers to whether the actual number of passengers achieves forecasted levels. Environmental remediation risks may become too time-consuming and costly for thePrivate sector to address and may best be retained by the public sector given its stewardship role within the government.