The European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) is being designed to rendezvous and dock with the space station’s Russian Service Module. The Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle is scheduled to be available in 2008. The ATV and HTV also carry less cargo than the shuttle. Because the Russian Soyuz and Progress are the vehicle, a new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed in order to dock assembly elements with space station. The payload fairings would have to be modified from the current 5-meter to a 6-meter version to accommodate the larger cargo. with an alternative means of providing logistics support to the space station in case delays occur requiring extension of the planned 2010 date. A comprehensive and thoroughly documented analysis of launch requirements and launch alternatives can provide NASA with comparative cost information and afford the agency the opportunity to use its resources more effectively and efficiently. We recommend the NASA Administrator take the following three steps: Direct current efforts to explore other space launch options. Perform a detailed analysis of these alternatives to determine the best option for delivering the logistics cargo required for space station operations prior to and after space shuttle retirement. NASA is evaluating responses from commercial industry on different ways to provide logistics services to and from the space station. According to a recent revision of NASA’s internal guidance, the most important aspect of formulating a program technical approach is conducting a thorough analysis of alternatives. NASA did not have the full breadth of knowledge necessary to conclude the space shuttle was the best option to support space station operations, the agency says. The agency is examining configurations of the space Station that meet the needs of the new vision and the international partners with as few shuttle flights as necessary. NASA guidance defines an analysis of alternatives as a formal method that compares alternatives by estimating their ability to satisfy mission requirements and life cycle costs. The results of these two analysis are used together to produce a cost-effectiveness comparison that allows decision-makers to assess cost and effectiveness simultaneously. An analysis of. alternatives broadly examines multiple elements of program alternatives (including technical. performance, risk, life cycle cost, and programmatic aspects), and is. typically an important part of the formulation studies. NASA views a thorough analysis ofalternatives as. program delays and would cost more than returning the space shuttle to flight. NASA did not have sufficient knowledge to support its conclusion regarding logistic support missions. NASA officials stated that the technical challenges for developing an alternative vehicle could be overcome, but probably not before the 28 missions scheduled through 2010. By completing a comprehensive analysis, NASA could also identify the feasibility and risks associated with an alternative means of providing logistics support to the space station, the authors say. The authors conclude that the shuttle is the best option for logistics missions prior to its retirement in 2010. 2004 informal assessment. AAS contractors projected the cost to develop an alternate launch capability would be approximately $1 billion, take 3 to 5 years to develop, and require $2 to $3 billion per year for operations. Since a majority of the space station assembly missions are scheduled within the next 3 years, these types of missions could preclude the use of an alternative vehicle. NASA did of using alternate launch systems with the scheduled space shuttle program costs, to include the cost of returning the space shuttle to flight. our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. According to NASA officials involved in the 2004 assessment, accommodating a transition to other launch vehicles would create significant challenges that drive risk, schedule, and costs. NASA officials stated the space shuttle launch environment, with respect to vibration and g-force exerted on the payload, cannot be duplicated on an expendable launch vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed. There would be a need to develop a new process to assemble the space station. NASA plans to return the shuttle to flight in July 2005. While the shuttle has been grounded, space station crew transfers and logistics resupply have depended on Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. Europe and Japan are also developing logistics cargo vehicles to support space station operations later this decade. These Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable the shuttle. In a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no NASA conducted a detailed assessment of alternatives to the space shuttle. request for proposal for commercial space station cargo services later this summer. NASA also said that its acquisition strategy will be consistent with space station requirements, international partner agreements, and available funding. We are encouraged that NASA has taken steps to pursue a deliberate alternative cargo transportation system assessment. However, NASA should not limit documentation of this effort to the acquisition strategy meeting, but should also document the decision paths leading up to that event and throughout the evaluation of the transportation systems proposed by contractors responding to NASA’s request for proposals. In 2000, NASA determined that no commercial logistics service for the space station was possible at that time. As a result of this study, NASA decided to solicit and fund a more detailed review of concepts. The Alternate Access to Station (AAS) study contracts were awarded in July 2002, with 1-year contracts given to four contractors. In summer 2003, these contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international alternatives to determine if any planned space shuttle logistics missions could be performed by or complemented with commercial launch vehicles later this decade. contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international expendable launch vehicles. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for covering the entire range of missions for space station support. NASA received 26 responses from a September 2004 request for information that asked for, among other things, input from the commercial space industry regarding capabilities and market interest for missions for providing cargo launch services to, and the ability to return items from, the space station. According to NASA officials, the responses from industry with regard to space station logistics support have been very promising. year 2010. NASA has also requested $1.8 billion for crew and cargo services over the same time frame to purchase commercial services. In its fiscal year 2006 budget request, NASA indicated that such commercial services are expected to be available not later than 2009. In addition to lacking sufficient knowledge with regard to the use of alternatives for logistics missions, NASA did not document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. It is expected that these services are a key element in the future of the space station program. Cost briefings; Return to Flight Status Briefings; and, Alternate Access to Station briefings. Reviewed previous GAO reports on NASA, the Space Shuttle Program, International Space Station Program, and best practices in many areas and multiple agencies. Interviewed officials responsible for managing the programs within the Space Operations Mission Directorate at NASA headquarters, as well as program managers at Johnson Space Center, Texas. We interviewed contractors at Boeing Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Space Systems and reviewed pertinent documentation related to expendable launch vehicles for space station assembly. NASA and its international partners are building the space station to serve as an orbiting research facility. The space shuttle is the primary vehicle supporting the assembly and resupply of the station. Figure 1 shows the Space Shuttle Endeavour docked to the International Space Station. Following the Columbia accident in February 2003, the NASA Administrator grounded the space shuttle fleet pending an investigation into the cause of the accident. The administrator appointed the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to determine the cause and to make recommendations for improving the safety of the space Shuttle. as launch human missions to the moon between 2015 and 2020. In essence, NASA’s implementation plan holds aeronautics, science, and other activities at near constant levels. Funding currently dedicated to the space station and space shuttle programs will transition to the new exploration strategy. Under the new vision, the research will be focused on determining the effects of long duration space travel on humans and developing countermeasures for those effects. The space station research necessary to support human explorers on other worlds would be complete by 2016. shuttle retirement late this decade, rather than only after its retirement. However, we were told these services would not eliminate any of the scheduled space shuttle flights, but only augment the capabilities of the space shuttle. NASA plans to document its acquisition strategy through a NASA Headquarters Acquisition Strategy Meeting prior to release of a request for proposal for commercial space station cargo services later this year. In written comments on a draft of this report, NASA concurred with our recommendations and stated that the agency seeks to fully explore space launch options. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for Exploration that called for retiring the shuttle in 2010. The President called for a shift in NASA’s long-term focus, envisioning that NASA will retire the space shuttle after nearly 30 years of service as soon as assembly of the International Space Station is completed, planned for the end of the decade. NASA will develop a new crew exploration vehicle as well as launch human missions to the moon between 2015 and 2015. The shuttle will be retired in 2010, requiring NASA to find an alternative to support space station operations through 2016. document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. The agency did not record the processes it followed and therefore did not capture the basis of the decisions reached. NASA officials indicated that the informal assessment was based primarily on the expertise within the headquarters and they did not formally document the decision paths. While we recognize that the extensive experience of its senior managers is an important element in evaluating alternatives, the existence of any formal assessment of alternatives covering the entire range of missions for space station support is not known. distribution of this report until 15 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send copies to the NASA Administrator; the Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Please contact me at (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. current 5-meter to a 6-meter version to accommodate the larger diameter payloads to the space station during assembly missions. Current 5- meter version will be replaced by a 6m version for larger payloads. The new version will have a diameter of 6m to accommodate a larger diameter of payloads on board the ISS. It will be used to carry heavier payloads such as solar panels and other heavy equipment to the station for assembly missions in the 2030s and 2050s.