A state permit "program" is the body of authorities, activities, and procedures that the permitting authority uses to implement and enforce regulations applicable to a solid waste disposal facility. Permit programs may include, among other elements, state laws that specify the types of facilities required to obtain a permit. Permits are legally enforceable documents detailing requirements applicable to the permittee (owners and operators of a specifically regulatedSolid Waste disposal facility) A state's permit program may be created by amending existing laws to specify the entity required to operate using a permit and authorize the appropriate state agency to promulgate regulations. States would determine when owner/operators would be required to comply with the requirements implemented via the permit program and when they would issue permits. Participating states would certify that they have a program in place within three years of enactment of proposed Section 4011, including a legal certification that the state has "fully effective statutes or regulations necessary to implement a coal combustion residuals permit program that meets the [statutory] specifications" The requirements adopted by the state would likely meet a state-determined standard of protection. 40 C.F.R. §257.60, "Placement above the natural water table," included among the Location Restrictions criteria. 4011(c)(1)( F ) (ii) State Notification and Groundwater Monitoring: Groundwater monitoring. 401 1(c) Requirements for Surface Impoundments That Do Not Meet Certain C riteria — related to certain risks associated with contaminant migration from unlined surface impoundments. The proposed provision would prescribe actions a state would be required to take after it was determined that until a state defines a structure. specify deadlines for facility compliance, and clarify requirements applicable to existing versus new facilities. Since those standards are necessary to implement a program, states would likely include them in their own CCR Permit Program. State inclusion of those criteria would likely vary from state to state. Decisions regarding the applicability of state regulations and compliance deadlines that existing facilities would be required to meet would be particularly relevant in determining the degree to which a state program may protect human health from risks specific to CCR disposal. required components of program application, including detailed information that must be provided by a state in the narrative description of its program. Adequacy Determination Procedures —includes criteria EPA would use to make its adequacy determination or to partially approve state programs, procedures. Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs —details minimum permitting requirements, compliance monitoring authority, and enforcement authority a state would need to demonstrate to EPA before the program could be deemed adequate by EPA; and requires state programs to provide for citizen action in the state civil enforcement process. requirements specifying general compliance standards, location restrictions, operating criteria, design criteria, groundwater monitoring and corrective action, closure and post-closure care, and financial assurance. When individual requirements are largely similar, only the regulatory heading is included. When there is a significant difference between two requirements, additional information is provided to clarify that difference. Those descriptions are not intended to summarize the full range of detail in each requirement. The most significant differences pertain to the potential regulation of surface impoundments. narrative description provided in the program certification (required in the State Actions provisions in 4011(b), and maintains fully effective statutes or regulations necessary to implement a CCR Permit Program. States would be obligated to provide information necessary for EPA to make its deficiency determination within 90 days of EPA making the request. If EPA identifies a program deficiency, the agency would be directed to collaborate with the state to establish a reasonable deadline to address it. What constitutes a "reasonable deadline" is not explicitly defined. Bills would require EPA to identify certain state program elements that may be "deficient" EPA could potentially find certain program elements deficient and be required to implement a CCR Permit Program. Deadlines for compliance and details regarding program applicability would not be known until states promulgate regulations that would be implemented by the permit program. If a state fails to remedy program deficiencies identified by EPA within the time frame negotiated between the state and EPA, the agency would berequired to implement the program. required to apply. According to that precondition, it is arguably implied that states choosing to adopt and implement a CCR Permit Program would promulgate regulations applicable to "CCR structures" The time frame for that could vary depending on the compliance deadlines established by the state. If EPA implemented a permit program for a state, what regulations would EPA implement—its own or a state's? If EPA uses its own rules, how would the agency interpret permit program requirements that would otherwise be left to states to implement? Proposed bills would allow states to create their own programs to regulate CCRs. States would be expected to notify EPA within six months of the bill's enactment Section 4011. Within 36 months of bill enactment, states must submit to EPA a certification explaining how their program meets the Permit Program Specifications in proposed Section4011(c) Some in Congress who have expressed concern that EPA has "overreached" its existing legislative mandates have supported legislation that would limit EPA's role in regulating CCR disposal. The bills considered in the 112 th Congress were proposed in the wake of a June 2010 proposal by EPA to regulate CCRs. There is no explicit directive in the bills that the requirements applied via the permit program be those necessary to protect human health. CCR regulations promulgated under a state's own authorities would then apply to CCR structures based on meeting any standard of protection deemed appropriate by that state. The potential for EPA to review a substantive element of a CCR Permit Program is limited to a directive to EPA to notify a state. interpretation envisions a more proactive role for EPA. In this interpretation, rather than wait to make decisions regarding deficiencies after the fact, the Administrator might issue guidance before the states implement their programs. Anticipating criticism that such guidance would constitute regulations in disguise, EPA might actually issue regulations. EPA has already—in its June 2010 proposal—done much of the work of writing such regulations or guidance. It has identified the CCR management practices that it wants to address, the standards it would set, and the time frames. Permit programs were created under RCRA when Congress wanted to ensure that on how EPA interprets its obligation to implement a permit program. EPA's authority with regard to state program elements found to be "deficient" involves the use of a term not found in the RCRA statute, and thus lacking a history of interpretation. It is difficult to anticipate how EPA would interpret this authority, but there appear to be at least three options: In the first and most limited option, EPA would implement only the deficient components of a state's program. a permitting authority (generally a state agency) uses to implement and enforce regulations. Proposed Section 4011 would not create a permit program, per se. Instead, it would provide the framework that states may be expected to use. The key definition is that of a "structure" that may receive CCRs. All Minimum Requirements and Revised Criteria that must be applied by a CCR Permit Program would be required to apply to "structures" The applicability of a C CR Permit program would also depend on the definition of a 'structure' Each bill would have added to Subtitle D of RCRA a new Section 4011, Management and Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals. Compared to H.R. 2273 , the Senate-introduced bill (S. 3512) included more detailed provisions. Legislation addressing CCRs may be considered in the 113 th Congress.. The approach to creating state permit programs was largely the same in each bill. That approach is unique within RCRA. The bills would encourage states to create permit programs. The proposed amendments to RCRA would not create a "permit program," per se. Instead, selected provisions in the bills would form a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCR management. Provisions included throughout the bills use the term "CCR permit program" to refer to state programs to regulating CCRs. To distinguish between "permits" as they have been previously created in RCRA and programs that could be created pursuant to the approach taken in the proposed bills, use of the phrase 'CCR Permit Program' will mean a 'permit' program. A structure would be defined as "a landfill, surface impoundment, or other land-based unit" that may receive CCRs. The proposed definitions do not include details regarding what may constitute a "CCR landfill" The applicability of any regulations a state would promulgate and implement would depend on that state's definition of a structure, the authors say. The bills would afford states broad latitude in construing these terms, they say. They say existing RCRA regulations established by EPA explicitly define terms necessary to determine the applicability. management requirements? When would owners and operators of CCR structures be subject to any new regulations? If a state were to promulgate new regulations, how would that state determine the level of protection that C CR structures would be required to meet? How would EPA interpret its obligation to identify program deficiencies? Would EPA identify a program as having a deficiency if EPA determined it was not adequate to ensure facility compliance with requirements necessary to protect human health? For example, would EPA identify as a deficiency a state's definition of a "CCR landfill" that EPA determined was insufficient to ensure that uses of C CRs that constitute disposal on land are regulated? Congress would use a fundamentally different framework to create state programs to regulate CCRs. Until states promulgate regulations that include a more detailed definition of a CCR "structure," program applicability will not be determined with specificity. Some stakeholders debate the appropriateness of EPA's definitions, but the bills leave that issue unresolved. The bills did not explicitly require EPA to set uniform national standards of protection or promulggate regulations applicable to CCR structures.. How would states interpret minimum program requirements and the MSW landfill criteria listed in the bills? to regulate CCRs only insofar as such detail is helpful to clarify risks associated with CCR management. The approach to creating the permit program in the bills considered in the 112 th Congress differs from what is typical in federal pollution control laws terms. Congressional consideration of such legislation will occur in the context of ongoing concern about the impacts of current CCR facilities, changing economics for coal-fired electricity, and a range of perspectives about the appropriate role of the EPA in CCR regulation. The proposed bills would define a "coal combustion residuals permit program" as "all of the authorities, activities, and procedures that comprise the system of prior approval" Proposed amendment would have provided no explicit authority for EPA to directly enforce regulatory criteria applicable to CCR disposal units. Instead, the proposed Section 4011 would itself list Permit Program Specifications that individual states would be required to apply to "CCR structures" The bills would establish a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCR a landfill that receives CCRs. EPA would be given a more limited role in development of the regulatory program for CCR facilities, compared to the existing program to regulate MSW landfills. Some argue that by requiring EPA to implement a CCR Permit Program for a state under specific conditions, the bills would provide EPA with authority to backstop state programs. Under current law, the term "backstop authority" is not formally defined in statute or regulation, and whether EPA is said to have backstop authority or not has no legal consequence. The term has been widely used to refer to explicit authority provided to EPA to enforce standards at individual facilities in a state authorized to implement and enforce federal standards. Under the Constitution, Congress has no power to compel states to exercise their sovereign authority. Congress has authorized EPA to promulgate and enforce certain regulations. Congress may not require states to adopt federal regulations or implement certain requirements using a permit program. The bills considered in the 112 th Congress would use a fundamentally different approach. It would allow EPA to directly enforce the federal criteria, but only under certain conditions. It could potentially withdraw its approval of a state program, if EPA were to receive information indicating that the program is not being implemented as originally described by a state. various concerns, many of which were centered on EPA's lack of authority to directly enforce the standards. Given the argument by many states that the material is being managed sufficiently under current state regulatory programs, environmental and citizen groups have expressed doubts over the degree to which states would adopt new standards. This report provides information regarding EPA's proposals to regulate CCRs only insofar as such detail is helpful criteria that meet an explicit standard of protection. The administrative process, under the Administrative Procedure Act, provides some transparency regarding how EPA arrived at its determination. EPA considers risk to be the chance of harmful effects to human health or to ecological systems resulting from exposure to an environmental stressor. A stressor is any physical, chemical, or biological entity that can induce an adverse response. Stressors may adversely affect specific natural resources or entire ecosystems, including plants and animals, as well as the environment with which they interact. EPA uses risk assessments to characterize the nature and magnitude of health risks to humans and ecological receptors (e.g., birds, fish, wildlife) Analysis of selected elements of the legislation considered during the 112 th Congress is provided in this report as background for future legislation that may take a similar approach. Federal criteria applicable to MSW landfills were promulgated in 1991. States then adopted those federal criteria and currently implement them using an EPA-approved permit program. It is not necessarily a question of a state's ability to regulate CCRs, it may be a difference between states and EPA regarding standards to ensure protection of human health. programs to regulate MSW landfills, regulations or other requirements established by individual states would be designed to protect human health. EPA's June 2010 proposals to regulate CCRs reflect EPA's effort to determine those risks and protective measure to address them. There is no legislative history for the Senate-proposed bill. However, since it also uses the MSW landfill criteria as its framework, there may have been a similar expectation that the use of those criteria would create a permit program that would meet a similar standard. The approach used in the 112 th Congress bills would not have provided an explicit mandate that EPA or the states promulgate regulations applicable to CCR disposal facilities. Instead, the proposed Section 4011 would the program. Regulations that would ultimately apply to owners and operators of CCR structures would depend on each the MSW landfill criteria, included under 40 C.F.R. Part 239. In contrast, any ambiguities or requirements not specified in the proposed CCR bills would be subject to state (and potentially court) interpretation. proposed in the 112 th Congress would use as their framework the existing program created under Subtitle D to regulate MSW landfills. A unique element of the proposed amendment to RCRA would be the creation of a permit program absent a directive to EPA to promulgate standards applicable to the entity potentially regulated pursuant to the program. The proposed bills include no explicit owners and operators of CCR structures would depend on each state's interpretation of the criteria listed among the proposed Permit Program Specifications. The CCR Permit Program would draw from selected elements of existing state programs to regulate MSW landfills. The bills would provide no formal role for EPA in this regulatory development process. It is difficult to determine in advance how EPA may interpret directives regarding its role or how the proposed authorities may affect state adoption and implementation of a permit program. EPA played a significant role in developing regulations applying to MSW landfill facilities. Once those state permit programs were approved by EPA, however, the agency had little role in state implementation, including enforcement. The 1984 amendments to Section 4005 required each state, within 18 months of EPA promulgating the MSW landfill criteria, to adopt and implement a permit program. States either adopted the federal criteria exactly or used them as a model to create their own requirements applicable to MSW landfills. EPA has since approved all state programs, deeming them adequate to enforce the federal regulatory criteria. States "implement" those regulations by issuing permits to owners and operators of regulated landfill that specify compliance obligations. EPA was authorized to enforce the federal standards from 18 months after the MSW landfill criteria were finalized to the point at which a state adopted a program approved by EPA as adequate. EPA never stepped in have an EPA-approved program in place. EPA authority to directly enforce the criteria may not currently be invoked by the agency since that authority is limited to states found by EPA to have an inadequate program to implement MSW program. Currently, all states that have EPA- approved permit programs, including all U.S. territory, have obtained full approval of their permit programs. Proposed Section 4011(d) would require EPA to identify and notify a state of "deficiencies" in specific elements of its program. Unlike "deficient," the term "adequate" now has decades of agency interpretation. EPA would not be explicitly required to assess other program elements (e.g., how a state defines a landfill that receives CCRs). EPA would also not be required to provide review of substantive elements of the program, and the conditions under which EPA would have enforcement authority. that states would promulgate such regulations. The majority of the Permit Program Specifications are criteria that would be applied by the permit program. The absence of certain provisions in Section 4011 comparable to requirements relevant to existing state programs to regulate are compared to the regulatory requirements applicable to the permit programs. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the coal industry's request for a permit to dump coal residuals at landfills in the state of West Virginia. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court by the West Virginia Department of Justice. each state "developed an adequate program" (i.e., a program adequate to assure facility compliance with the MSW landfill criteria) That determination could be made in conjunction with EPA's decisions to approve, disapprove, or partially approve state solid waste management plans. The resulting state permit programs were the body of laws, authorities, and procedures that comprise the state's system for regulating the location, design, operation, groundwater monitoring, closure, post-closure care, corrective action and financial assurance of regulated MSW landfills. The creation of state programs to regulate MSW landfills involved two different but related elements. EPA approval of a state permit program to implement the MSW landfill criteria was dependent on whether EPA determined that the state's program was "adequate" In the proposed amendment to RCRA, however, EPA would be directed to notify a state of a "deficiency" if a state is not implementing a CCR program that meets statutory specifications (in proposed Section 4011(c) How EPA would interpret the directives in proposed Section 4001(d) using this new 40 C.F.R. Part 258. Each option would result in regulatory programs with a substantially different scope and potential for enforcement. Adoption and enforcement of the Subtitle C "cradle to grave" regulations would involve stricter waste management standards. That would involve a higher cost to both industry and state waste management agencies. Congress took an approach that could be implemented under Subtitle D. That approach resulted in more detailed regulations than those applicable to sanitary landfills, and included a stronger enforcement mechanism to ensure consistent state conformance with the national standards. Subtitle C requirements, unless or until EPA determines that such requirements are warranted. The Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 (HSWA; P.L. 98-616) amended RCRA Subtitle D to address an issue almost identical to the one currently applicable to CCRs. On June 21, 2010, EPA proposed for public comment two among other things, to facilities that may receive hazardous household wastes (subsequently defined in regulations as MSW landfills) EPA has two options: (1) it could determine, reversing previous rulings, that hazardous waste regulation is warranted, and promulgate regulations under Subtitle C. EPA determined that national standards were needed to protect human health from risks specific to CCR management. EPA options to regulate CCRs are limited under its current authorities in Subtitles C and D. Pursuant to the Bevill exclusion, C CRs are explicitly excluded from the Subtitle C requirements, unless or until EPA determines that such submitted its "Regulatory Determination on Wastes from Fossil Fuel Combustion" to the White House Office of Management and Budget, for review. On June 21, 2010, EPA proposed for public comment two options to regulate CCRs. Under the Subtitle C option, EPA would reverse a previous regulatory determination to exempt C CRs from the hazardous waste requirements. If finalized, EPA could encourage states to adopt and enforce the Sub Title D standards, but would have no authority to enforce the standards directly. EPA's proposal drew comments from industry groups, environmental and citizen groups, state agency representatives, and some Members of Congress. Although public comments varied, opposition was largely due to concerns that it would be costly to implement to both states and industry. If finalized, the Subtitle D option would be implemented pursuant to EPA's authority under RCRA Section 4004 to identify criteria necessary to determining whether a facility should be classified as a "sanitary landfill" or an "open dump" At a minimum, a facility would be deemed a sanitary landfill if solid waste disposal at such a facility posed no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment. Disposal facilities that did not meet the criteria for sanitary landfills would be considered open dumps. Under RCRA Subtitle D, states have primary authority to regulate nonhazardous solid wastes. EPA's role has largely been to promulgate criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. The creation of state programs to regulate time frames that it considers adequate for compliance could be adapted to guide the process of identifying deficiencies, the authors say. The authors say EPA has no authority to require or approve/disapprove of state solid waste permit programs applicable to facilities receiving any other type of solid waste regulated under Sub Title D. Proposed bills did not include a specific statement of the objective of created previously under RCRA. Congress wanted to ensure that certain solid waste disposal facilities would be subject to regulatory criteria that achieved a minimum national standard of protection. There is no provision in Section 4011 that explicitly requires regulations promulgated by the state and implemented by a CCR Permit Program to achieve a certain level of protection, the authors say. The proposed statutory criteria are not comparable, in scope or in detail, to those identified by EPA as those necessary to protect human health. This report looks primarily at how state programs to regulate CCRs may be developed and implemented by a state. The report also describes selected elements of RCRA Subtitles C and D, relevant to both EPA's proposal and legislative proposals to create state programs. Under Subtitle D, states have the authority to regulate nonhazardous industrial solid waste, such as household garbage and non Hazardous Industrial Solid Waste (HISW) This report also looks at a range of perspectives about the appropriate role of states and EPA. treatment, storage, and disposal facilities (TSDFs) In lieu of the federal program, states can be authorized by EPA to implement regulations applicable to those facilities, including permitting those facilities. Most states have requested and received such authorization. While under certain conditions, EPA could rescind state authority to implement a previously authorized state hazardous waste management program, EPA has never done so. EPA has taken enforcement actions against individual TSDFs in states authorized to implement federal Subtitle C requirements. In contrast to such programs where EPA has primary oversight and enforcement authority, EPA's authority to MSW landfill criteria are intended to apply to facilities that dispose of largely "dry" waste. New MSW landfills were required to ensure compliance with the standards before they began operation. Owner/operators of existing facilities that did not comply with applicable criteria by deadlines specified by EPA would be in violation of RCRA's prohibition on open dumping. Each standard is designed to be implemented by the owner or operator, with or without oversight or participation by a care, and financial assurance. The general standards specify the intended scope, purpose, and applicability of the regulations. In 1991, EPA established minimum national criteria applicable to MSW landfills. The criteria are those necessary to protect human health and the environment from risks associated with the disposal of MSW in a landfill. To identify risks specific to the management to migrate off-site, EPA must rely on data provided by states and the potentially regulated industry. Final regulations represent the "minimum national standard" applicable to waste disposal facilities that, when implemented, would be expected to achieve the standard of protection set in workers, recreational visitors and wildlife. EPA was required to determine whether each state developed but not necessarily a state's solid waste management program. A 2009 survey of states found that more than 60% of states required neither liners nor groundwater monitoring for surface impoundments. The majority of states responding to the survey also did not have siting controls, inspection, or structural integrity requirements for liquid waste facilities. At a minimum such revisions for facilities potentially receiving such wastes should require ground water monitoring as necessary to detect contamination, EPA says. Congress required EPA to revise sanitary landfill criteria to protect human health and the environment. EPA was required to determine whether each state developed an adequate permit program. The landfill criteria and required elements of an "adequate" permit program were developed and implemented using data and information gathered over a more than 20-year period. The agency has identified risks to human health from waste management, regulatory criteria that effectively address those risks, and regulatory potential to present danger to the environment in certain circumstances, the agency says. EPA determined that the material is generated in large volumes annually (e.g., approximately 130 million tons in 2011) The material contains more than 40 toxic constituents, including antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, that may receive a particular type of waste. Regulatory criteria that meet that directive have been identified in the more than 30 years that EPA has gone through the public rulemaking process. The presence of toxic constituents alone is not enough to protect humans. or release of liquid waste to surface water, as in the structural failure of a surface impoundment (e.g., the Kingston release) or as a result of run-on/runoff across the deposition site during rain/flood events. fugitive dust emissions, when fine particulates in dried ash become airborne, as at landfills or large-scale fill operations. Of those pathways, risk to human health was highest from contaminant leaching and migration to surface and groundwater. Pathways of exposure may include potential release to air or to water from precipitation run-on/runoff across the disposal site. Contaminant leaching to surface water or groundwater at levels that could lead to drinking water exceeding maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) established under the Safe Drinking Water Act. Potential protective measures identified as those that may minimize human exposure to toxins below a standard specified according to federal law. Such practices have included a requirement that composite liners be used at disposal sites. CCRs one of the largest waste streams in the United States. Disposal of CCRs on site at individual power plants may involve decades-long accumulation of waste. TVA estimates that cleanup will continue into at least 2014 and will cost $1.2 billion. EPA has determined that a more common threat associated with CCR management is the leaching of contaminants likely present in the waste, primarily heavy metals, resulting in surface or groundwater contamination. The Kingston release also brought attention to the fact that the management of such large volumes of C CRs is difficult. In 2011, electricity generating units in the United States burned more than 900 million tons of coal. CCRs are the inorganic material remaining after pulverized coal is burned at electric utilities and independent power producers. According to industry estimates, in 2011, as much as 130 million tons were generated, making C CRs one of the largest waste streams in the U.S. EPA with authority to backstop state programs to regulate CCR facilities. The EPA has the authority to regulate facilities that use CCR materials. the combustion of coal or other fossil fuels, including an analysis of the source and volumes of such material generated per year. present disposal and utilization practices; potential danger, if any, to human health and the environment from the disposal and reuse of such materials. alternatives to current disposal methods; the costs of such alternatives; the impact of those alternatives on the use of coal and other natural resources; and the current and potential utilization of suchmaterials. Further, as it has been proved that surface runoff or leachate can pose a danger to health or the environment. EPA was directed to prepare a detailed and comprehensive study on the adverse effects on human health and the environment, if any, of the disposal and use of CCRs. EPA also used federal regulatory criteria applicable to the identification and listing of hazardous waste. In May 2000, after review by OMB, EPA issued a revised regulatory determination that stated its intent to leave the Bevill exclusion in place. EPA stated that it was convinced that national regulations under Subtitle D were warranted for CCR disposal in landfills and surface impoundments. current and potential utilization of such materials. Further, as it deemed appropriate, EPA was required to review studies and other actions of other federal and state agencies regarding the material and invite participation by other concerned parties, including industry. Both legislative and administrative actions regarding the potential regulation of CCRs are summarized in Table C-1. In March 2000, EPA submitted its "Regulatory Determination on Wastes from Fossil Fuel Combustion" and invited participation from all concerned parties. The EPA took action in response to Bevill directive and more recent action taken in the wake of the Kingston release. Study and assessment could be completed to determine their risk to human health and the environment. These special wastes were identified because they typically were generated in large volumes. In anticipation of the enactment of this legislation, according to EPA, the agency excluded the regulation of fossil fuel combustion waste from its final hazardous waste regulations. Ultimately, the Solid Waste Disposal Act Amendments of 1980 (P.L. 96-482) included provisions commonly referred to as the Fossil Fuel Combustion Waste Act of 1980. On October 14, 2011, the House passed the Coal Residuals Reuse and Management Act. On August 2, 2012, the Coal Ash Recycling and Oversight Act of 2012 (S. 3512) was introduced in the Senate. The House subsequently incorporated the provisions of the Senate bill in Title IV of H.R. 3409, the Stop the War on Coal Act, passed in the House on September 12, 2012. The bills would have amended the Solid Waste Disposal Act. EPA has gathered data on CCR use and disposal for more than 30 years. In the past 10 years, EPA has found that states appear to be regulating CCR landfills to a greater extent than they had in the past. Based on available data, EPA determined that a majority of states with CCR surface impoundments did not appear to require facility owner/operators to implement protective measures typically deemed necessary to protect human health from contaminant migration. The majority of disposal units were likely to be older and lacked liners and groundwater monitoring. EPA identified common methods of disposal and use, potentially regulated under RCRA, that resulted in documented cases of damages that could cause human health concerns. EPA also identified certain protective measures that may be implemented that would minimize or largely eliminate risks from CCR disposal. The pathways in which humans may be exposed to toxic constituents in CCRs at levels high enough to cause health concerns include: contaminant leaching and migration off-site. direct, uncontrolled discharge or release of liquid waste to surface water. Almost 80% of CCRs generated in 2011 was managed in a way that involved land application of the material. Such management practices included CCR disposal in landfills, surface impoundments, or mines (as minefill) EPA has identified a number of conditions under which such land applications of C CRs may pose a threat to human health. EPA also identified certain protective measures that could be used to protect against the potential impacts of implementing either EPA regulatory option. The proposals to amend RCRA were introduced in the 112 th Congress. Landfills also include piles, sand and gravel pits, quarries, and/or large-scale fill operations. Sites that are excavated so that more coal ash can be used as fill are also considered CCR landfills. CCR surface impoundments are used to receive CCRs that have been sluiced (flushed or mixed with water to facilitate movement), or wastes from wet air pollution control devices, often in addition to other solid wastes. The definitions were proposed by EPA based on findings in its groundwater risk assessment and its documentation of CCR damage cases. The potential for structural failure could be minimized by various means. New disposal units would be required to be constructed with a composite liner. Existing disposal units could not be located in an unstable area. New CCR units must have groundwater monitoring systems installed before CCRs could be disposed of in the units. The following standards are among those intended to address concerns associated specifically with CCR disposal. units would have to be placed above the natural water table or within 200 feet of a fault zone, or in a seismic impact zone. CCR facilities would be subject to limited federal regulation. required to control fugitive dust emissions. All units would be required to have an independent registered professional engineer certify that the design of the run-on/runoff control system meets requirements specified in the regulations. Owners and operators of all existing surface impoundments would be. required to maintain certain information about the units (e.g., a description of the physical and engineering properties of the foundation materials on which the CCR surface. is built) and notify the state that the designs have been placed in the operating record and on the owner's or operator's publicly accessible Internet site. ensure compliance with land disposal standards applicable to owners and operators of TSDFs. Pursuant to its existing authorities under Subtitle D, EPA's second regulatory option would be to promulgate national standards. The proposed standards are structured similarly to regulatory requirements applicable to MSW landfills, supplemented to reflect requirements specific to the management of CCRs. According to EPA, if implemented as proposed, each regulatory options would result in a "General Standards" listed in Table A-2. EPA determined that national standards applicable to the management of CCRs destined for disposal are needed. In its Subtitle D option, EPA would add to 40 C.F.R. Part 257, "Standards for the Receipt of Coal Combustion Residuals in Landfills and Surface Impoundments" Those standards would apply to solid waste disposal units, defined as follows: CCR landfill —disposal facility or part of a facility where C CRs are placed in or on land and that is not a land treatment facility. EPA's Subtitle D regulatory option reflects the framework of risks associated with a catastrophic release from surface impoundments. EPA intended those risks to be addressed, at least in part, in its "Design criteria for existing CCR surfaceimpoundments and lateral expansions" Compared to the bills' structural integrity provisions, EPA's proposed criteria included more detailed requirements comparable to the MSHA standards (discussed above in " Proposed EPA Standards to Address Risks Specific to CCR Management " and detailed in Table A-3 in Appendix A ). since criteria applicable to the management of liquid wastes are not included under 40 C.F.R. Part 258. The MSW landfill criteria also do not address structural integrity issues associated with the accumulation of coal ash slurry. To address such risks, selected proposed standards for CCR surface impoundments were modeled on the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) regulations. EPA drew from the MSHA mine safety standards for "water, sediment, or slurry impoundment and impounding structures" For example, the paragraph entitled Revised Criteria begins "The revised criteria described in this paragraph are ... ," followed by provisions such as "the revised criteria for design, groundwater monitoring, corrective action, closure, and post-closure, for structures" The leachate collection system requirements in 40 C.F.R. §258.40(a)(2) do not apply to structures that are surface impoundments. "For all structures that receive coal combustion residuals after the date of enactment of this section, the revised criteria are ... " Proposed Subtitle D design standards would require that new landfills and all surface impoundments that have not completed closure prior to the effective date of the rule. Units would be required to be retrofitted with a liner or closed within five years of the final rule. That is the same time frame EPA proposed under its Subtitle C alternative. EPA also proposed to require the same liner and leachate collection and removal systems as part of the Sub Title D criteria. The technical justification for the requirements is equally applicable to the wastes and surfaces impoundment. the following statement: The Committee believes that it is not necessary for EPA to promulgate new regulations. EPA acknowledged in [its June 2010 Subtitle D] Proposed Rule that the "part 258 criteria represent a reasonable balance between ensuring the protection of human health and the environment" The Committee expects that permit programs using the minimum Federal baseline established by this legislation will meet the standard of protecting human health. The House report further notes the "revised criteria" that would be included in the proposed rule.