governments, which are responsible for most traffic signs, and $11.8 million by state governments. The maximum cost in any one year was estimated at $4.5 million. Up to 100% of the cost of replacing traffic signs is eligible for federal funding. Most larger communities already have sign maintenance and replacement programs. For these communities, the study estimated that the impact of the retroreflectivity maintenance standard is likely to be modest. The impact may be greater in smaller communities that may never have instituted sign Maintenance and Replacement programs. The new standard required that communities comply with the new standard by certain deadlines. Communities are still required to replace any signs that do not meet the standards. The deadline for communities to bring all of their regulatory, warning, and post-mounted guide signs (except street name signs and overhead guide signs) into retroreflectivity would appear to put an agency in a better position to defend lawsuits. DOT said it changed the deadlines to reduce the costs and impacts of the compliance deadlines on state and local highway agencies. New standard established measurable standards for minimum acceptable retroreflectivity of signs. Second element of the new standard was a requirement that agencies adopt a method by which to maintain the retro Reflectivity of their street signs. To provide flexibility to agencies, the standard listed several methods that can satisfy this requirement, including visual nighttime inspection from a moving vehicle by a trained sign inspector. According to the standard, an agency using a retro reflectivity assessment or management method will be in compliance with the standard. methods that are developed based on engineering studies. of places, streets, and highways (§2D.05). Formerly, names on signs could either be in all capital letters or have only the first letter capitalized. The new standard eliminated the option of using only uppercase letters. This standard did not have a deadline for compliance. State and local transportation agencies are required to implement the new lettering style only as they implement the lettering standard. This change was made because drivers often have only a brief time to read these signs and studies indicate that mixed-case lettering is easier to read. standard useful-life cycles for signs, but that varying environmental conditions meant that the actual useful life of signs varied in different areas of the country. In the UK, signs can live for up to 30 years, but in the U.S. they can live up to 50 years, depending on environmental conditions. In Australia, signs have a life expectancy of up to 20 years, and in the UK it is between 10 and 15 years. In Europe, signs live for as long as 30 years. As reflective materials degrade, a sign becomes harder to see at night. Nighttime crash rates are estimated to be three times higher than daytime rates. The fatality rate for nighttime driving is also higher than for daytime driving. With the aging of the U.S. population, the number of older drivers is increasing. But ensuring that traffic signs are easily visible to older drivers at night is becoming a more significant safety issue, says the MUTCD, a federal highway safety agency in Washington, D.C. The process of developing the new standard included FHWA-sponsored research. The new standard took effect on January 22, 2008. It established measurable standards and established methods to assess the nighttime visibility of signs. AASHTO adopted a policy resolution in 2000 requesting that agencies be given six years to implement methods for nighttime visibility. The proposal was revised through the formal federal rulemaking process from 2004 through 2007, with repeated opportunities for public comment.iReport.com will feature iReport stories in a weekly Newsquiz. Since 2007, the Federal Highway Administration has amended certain national standards for traffic signs. Among the new standards were a measurable standard for the minimum level of nighttime visibility of traffic signs and a change in the lettering of street signs. Some state and local agencies complained that the new Standards would be relatively costly to comply with. This report provides background for the nighttime visibility maintenance standard and addresses some of the issues that have been raised about this standard. January 22, 2018 (10 years after adoption)—the deadline for communities to bring all street name signs and overhead guide signs into compliance. minimum nighttime visibility standard to the MUTCD. In 1992, Congress directed DOT to develop a minimum standard, with this provision in the FY1993 Department of Transportation (DOT) appropriations bill: SEC. 406. The reflective properties of sign materials decrease over time, due to exposure to sunlight and other factors. As the reflective materials degrade, a sign becomes a sign of the road, not the road itself. The standard for a minimum level of retroreflectivity that must be maintained for pavement markings and signs shall apply to all roads. The minimum retroreflectivity standard's primary impact was to establish a quantifiable level for what constitutes adequate nighttime visibility. Up to 100% of the cost of installing and replacing traffic signs can be covered by federal-aid highway funding under several programs. The deadline for highway agencies to implement an assessment or management method for ensuring that their signs comply with the standard has been extended to May 2014. DOT has observed that the MUTCD already required agencies to maintain the nighttime visibility of traffic signs. and local governments for developing sign inventories, training personnel to examine signs. Some press reports have given the impression that the federal government is requiring communities to immediately begin replacing all street signs. This is incorrect. Communities are required to implement the new lettering style only as they install new signs or replace existing signs. If a traffic sign meets the MUTCD standard for retroreflectivity, it does not have to be replaced. If it doesn't, then it may create a safety hazard after dark, although it may appear to be perfectly good during daylight hours. The case of "perfectly good" traffic signs. to be violated (knowingly or unknowingly) in actual practice. The more significant potential enforcement mechanism for MUTCD standards is the tort liability that communities may face in the event of a lawsuit involving a nighttime car crash. A study sponsored by DOT estimated the total additional cost to state and local governments of complying with the new standard to be $37.5 million over a 10-year period. Of this, $27 million would be borne by local governments, which are responsible for most traffic signs, and $11.8 million by states. not have compliance deadlines. The case of the retroreflectivity maintenance standard is unusual in this respect. It was given a compliance deadline because its safety impact was considered to be significant. States and local governments that are not in compliance with standards are potentially subject to having a portion of their federal transportation funding withheld. However, there is no formal enforcement mechanism to ensure compliance. In fact, one report noted that "It is not uncommon for MUTCD principles to be violated (knowingly or unknowingly) in actual practice"