and size and scope of operations. The ANSPs were commercialized between 1987 and 2001 and have been operating since then as performance-based organizations. We interviewed government officials, ANSP executives and representatives, union officials, and representatives of aviation stakeholders. We synthesized information from our interviews with information from the literature to arrive at some general lessons on the commercialization of the five air navigation service providers we reviewed. Unless otherwise noted, we converted the local currencies to make it easier to read. High salaries of air traffic controllers make it difficult to recruit them for regulatory positions. Obtaining baseline measures before commercializing a country’s air navigation services will allow the government and others to assess the new ANSP's performance in the areas of safety, cost, and efficiency. Some of the countries whose ANSPs we reviewed did not collect baseline data or measure performance as extensively as the commercialized AnSPs have since done. We interviewed government officials, ANSP executives and representatives, union officials, and representatives of aviation stakeholders in each country. The UK and Germany are members of EUROCONTROL, a European organization responsible for regulating the safety of air navigation. According to information from each of the ANSPs we reviewed, air navigation safety has not declined since commercialization. All five AnSPs have taken steps to control costs, and have improved efficiency of their operations by implementing new technologies and equipment. At a minimum,Safety has not eroded since commercialized, according to the available data from most AN SPs, the authors say. UK established such an authority before commercialization, and Germany is planning to develop one. For all five commercialized ANSPs, the safe movement of aircraft remains the primary goal. Despite differences in ownership structures, all operate as businesses rather than as government organizations and are self-financing. All are largely monopoly providers that are subject to some form of price- setting constraint achieved through economic review or procedural guidelines. In some instances, government policy requires that the ANSP consider safety in some cases. with EUROCONTROL’s safety requirements, to all of their operational activities. This system forms the basis for risk assessment, safety assurance, safety control, and safety monitoring through standards that comply with national and international obligations. The five commercialized ANSPs vary in the extent to which they are owned by the government—wholly, partially, or completely. Airservices Australia employs a systemic Safety Management System that complies withnational and international requirements. To promote safety, the system requires activities such as operational risk assessments, surveillance, audits and incident investigations. Each ANSP generally offers en route, approach control, and terminal (or aerodrome control) air traffic services. In some countries, the ANSP may not be the sole provider of approach control and terminal services. All but Germany’s DFS also offer oceanic air navigation services. all five ANSPs are responsible for providing air navigation service to both civil and military aviation. In addition, the nation's air navigation operator may also provide oceanic services to military aircraft. enterprises in 1987, including air navigation services, rail services, and postal services. The government also reformed electricity as a state-owned enterprise in 1994 and telecommunications in 2004. Commercialization was generally intended to relieve the government of a fiscal responsibility. According to ICAO, the government should still regulate the safety of the ANSP’s operations, but it should be encouraged to be as competitive, efficient, and cost-effective as any other commercial business. In the five countries whose air Navigation services we reviewed, the AN SP continued to provide nationwide services after commercialization and, with limited exceptions, remained the. services to both civil and military aviation. The ANSPs may offer other air navigation-related services, such as meteorological, training, and consulting services, and charge for these services. The governments of all five ANPS are members of ICAO. All five ANSPS are also members of the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), a voluntary international trade organization whose mission is to represent the interests of commercialized AnSPs. In addition, the UK and Germany areMembers of EUROCONTROL.  NAV CANADA can alter operations in accordance with business principles, but must demonstrate that the changes meet the required level of safety. All five ANSPs are subject to external safety regulation. A separate authority conducts safety regulation and issues relevant certificates or licenses to air traffic controllers and technicians. In New Zealand, for example, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent regulatory authority that establishes civil aviation safety and security standards and monitors adherence to those standards. In Australia, theCivil Aviation Safety Authority regulates and promotes aviation safety. some instances, government policy requires that the ANSP consider safety in any and all decisions affecting operations and service. For example, according to DFS officials, German legislation requires DFS to observe ICAO’s standards and recommended safety practices. Similarly, in Canada, legislation requires NAV CANADA to maintain a fixed level of safe operations. Under a performance-based approach to safety regulation, Transport Canada, as the regulator, establishes the requirements in law and standards, and NAVCANADA must demonstrate compliance. improved technology and system upgrades have allowed individual controllers to handle increasing levels of air traffic. Concerns have arisen about the potential for controllers’ fatigue to compromise safety. Data are not available to assess this potential, but some ANSPs have taken steps to limit and monitor controllers' workload. For example, the UK’s CAA has regulated the hours of civil air traffic controllers, and its Safety Regulation Group must be notified of any breach by NATS or by controllers. For more information, visit airtrafficcontrol.org. Germany faces a similar challenge as the government prepares to develop a safety regulatory authority in accordance with the Single European Sky initiative. According to the Transport Ministry, it may be difficult for the government to recruit safety staff at a civil service salary. CAA managers with responsibilities for regulating the safety of NATS’s operations also raised concerns about recruiting staff. Accordingto these officials, regulators need to be able to carry out timely safety inspections during the first 6 months after commercialization. It is hoped that the new safety authority will be in place by the end of this year. financial information available to the public to ensure transparency. An independent audit was conducted on the annual financial reports of each of the five ANSPs. To identify any changes in safety since commercialization, we collected and analyzed information provided by each ANSP and by its independent safety regulator. We interviewed officials from these regulators, and we relied on safety data from the AN SPs and their audited annualfinancial reports. The independent auditors for each AN SP found that the annualfinancial statements were unqualified and fairly presented, in all material respects. evaluated. We determined that the data from each country were sufficiently reliable to identify any major changes in safety since each ANSP was commercialized. In addition to the contact named above, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Samantha Goodman, Brandon Haller, David Hooper, Hiroshi Ishikawa, Joseph Kile, Jennifer Kim, and Richard Scott made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. example, stresses the importance of having transparent financial data available for economic oversight. CANSO and EUROCONTROL are working to standardize performance measures and compare ANSPs across dimensions such as safety, cost, and efficiency. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Please call me at (202) 512-2834 if you or your or your family member would like a copy of the report. we reviewed. Unless otherwise noted, we converted the local currencies of each country into U.S. dollars. We adjusted for inflation using the Gross Domestic Product price index of the Congressional Budget Office’s economic projection for 2005. We did not compare performance before and after commercialization or across countries. Such comparisons are generally not feasible because data for assessing performance are typically unavailable for the country at the time of the comparison. We used purchasing power parity historical series for each country in the relevant years for the currency. need to recover its costs may be at odds with a small or remote community’s need for scheduled air service. Providing air navigation services for such communities may not be commercially viable because it typically generates less revenue than providing services for larger communities. In the past and in some countries today, the ANSPs charged the same fee for air Navigation services at every airport, regardless of its size or location. Airservices Australia has reported that it plans to phase in location-specific pricing to ease the transition from network pricing. for instance, subsidizes service to some regional areas under the Location-Specific Tower Subsidy Program. Transport Canada is legislatively required to maintain service to remote locations in the northern region. In addition, NAV CANADA charges the same price for services toremote locations as for services for the rest of the country. The price is based on a formula that considers weight and distance. We have derived a number of lessons from our research on the commercialization of air navigation services in the five countries we selected. Airservices will increase charges over the next 5 years at general aviation and regional airports. Although the increases will be gradual, the plan has raised concerns about further price increases and any future need to close or reduce services at these locations. Some fear that needed air services to remote bush locations will be lost, while others fear that secondary services, such as flight school training, will be affected. The impact of location-specific pricing on remote bush airports is not yet known, according to Airservices. The air navigation fees cover operating and capital costs associated with both en route and approach control services. These charges are based on a weight-distance formula. If applicable, ANSPs also levy charges for oceanic control. In Canada, aircraft or flights dedicated to search and rescue, air ambulance operations, and firefighting services are all exempt from air navigation service charges. If an ANSP generates revenues from charges in excess of its costs (i.e., operating profits), it may rebate them to the users, lower the charges for the next year, pay some form of payback. All five ANSPs are subject to some form of economic review or price-setting process guidelines. In Australia, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) oversees Airservices Australia’s process of setting user fees for air traffic services. Airservices must notify the commission whenever it wants to raise fees. The commission then evaluates the ANSP and sets its own guidelines for user charges and prices. The five countries reviewed have taken different approaches to reviewing their ANSP's user charges. ICAO recognizes the need for an independent mechanism to provide economic regulation of air navigation services. According to ICAO, the objectives of economic regulation should include the following: Ensure nondiscrimination in the application of charges. Ensure the transparency and availability of all financial data used to determine the basis for charges. Assess and encourage efficiency and efficacy in the operation of providers. Establish standards for reviewing the quality and level of service provided by air navigation service providers. The objective is to ensure that there is no overcharging or other anticompetitive practice. In the UK, CAA exercises economic regulation over NATS. CAA’s Economic Regulation Group sets price caps for 5-year periods, basing them generally on the retail price index. The German Transport Ministry reviews and approves any changes in user fees, but it does not independently evaluate the price-setting process or pricing changes. According to the Transport Ministry, Germany plans to create an independent economic regulatory authority by the end of the year. The European Commission is also set to set up an independent regulatory authority. operating profit after taxes and the cost of capital. A portion of any EVA above a certain level is returned to users in the form of a rebate. For example, in its 2004 Annual Report, Airways reported its net operating profit after tax as about $8.3 million. The resulting EVA was approximately $3.9 million. Of this amount, $1.8 million was returned to customers in theForm of a Rebate. According to the aviation industry, the EVA mechanism has  ACCC rejected one of two proposals by Airservices for a temporary fee increase to address the revenue losses that followed September 11 and the SARS outbreak. The airline industry had objected to the second set of proposed increases, citing a need for longer term price certainty. ACCC directed Airservices to focus on 5-year pricing plans to encourage long-term planning, emphasizing that the robustness of the airlines should be taken into account when a price is set. The Canadian Transportation Agency reviews the price-setting process against an established set of statutory principles. NAV CANADA’s price-setting process is limited only by statutory charging principles. As a nonshare capital corporation, surpluses are reinvested in the business or used to lower charges to customers. NAV CANADA was able to raise its fees unilaterally, without having to negotiate increases with representatives of the airlines or other interests. Its board approved the fee increases to balance revenues and expenses as required by legislation. The CTA rejected an appeal of the increases brought by certain operators.  NAV CANADA estimates that it is saving the airlines approximately $80.3 million annually in reduced aircraft operating costs. In Germany, Lufthansa stated that except in business years 2001 through 2003, the airline paid less in user fees than it paid during the initial commercialization of Germany’s air navigation service in 1993. According to Airways Corporation of New Zealand, it reduced en route charges by 22 percent in 1995 and by another 13 percent since 1997, resulting in an overall reduction of more than 30 percent. Zealand, have tried to make the fees affordable for small operators by charging a flat fee. NAV CANADA, for instance, charges general aviation operators a flat annual fee of $58. Some governments have provided for air navigation services at small, remote general aviation and regional airports, viewing such services as a public good. Australia, for example, subsidizes service to some regional areas under the regional air service scheme. According to the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association–New Zealand, Airways Corporation of New Zealand charges general Aviation operators a fee of £68 for 50 landings. Before commercialization, air navigation services under government control faced increasing strains. Many were underfunded, as evidenced by freezes on air traffic controllers’ wages and insufficient funds to replace aging technologies. Technology replacement programs often cost more, took longer, and delivered less than promised, and stakeholders complained about performance and customer service. In some instances, the country as a whole faced widespread fiscal problems and the commercialization of air navigation Services was simply part of a larger movement to reform government enterprises. For instance, the New Zealand government established 14 state-owned enterprises in 1987, includingAir navigation services, rail services, and In Germany, DFS mainly finances its capital expenditures by drawing on a capital market program. DFS can also draw on an annual credit line of around $175.9 million from its bank. The ANSPs may also charge fees, as applicable, for other services, such as aeronautical information, consulting, and training. For example, a DFS business unit offers consulting services in air traffic system design and implementation.is currently drawn. The German air traffic service is one of the largest in the world. In Germany, DFS also lost revenue during the industry downturn, but to a lesser degree. DFS reported a loss of more than $36.4 million in 2001, when air traffic declined by 0.9 percent over the previous year. In 2002, it sustained a loss. of over $23.2 million. To address these deficits, D FS modified investments, canceled projects, and ultimately raised fees, increasing financial pressures on the airlines.body, would remain fixed until the next regularly scheduled review when prices may be adjusted, upward or downward, and benchmark levels set. years and is planning to consolidate these two radar centers into a single center by 2006. DFS also relocated the Dusseldorf control center to the Langen control center in 2002 (see fig. 1), a year earlier than planned. The supervisory board, rather than a parliamentary committee, now makes major investment decisions, it has been able to make key strategic decisions that would have previously been made by the parliamentary committee. It has also integrated operations and consolidated facilities, moving 17 approach units from airports and integrating them into four air traffic control centers. Before September 11, NAV CANADA banked up to $66.3 million in its rate stabilization fund to protect against future losses. With the industry downturn, this fund was quickly exhausted and, after the SARS outbreak in 2003, the fund reached a cumulative deficit of about $96.9 million. DFS has begun to consider the benefits of a reserve fund, but German legislation governing air navigation service charges must be changed before DFS can develop such a reserve. The fee increases had the inadvertent effect of disrupting the business cycles of air carriers, which faced the same difficult economic circumstances. If costs exceed revenues, ANSPs use different strategies to meet those shortfalls. NAV CANADA established a “rate stabilization fund’ which it used to store revenues when the aviation industry was healthy. The fund was capitalized by operating profits earned before September 11, 2001, but depleted during the economic downturn caused by the events of September 11. It could then be used to cover costs and keep rates stabilized when the industry was ailing. It was also used to keep revenues in reserve to protect against future losses. Commercialized ANSPs rely primarily on user fees to cover their costs. An industry downturn presents a fundamental financial risk for such AN SPs. Airservices, DFS, NATS, and NAV CANADA all had to take additional steps to address the revenue losses. NATS with the greatest debt load was the most vulnerable to the industry downturn, but even NAVCANADA had to make extraordinary measures to offset revenue losses during the downturn. The following paragraphs summarize these lessons. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. the economic downturn caused by the events of September 11 and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak of 2003. To pay for capital projects, the five ANSPs can either use current operating revenues or borrow funds. All five can borrow funds through access to debt financing and private capital. For example, NAV CANADA has a borrowing capacity of about $2.4 billion, of which $1.8 billion is currently drawn. In Germany, DFS mainly finances its capital. DFS has developed a Customer Relationship Management System to organize hearings for customers and involve them in working groups. This approach to involving stakeholders is consistent with a Single European Sky directive that member states establish a mechanism for consulting with stakeholders. In Australia, the aviation community (i.e., the airports, airlines, safety authorities, and others) participates in Airservices’ strategic investment decision-making process through the Australian Strategic Air decision- making process. For more information, visit DFS’s website. Before commercialization, the German government did not consult with users and other stakeholders when it acquired and deployed new air navigation technologies. DFS has also reported that consulting with its customers before investing in any modernization efforts has been beneficial. Once an initial investment decision has been made, ANSPs have further reported that it is beneficial to involve stakeholders throughout the design and acquisition process. For example, Airservices Australia reported that, since commercialization,. air traffic controllers play a much larger role in the acquisitions process and have come to understand the linkage between. example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand noted that its investment decisions are very much driven by customers’ needs. Airways said it consults closely with the airlines before deciding to acquire new systems and to implement technology upgrades. According to Airways, if the airlines say they do not want to make a particular investment and the investment adds no value for the customer, Airways will not spend the money. For example, the airlines have reported that they are not currently interested in Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast, so Airways has no immediate plans to invest in the technology. acquisitions process and have come to understand the linkage between service delivery costs and the costs of new equipment. In Airways’ experience, it is essential for controllers, manufacturers, and the ANSP to reach agreement in order to establish realistic expectations for system design from the very beginning. In some instances, an ANSP’s need to recover its costs may be at odds with the need to ensure consistency in requirements and to maintain a thorough understanding of the project’S ongoing specifications. The members of this board may represent key stakeholders, such as the airlines, employees, general aviation, and the national government. As in a corporation, an executive officer implements the ANSP board’s policies and is, in turn, accountable to the board. For example, Airservices Australia is structured around three market-oriented business groups—the Air Traffic Management, Airport Services, and Infrastructure Support Services groups. The managers of these five groups form the Executive Committee and work with the chief executive officer to advise the board as well as carry out the board's policies. The UK’s NATS is a public-private partnership (i.e., a cooperative venture between the public and private sectors) The government holds the largest share of NATS (49 percent) The remaining shares are divided among a consortium of seven UK airlines (42 percent), NATS staff (5 are appointed by the airline industry, 3 by the government, 2 by employees such as air traffic controllers and engineers, and 1 by general and business aviation) (See table 2) consortium of seven UK airlines (42 percent), NATS staff (5 percent), and a private airport company (4 percent) By 2006, Germany plans to change the ownership of DFS, selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors and reorganizing it as a public-private partnership. NAV CANADA is a nonshare capital, private corporation—that is, it has “members” instead of shareholders. The corporation has 4 members representing government, airlines, noncommercial users, and the unions. NATS was vulnerable to the industry downturns because nearly all of its costs were fixed, limiting its ability to cut costs. North American flights accounted for 14 percent of NATS flights and 44 percent of its revenues. To avoid insolvency, NATS first obtained an estimated $104.2 million in short-term loan credit from its lending banks and then refinanced, bringing in a new equity partner (BAA, plc). However, the combination of lost business and increased debt threatened NATS with insolvencies in early 2002. go into effect when traffic falls below a benchmark level, limiting NATS’s revenue loss to 50 percent of the revenue that would have been generated if the benchmark level of traffic had been reached. In effect, this automatic trigger mechanism spreads the risk of traffic downturns between NATS and its airline customers. Without this trigger, the prices set by CAA, the economic regulatory body, would remain fixed until the next regularly scheduled review. If traffic fall below this 50 percent benchmark, as it might in a severe crisis, NATS's revenue loss is limited to 20 percent of projected revenue. NATS offers consulting services in air traffic system design and implementation. In 2003, DFS’s consulting service generated revenue of about $2.8 million. In the UK, NATS competes with other service providers to provide terminal services at UK airports. NATS, like DFS, consults and offers training for other ANSPs worldwide in implementing safety management systems, solving airspace capacity problems, and commercializing AN SPs. in part through direct management actions, NATs reduced its net operating costs by almost $161 million from 2002 through 2004 in the UK. services and materials by about $18.5 million between 2002 and 2003. Between 2003 and 2004, NATS reported, it reduced its operating costs for air traffic services by another $21.4 million through cost control measures. All five ANSPs said they have improved productivity through modernization. modernization, together with airspace redesign, has produced operational efficiencies, including fewer and shorter delays, according to the AnSPs. In New Zealand, individual controllers are now able to handle much more flight activity because of improved technology. Commercialization has allowed the ANSPs to implement modernization projects more efficiently. NATS, for example, reduced its average delay per flight from 2.7 minutes in 2002 to 0.74 minutes in calendar year 2003, while handling almost 2.1 million flights. Formerly, the uncertainty associated with the annual appropriations from national governments made it difficult to plan over multiple years. Access to cash flow and borrowed funds has allowed them to plan and execute projects more efficient and has improved their ability to deliver projects on time, within budget, and on time. In New Zealand, as air traffic has increased, some airspace sectors have been subdivided so that controllers are responsible for a smaller piece of airspace. To lower their facility operating costs, all five ANSPs have closed, relocated, or consolidated facilities. NAV CANADA closed most of its regional administrative offices and centralized corporate functions to its headquarters, reducing mostly administrative staff by 1,100 people (17 percent of the workforce) Airways Corporation of New Zealand also reportedly reduced its personnel costs by eliminating some middle management and administrative positions. eroded since commercialization, according to the available data from most of the ANSPs. For example, data from DFS show a decrease in the number of aircraft proximity incidents in Germany, from 23 in 1995 to 8 in 2003, 3 of which were attributed to DFS. Officials at Transport Canada, the safety regulator, confirm an overall decline in aviation incidents since commercialized. According to some, the separation of operating and regulatory functions has strengthened safety regulation and diminished any potential conflict of interest. NATS was extremely vulnerable to the decline in air traffic after September 11. DFS is currently undergoing a valuation of its key assets in preparation for selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors in a formal competitive bidding process. Some countries that commercialized their ANSP had difficulty retaining a sufficient number of staff to carry out safety regulation. In Canada, many of the safety staff moved to the newly established NAV CANADA after commercialization, leaving the government regulator, Transport Canada, with insufficient staff. NAV CANADA recently signed a contract with NATS to install the Extended Computer Display System (EXCDS) in three London-area airports. While NAV CANADA prefers commercial off-the-shelf products, it also invests in developing in-house technologies. Some of the commercialized ANSPs. maintain that they have achieved the benefits of modernization faster and at less cost by. purchasing commercially available systems and upgrades or by modifying. their own systems from the ground up. For example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand deployed its new oceanic system, FANS1, in less than a year. developing their own systems from the ground up. NATS purchased its oceanic system and automated tower/terminal control system from NAV CANADA. To achieve further purchasing efficiencies, some commercialized European ANSPs have developed an alliance to procure systems. For instance, Germany has developed a strategic alliance with Switzerland and the Netherlands for the joint procurement of a new radar system. Through their cost control initiatives and modernization efforts, some of the AN SPs have been able to lower their unit costs and lower their charges to major commercial airlines. The Airline Group provided approximately $1.4 billion, including about $112.2 million from the group’s own resources. The group used this sum to acquire NATS and meet associated transaction costs, leaving cash assets of approximately $6.0 million in the business. NAV CANADA purchased all of the ANSP assets from the Canadian government. Instead of going through a formal competitive bidding in 1996, NATS fell short of the $2.3 billion estimate developed in 1995 by a third party. Canadian government purchased air navigation system in 1996 for about $1.5 billion. NAV CANADA uses the remaining funds for capital investment and as working capital, as required. Each ANSP makes and carries out its own strategic, operating, and financial decisions. A supervisory board oversees policy making and operations and, when applicable, has fiduciary responsibilities to shareholders. The members of this board may Airservices’ strategic investment decision-making process through the Australian Strategic Air Traffic Management Group. stations, which will allow air traffic surveillance services over remote regions of Australia where no surveillance currently exists. To protect taxpayers’ interests, Canada and the UK needed to have an appropriate valuation of their facilities and equipment before wholly or partially selling these assets to their newly established ANSP. According to its Office of the Auditor General (OAG), Canada did not properly value its ANSP assets and infrastructures. The approximately $1.5 billion value that the government negotiated with NAV CANADA in 1996 fell short of the $2.3 billion to $ 2.4 billion. Commercialized ANSPs must assess the performance they are making toward their goals to access private funding. Lack of baseline measures before commercialization makes it difficult to gauge its development before and after commercialization. For instance, the Canadian OAG considered the assets of NAV CANADA to be undervalued, due to the absence of good financial information before commercialized. ICAO, for example, stresses the importance of having transparent financial data available. The ANSP industry needs to develop performance measures and benchmarks.