This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and returned via e-mail to USTSurvey@gao.gov. If you prefer, you may print copies of the questionnaire and complete them by hand. Please use your mouse to navigate by clicking on the field or check box you wish to answer. To select a check box or button, simply click on the center of the box. To change or deselect a checkbox response, simplyclick on the the response field. To answer a question that requires that you write a comment, click on the answer box ____ and begin typing. The box will expand to accommodate your answer. To help ensure consistency in survey responses from the various states, we provide definitions for terms in this survey at or near the point at which the term appears. Please consider these definitions when responding to survey questions. Have there been any reviews of the recent review? If so, e-mail: LaudermilkG@gao.gov. funding sources for cleanups. The practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling error. For selected survey questions, where we were able to, we independently corroborated survey data by comparing these data with EPA data. We then followed up with states and EPA as needed about discrepancies. We included a series of data reliability questions in the survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us. We accepted responses to the survey through mid-October 2006. We sent e-mail reminders and conducted follow-up telephone calls with nonrespondents. survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us by the respondents. We collected information about (1) the databases states used to provide survey data; (2) the internal controls on those databases; and (3) whether the data provided were actual or estimates. We also requested supporting documentation if states noted their database(s) had been reviewed for quality. We used a data collection the states’ database reviews and database limitations identified in their survey responses. We contacted state officials to clarify survey responses when necessary and used a centralized tracking document to record all changes. interviewed the officials to ensure that the (1) questions were clear and unambiguous. As a result of our pretests, we made changes to some of the survey questions. We sent an announcement on November 18, 2005, of the upcoming survey to state contacts (including the District of Columbia) and then e- mailed the survey as an attachment on January 19, 2006. We asked respondents to return the survey by e-mail, fax, or mail by the end of January 2006. to selected questions and the wide variance in the reliability of those responses. With these provisos, the survey data are sufficiently reliable as they are used in the body of the report. The survey data presented in appendix II are not reliable for state level comparisons. We conducted interviews regarding data reliability with a nonprobability sample of seven states (see next page for a further discussion of this sample of states). These interviews included in-depth questions focusing on topics such as the states’ database reviews and database limitations. We used a data collection instrument (DCI) to systematically and consistently record all available data reliability information. The DCI was then reviewed by an independent person who assessed the accuracy of DCI data entries and the reasonableness of the judgments on the reliability of states’ survey data. As expected, there was wide variability in the level of oversight of the databases states use to track underground storage tank information. Some states provided explanations for their responses that were precise and grounded in reasonable mathematical or trend based assumptions. Others noted that their responses were educated guesses. underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. A few states reported they were not able to provide us with data specific to federally regulated underground storage tanks for selected questions. Instead, they generally provided us with either data including a different universe of tanks or data prorated based on the number of federally regulated storage tanks in the state for these questions. Most survey questions that asked for data for a specific year referred to the federal fiscal year. If states were unable to provide data for theFederal fiscal year, we asked them to provide them with data for that year. We then attempted to contact all listed state officials via e-mail and asked them to tell us whether they or someone else in their state would be the most appropriate contact. In states where we were not able to contact the officials on EPA’s list, we sent the e-mails regarding the mostappropriate contact to officials named on lists of state contacts from two other professional organizations that also conduct surveys about underground storage tanks. Upon receiving this e- mail, a few officials identified more appropriate survey respondents. England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission and the Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials. We pretested the survey with officials from four states between October 28, 2005, and December 21, 2005. States were selected for the pretests to ensure variation in size of workload and status of the state financial assurance fund. We then interviewed the officials to ensure that the questions were (1) questions were correct. We sent agency officials a draft of the survey and used their feedback to refine the survey. discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state based on the number of relevant topics they could discuss, as indicated by their survey responses. We interviewed all states that had scores at or above a threshold score that we determined, based on how many states we would need to discuss the relevant topics with to obtain sufficient information for the purposes of this report. We also conducted interviews with regional program officials from EPA’s Underground Storage Tank Program in six EPA regions to gather additional information. have identified the states that fall into each category. Overall, given the limitations in the information reported from some states, data reported by states and presented in this appendix should not be used to compare state programs. To aid in our continuing reviews of the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Underground Storage Tank program, we are currently surveying the 50 states as part of a study of how states operate. The GAO is an agency of the legislative branch that reviews federal programs on behalf of the U.S. Congress. EPA develops information on states’ needs and performance from semiannual activity reports on tank numbers and cleanup activities. Survey disclosed several concerns regarding the accuracy of these reports. According to officials in two states, the information they report is based on estimates rather than actual performance. The EPA does not consider the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner in various states, nor does it consider the risk that specific releases may pose to human health and the environment. To help, go to www.epa.gov/environment. EPA recommends that the regions review each state’s data submission for reasonableness. When any of the states’ data appear questionable, the regions are asked to follow up with the states to obtain an explanation or corrected data. In some cases regional officials were not aware of reporting problems with states in their regions that our survey disclosed. To ensure that states properly understand EPA's definition of the data reporting elements, at least one EPA region reminds its states of the EPA definitions each time a semiannual activity report is due. at most, helped confirm what regions already saw as problem states. States provided data with gaps or further clarifications needed in key areas, such as the number of release sites awaiting funding. EPA decided to collect data again in 2006 without changing its method. Results for 2006 were not available as of December 2006. The 2005 Act also included language providing that EPA may withdraw approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without the state’s approval. It was also included in the 2005 Act. performance. A Maine official told us that the data the state reports is generated by canvassing their regional staff. Because EPA reports call for data on releases rather than sites, Wyoming provides its best estimate of release data. An Arizona program official said the program was uncertain of EPA’s definition of “performance.’’ A Wyoming official said that the state tracks contaminated sites rather than releases. The state has found errors in the data reported in the past, the official said. 4. What are the known limitations of the current data (e.g., data elements that are known to be incomplete, incorrect, or out-of-date) for each of the databases you listed above? 5. Is there any additional information about the way your states’ data for UST management is collected, entered, stored, and quality reviewed that would help inform our interpretation of these data? 6. Are the cumulative data for the number of federally regulated USTs for your state, first as of September 30, 2004, and then as of Sept. 30, 2005? provided fairly precise and mathematically grounded explanations for their calculations. 26 states and the District of Columbia generally reported having some internal controls on the data, and/or some data quality problems. 6 states reported having few, if any internal controls and significant data quality issues. In tables 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 in this appendix, we have identified the states that fall into each category. Overall, overall, the U.S. economy is doing better than it has been in decades. . Have there been any reviews of the recent review? [Enter quality of the data? UST management? 4 digit year.]. What procedures are used to ensure all data contained in the databases you listed above are accurately recorded? a. What are the known limitations of the current data? A. What types of information do each of the databases contain? B. What type of information does each database contain? C. What kind of information is contained in each database? D. What is the current state of the UST database? MTBE is a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane. Because MTBE dissolves easily in water and does not cling to soil very well, it migrates faster and farther through the ground than other gasoline components. MTBE’s health effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government has determined it to be a potential human carcinogen. Some states have set their own limits on allowable levels of MTBE in drinking water, and some have banned its use in gasoline sold in the state. EPA estimates that a release costs about $125,000 on average to clean up. The cost can vary based on several factors, including the extent of contamination, the cleanup method selected, and the presence of MTBE or groundwater contamination. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then fund any cleanup of the site. The additional cost for cleaning up these releases varies widely, from no additional cost to a substantial increase, depending on the history of the release, the authors say.changed. Of the almost 450,000 releases confirmed as of fiscal year-end 2005, cleanups had been initiated for about 93 percent and completed for about 74 percent. As cleanups have progressed, methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE)—a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane—has have banned its use in gasoline sold in the state. States reported that completing the cleanup of approximately 54,000 known releases would likely require substantial amounts of public funds from state and federal resources. The public cost of cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner, as well as the number of releases in states’ cleanup. A state official expressed concern that the state’s definition of cleanups initiated may not agree with the EPA definition. The state reports a site as “cleanup initiated” when the release has been confirmed and a case number assigned. According to the EPA, cleanup initiated requires the state or responsible party has evaluated the site and initiated physical activity (e.g., removal or treatment of the contamination, removal of the contaminated soil, or monitoring of the groundwater or soil being remediated) or monitoring of the groundwater or soil being remediated. Cleanup initiated should also be reported in situations where the state has evaluated the site and determined that no physical activity is necessary to protect human health and the environment. A Louisiana Underground Storage Tank Program official told us that a review of its files disclosed that the program had been reporting duplicate entries and releases that did not meet EPA’s definition. An Oregon Underground storage Tank Program Coordinator told us in the process of cleaning up its database information, program officials found many sites being reported that were duplicates. your state’s cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: 0. Is this number correct? Yes .................... No...................... a. What is the correct number? Please refer to this number when answering questions about your state's cleanup backlog in completing the remainder of this survey. Considering the number of releases in your state , how many have affected groundwater at levels requiring cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? groundwater .................................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in your state”s cleanup backlog that involve the release of MtBE? authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within 90 days. Officials generally preapprove cleanup work only at the sites where contamination is most severe. The most urgent category includes releases deemed emergencies. As of August 2006, less than 40 percent of the releases were being actively cleaned up. The remaining categories are ranked based on how soon the release is likely to affect human health and the environment, as well as its impact on groundwater. The state categorizes releases into one of four categories. our report is included as appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the EPA Administrator and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. it would cost to clean up approximately 54,000 known releases. States were unable to estimate the cost of cleaning up more than another 8,000 releases whose cleanup will require at least some public funds. States also reported that, overall, the proportion of releases cleaned up using public funds is likely to decline in the future. Some states that do not use their financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Columbia, may not be able to afford the cleanup. responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Arizona, expect particularly sizable declines. These states expect that owners or operators will use private sources of financial responsibility coverage to pay for the cleanup of most releases identified in the next 5 years. In 2005, these states confirmed a combined 8,000 releases, compared with their projections of an average of about 7,400 releases per year for the next five years. Most states use financial assurance funds to pay to clean up releases from underground storage. funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleaning up releases from USTs, both WITH and WITHOUT a viable owner. Is this an exact number or an estimate? Is this the total amount ($0) spent in the past year for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? Yes .................... No...................... d. Why is this amount different? Sites? Yes    Yes ................... No.............................. f. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year. EPA computes your state’s “cleanup backlog” by subtracting the cumulative number of cleanups completed from the cumulativenumber of confirmed releases. How many new releases from federally regulated USTs did your state confirm in each of the last five federal fiscal years? Is this an exact number or an estimate? How did you estimate the number of new releases over the next five years that will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? Based on the numbers you provided above, your state's cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: for which some amountof public funding will be required? costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of threats to public health, welfare, or the environment that may occur by a release (or suspected release) of petroleum from an underground storage tank. These costs include emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, the planning and design of corrective action, and the conduct, management and oversight of long-term remedial corrective actions. What was the total amount spent (in actual outlays) to pay for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? Is this an exact number or an estimate? releases from USTs your state confirmed in each of the last five years? 8. How many of these new releases over the next five years do you estimate will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? 9. How did you estimate the number of new releases from federally regulated USTs that your state will confirm over theNextFive years? 10. How does your state compare to other U.S. states in terms of number of releases it has confirmed in the last 5 years? each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups of leaking federally regulated USTs that require some amount of public funding, what do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release? 16. What do you Estimates is the Average Cost in Public Funds to Fully Address Each release that involves MtBE at levels requiring cleanup? 17. Estimated cost in Public funds to Fully address Each Release that involves MountBE at Levels requiring Cleanup? 18. Estimated Cost in public Funds to fully Address Each Release That involves Mt BE at Levels Requiring Cleanup. 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... h. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? 18. Is there any additional information about the amounts of public funding listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? 19. Among the current sources of public. funding for LUST cleanups, which sources, if any, do you believe have a high probability of no longer being. available in the next 5 years, and why not? 20. For purposes of this survey, consider tanks among your state’s cleanup. these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. Your prompt response to this survey is very important. Without your state’s response, we will not be able to accurately report to the Congress on the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and the Surveymonkey app for the iPhone and the iPad. To answer some of our questions, you may need to coordinate your responses with other state agencies responsible for certain aspects of the program. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. been covered in this survey that you anticipate affecting the availability of public finding for cleanups in the next 5 years? 58. Are there any additional comments you wish to make regarding the issues in this Survey or other matters related to USTs? Thank you for completing the survey! Please save this file now and send an e-mail with your saved questionnaire file and supporting documentation as an attachment to: USTSurvey@gao.gov. In addition to the individual named above, Vincent P. Price, Assistant Director; Krista Breen Anderson; Jenny Chanley; Richard P. Johnson; Jerry Laudermilk; Jennifer Lutzy McDonald. Johnson; Jerry Laudermilk; Jennifer Lutzy McDonald; Anne McDonough-Hughes; Rebecca Shea; Carol Herrnstadt Shulman; Dominique Sasson; and Nico Sloss made key contributions to this report. Johnson: "I think we're in a good place right now. I don't think it's going to get any worse than it is right now" Johnson: 'I think the world is going to come around to what we're trying to do' The LUST Trust Fund is funded by a $0.001/gallon excise tax on gasoline and other motor fuels. By fiscal year-end 2005, the fund had collected about $3.7 billion in revenue. appropriations totaled about $1.2 billion, leaving a fund balance of approximately $2.5 billion. The fund balance has been growing at an average rate of about $129 million per year since 1987, Figure 11 shows. The tax has been in effect continuously since 1987 except for a short period in 1990. approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without withdrawing approval of the overall state underground storage tank program. EPA has formed a workgroup to examine the issue of how to assess the soundness of state financial assurance funds. The guidance had not been made final as of December 2006. Annual appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have averaged about $71 million in recent years. Typically, about 80 percent of the money is spent on underground storage tanks in the state where the tank is located.  Appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have been relatively stable since fiscal year 1998. About 80 percent of the money is distributed to the states to support their cleanup programs. EPA uses the balance of the annual appropriations to support cleanup activities on Indian lands and its own cleanup-related activities. 45 states each reported spending an average of $24 million in 2005 to clean up contamination from leaking tanks.. Regional officials told us that many states prefer to use their Lust Trust Fund money to fund their own cleanup efforts. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (the 2005 Act), enacted in August 2005, expanded the permitted uses of the LUST Trust Fund. It authorizes states to use a portion of their LUST Fund money for inspections and other leak prevention purposes. The 2005 Act also included several other provisions regarding inspections, operator training, and financial responsibility, among other things. Some of these provisions impose ongoing requirements on states. For example, the inspection provision requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of its regulated underground storage tanks at least once every 3 years. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the tax on petroleum products that capitalizes the federal LUST Trust Fund. Money from the LUST Fund is meant, in part, to address releases from tanks without a viable owner. EPA will undertake a cleanup only when (1) there is a major public health or environmental emergency, (2) the state is unable to respond, and (3) no responsible party is able or willing to provide an adequate and timely response. In these circumstances, EPA’s involvement is to measure program performance against the national goals it establishes in accordance with the Government Performance and Results Act. The 1986 amendments to RCRA established the LUST Trust Fund to finance the cleanup of petroleum releases from underground storage tanks. Until recently, states could use these funds only for cleanup and related administrative and enforcement activities. Within this restriction, trust fund money could be used for the following general categories of activities: testing tanks for leaks when one is suspected; investigating a site to evaluate the source and extent of petroleum; assessing the number of individuals that may have been exposed to petroleum contaminants and the seriousness of exposure. In these circumstances, EPA’s involvement is to be limited to stabilizing the immediate situation, with the expectation that further cleanup will be conducted by the state. States are responsible for overseeing cleanup work performed by the party responsible for the contamination and for performing the cleanup at sites where no responsible party can be found. Only certain governmental organizations, nonprofit organizations, and nonprofit educational institutions are eligible for Brownfields cleanup grants. In fiscal year 2005, EPA provided eligible entities with about $22.3 million in Brownfields grants for cleaning up sites contaminated with petroleum. Some states prefer to use their LUST Trust Fund money to fund staff positions rather than cleanups. By funding additional staff positions, states were often able to identify the responsible parties. Some states require the use of state money for cleanup, and thus the federal money is used for administrative or enforcement activities, particularly salaries. EPA generally relies on states to use LUST funds for cleanups, but takes issue with states that do not use Lust funds forCleanups, says EPA official in Region 4. This amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes......................... No .......................... b. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year 29. How much of the amount deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year was from each of the following sources? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 30. What do you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund? Are these amounts for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... b. On what date does the the UST program? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 44. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new capable tanks? If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert funds from the fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner? 49. According to EPA, states may sometimes not spend a given amount. to Q37. Accepting and paying all valid claims without restriction. Go to Q27 Accepted and paying claims with some restrictions ....... a. Is your state fund limiting the number of claims it accepts based on the amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Yes ....................... No......................... c. Isyour state’s financial assurance fund ONLY accepting claims for releases that occurred before or after a certain date (e.g., an eligibility sunset date)? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates this type of fund.......................... Skip to Q47. Has your state ever had a state financial assurance fund, as defined in (1) above? Yes ....................... No......................... Skip to Q37. What was the status of your state’s financial assurance. fund as of September 30, 2005? Not applicable, never had this type of fund. Fund is no longer active. Accepting and paying all valid claims without restriction. No decision made to stop collecting claims. State Fund Dedicated to Tanks without a Viable Owner 37. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? 41. What was the overall balance of your state’s fund dedicated. to tanksWithoutViableOwner.com as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? date)? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable.] [Enter mm/dd/yy.] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? 27. Please describe the deductible amount(s) paid by responsible parties and any maximum amount the state financial assurance fund will pay for each release from a federally regulated UST. 28. How much was deposited into your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? What was the overall balance of your state’s financial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Obligated........................................ 32. During the past 5 years, what amount of funding, if any, did your state divert for purposes other than those related to the UST program? g. If applicable, for what purposes did your states divert funds from the fund for? 33. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? Reimbursed ................................. g. If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert UST financial assurance funds? 34. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new claims against the state financial assurance fund after a certain date? Date after which claims will no longer be accepted No decision made to stop accept claims......... 35. As a result of your state's decision to stop collecting revenues for the state Financial Assurance Fund, how did you pay back the money? How did you repay the money you received? The cleanup of leaking underground storage tanks can affect the percentage of releases in a state that are cleaned up using at least some public funding. One such approach is whether a state has chosen to set up a financial assurance fund that provides financial responsibility coverage for tank owners. For example, in North Dakota, where nearly all tanks are covered by the state’s fund, the state expects that more than 95 percent of releases will be cleaned up. States may have releases from tanks without a viable owner in their backlog because the owner or operator responsible for the tank failed to maintain adequate financial responsibility Coverage. States report they primarily use financial assurance funds to pay costs of cleaning up leaks. Concerns raised about whether tank owners have incentives to prevent releases. EPA estimates that releases cost about $125,000 to clean up, on average, $25,000 or less. 12 states described the circumstances under which penalties could be imposed on tank owners to avoid funding shortages, which could delay the cleanup of releases and potentially threaten human health and the environment. But EPA had not developed guidance to implement provisions of the 2005 Act as of December 2006. State laws addressing when a specific owner or operator is considered to be responsible for a release can affect who pays for cleanups. Michigan program officials previously told us that the state’s causation standard exacerbates the funding problem for tanks without a viable owner. Proving responsibility becomes difficult in cases where releases have occurred in the past and ownership of the property has changed. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then must then be held responsible for cleanup. The state must first prove that the present owner/ operator is responsible. The 2005 Act requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of their underground storage tanks on a 3-year cycle. For those states that currently inspect sites less frequently, the additional inspections could lead to a spike in the number of releases discovered. State financial assurance funds may also be affected by future natural disasters, such as hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005. For example, officials in Texas told us that underground storage tank facilities in their state are inspected about every 10 years, on average. Releases in this state that may not have otherwise been found for as long as 10 years may be discovered much sooner, leading to an increase in confirmed releases. that money will be available to clean up releases from underground storage tanks. This money, in turn, contributes to timely completion of cleanup and thus reduces the risk to human health and the environment posed by releases that are not cleaned up in a timely manner. We asked states about the number of cases they had encountered in the past 5 years in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility coverage. The longer contamination from these releases is left in place, the greater the potential becomes for the contamination to spread. beginning after the state has inspected tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the cleanup of releases from underground storage tanks. State financial assurance funds may face additional challenges to remaining financially sound in coming years for the following reasons: Financial assurance funds might take on additional liability from tank installers and manufacturers, and they may be required to provide coverage for the costs of cleanup directly related to releases caused by improper tank manufacture or installation. If these challenges are not addressed, then EPA would be concerned about the financial soundness of the fund. EPA indicated it has issued draft guidelines that would require inspections of underground storage tanks to assess compliance with financial responsibility requirements. EPA indicated that it would strengthen its oversight by improving a recently developed monitoring tool and by developing guidance for its oversight process. Regarding our recommendation that EPA assess the relative effectiveness of public and private options for financial responsibility coverage, EPA indicated it would improve its oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds. The agency indicated it will strengthen its Oversight of State Assurance Funds by improving its monitoring tool. purposes of this survey, consider tanks among your state’s cleanup backlog without a viable owner to be those tanks where, as of September 30, 2005, the responsible party was unknown, unwilling, or unable to perform the needed cleanup. For how many releases in your state's cleanup backlog has the state not yet determined whether a responsible party is known, willing, and able to perform cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 23. In the past year, how much public funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleanup projects? Cleaning up known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would cost an estimated $12 billion in public funds from state and federal sources. Just over half of the approximately 117,000 releases that states reported in our survey had not yet been fully cleaned up will be cleaned up using at least some public funds. Tank owners or operators will pay the entire costs to clean up another 34 percent of these releases, according to state officials. 11 states reported that they did not know how many releases in their backlogs were from tanks without a viable owner. The objectives of this review were to provide information on states’ estimates of the cost in public funding from state and federal sources to clean up known releases. The survey was focused specifically on federally regulated underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. We will use the information gathered in this survey to provide the Congress with information about the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states and the resources available to state programs to address these cleanups. We are aware of similar survey efforts conducted in the past year by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation and by EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks. Public funding: Includes any funding controlled and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Do not include funds spent by federal, state, and local governmental agencies to clean up releases from tanks they either it will cost to complete the remainder of the cleanups for all of these releases? None ................. Go to Q25. a. How did you estimate the cost for the backlog of releases from USTs without a viable owner? A. What is your interpretation of your responses to questions about the scope and type of UST cleanups in your state? In those cases where a state fund is dedicated solely to coverage of tanks without a viable responsible party, the survey provides a separate space to answer questions about such a fund. Responsible party funding: Includes both direct expenditures by responsible parties and indirect expenditures. EPA-defined site cleanup costs: “All costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of the problem’s source.” The survey does not provide specific cost data for these types of cleanup costs. The survey is open to the public. The 2005 Act included language providing that, if a state diverts resources from its financial assurance fund, EPA may not distribute a certain portion of LUST appropriations to that state for enforcement purposes. This provision affects only the 37 states whose financial assurance funds still provide financial responsibility coverage for new releases. Officials we interviewed in Pennsylvania and South Carolina were uncertain about the 2005 Act’s impact on future diversions. Two states even commented in their responses to our survey that they anticipated diversions in 2006. Of the 43 states that have had financial assurance funds, 16 reported that they had diverted a total of nearly $435 million from their funds between 2001 and 2005. Officials in two states where diversions occurred reported a negative impact on the state program’s ability to clean up sites. In Florida, for example, $20 million was diverted in 2002. As a result, financial assurance fund managers had to adjust the threshold for cleanup, meaning that the cleanup of less urgent releases, which otherwise would have been addressed, was delayed. As late as June 2006, the impact of the flooding caused by these hurricanes on Louisiana’s financial assurance fund was not yet fully known. If all underground storage tanks that could have been affected by the flooding turn out to have had releases, the workload of the state assurance fund would increase by 25 percent, an official says. Payouts from the state assure fund would increased by approximately $4 million per year, according to this official. Diversions from state financial assurance funds may also limit some states’ ability to. Over one-fifth of states’ public spending to clean up releases from underground storage tanks in 2005 came from these financial assurance funds. Florida’s fund last provided financial responsibility coverage for new releases on December 31, 1998. Seven states and the District of Columbia have never had funds that providedFinancial responsibility coverage. In these states, tank owners and operators use other ways of demonstrating financial responsibility.primarily through private insurance, according to state officials. In 2005, Florida spent almost $150 million on cleanups in 2005. Florida has cleaned up about 350 sites annually in past years using public funding. Three to four sites per year involved responsible parties that did not maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. As of August 2006, less than 40 percent of the releases in these categories were being actively cleaned up. The state fund is only able to actively conduct cleanup work at about one-third of the 12,000 remaining sites.. The approximately 8,000 other sites in the fund’s backlog await cleanup. These cleanups will not occur until money becomes available for them, or, potentially, the risk posed by the sites increases. State taxes on gasoline and other fuels accounted for about $1.3 billion (92 percent) of this income to state funds. States reported that financial assurance funds also received revenues totaling about $42 million (3 percent) from fees paid by tank owners and operators. Many states have maximum limits on the overall balance of their funds. Generally, if a state’s maximum limit is reached, its financial assurance fund may not be available for cleaning up underground storage tanks.. Only four states’ financial assurance. funds collected tank fees but not gasoline taxes. 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion, according to estimates. Four states did not have or did not report a fund balance. The top five states account for more than half of the total balance in these funds. While state financial assurance funds can provide substantial amounts of funding for cleaning up releases, funds in some states may not have sufficient resources to fund these cleanups in a timely manner, the authors say.. Officials in nine states reported that their funds limit the amount of cleanup work they finance based on funding availability. Some states have provided cleanup funds to address releases from underground storage tanks. Four of these states reported paying for such cleanups from state sources in 2005. At federal fiscal year-end 2005, state financial assurance funds in 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion. In the state of Washington, for example, the state’s reinsurance program helps owners and operators of underground storage Tanks obtain affordable pollution liability insurance by assuming part of the risk for each loss. Most states have, or have had, financial assurance funds. As of September 30, 2005, 37 states had funds that met federal requirements for financial responsibility. A state assurance fund is financially sound if it provides reasonable assurance that money is available to pay for cleanup costs and other liabilities. EPA would be concerned about the soundness of a state financial assurance fund if the funding levels or claim processing time caused undue delays in cleaning up releases, thereby potentially harming human health and the environment. In Texas, for example, the fund had a backlog of unpaid bills totaling about $170 million by 1992. annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Tank owners or operators that choose private insurance for financial responsibility coverage must pay annual premiums to maintain coverage. EPA does not provide states specific guidance on whether or how frequently states should engage in routine verification of financial responsibility Coverage. We found that only about one-third of states check coverage on an annual basis, while the remaining states generally reported they check less frequently or not at all. EPA lacks assurance that states are adequately overseeing and enforcing financial responsibility provisions.  states that do not check financial responsibility coverage on an annual basis may not know if owners or operators are maintaining required coverage. If states do not verify coverage on a routine basis, it may be difficult for them to know whether owners or operator will have required coverage in the event of a release. If the required coverage is not in place when a release occurs, funds may not be available to pay for cleanup in a timely manner, thus increasing the potential for contamination to occur. Forty-seven states and the District of Columbia reported that they anticipate identifying about 37,000 releases over the next five years. used in these types of situations in the past. Some options that owners or operators can choose for coverage either require annual updates or are often renewed annually. Owners or operators that self-insure, or choose to demonstrate that they have sufficient assets to cover costs resulting from a release, must prepare an annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Checking financial responsibility coverage helps to ensure that an owner or operator has the required paperwork to demonstrate coverage. For more information, go to www.insureyourself.com. Officials in several states indicated that penalties were not usually imposed simply if multiple releases occurred. Rather, most states imposed penalties on the basis of evidence that the tank owner did not comply with applicable regulations or failed to report a release. EPA approves state financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage. According to EPA guidance, the agency can withdraw this approval if a fund no longer provides coverage that ensures timely and adequate cleanup of releases. As discussed earlier, EPA would be in charge of cleaning up releases. government or the state (local government only) ......................... k. A dedicated fund (localgovernment only) ............................................. l. ................ 52. Is there any additional information about how you calculated the number of tanks covered by the various financial responsibility mechanisms that would help inform our interpretation of your responses? 53. Which of the following describe your state's procedures for determining whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? 56. Does your state ever impose penalties on responsible parties for multiple releases from federally regulated USTs? Yes ....................... No......................... Go to next question. How frequently, if at all, does your state check whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? At least annually ................................................................................................ Every 1 to 2 years .............................................................................................. Every 3 years or longer...................................................................................... State does not check financial responsibility..................................................... ........................................................................... 55. Over the past 5 years, how many cases has your state encountered in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility? Is this an exact number or an estimate of the number of cases? Have active federally regulated USTs in your state demonstrate financial responsibility? Please list the number of tanks covered by the various available financial responsibility mechanisms below. Is this an exact number or an estimate? a. State financial assurance fund......... b. Financial test of self-insurance ....... c. Corporate guarantee ........................ d. Insurance coverage.......................... e. Surety bond ..................................... f. Letter of credit................................. g. Trust fund set up by owner or operator ........................................ h. Bond rating test (local government only) ............................................. i. Financialtest (localGovernment only) ......................... k. Guarantee from another local government or the state (local Government only) EPA monitors the soundness of state financial assurance funds. In 2005, EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks began collecting information from states. According to some EPA officials, however, the data collected were of limited usefulness. Even though the fund stopped accepting new releases after December 22, 1998, state officials expect it to remain in place at least until 2008.daily added to the backlog. In order to catch up, the fund temporarily slowed down some cleanup work. The goals of this effort included providing a better tool to monitor stateFinancial assurance funds’ soundness. the federal fiscal year, we asked them to provide us with the starting date of their alternative reporting year. In addition to conducting a survey to address our three objectives, we also interviewed agency officials in a nonprobability sample of eight states. We selected this sample of states in order to discuss as many of our topics of interest as possible within a limited number of interviews. To select the states, we first reviewed all states’ responses to survey questions related to the relevant topics. We then calculated a score for each topic of interest. solvency of states’ financial assurance funds. To obtain further information about the federal funding to address these releases, we interviewed Department of the Treasury officials. We interviewed EPA headquarters and regional officials to determine the process by which EPA distributes LUST Trust Fund money. We gathered documentation regarding appropriations of money from the fund to EPA, states' expenditure of fund money, and the balance of the fund and its annual revenues. We found the data elements that we used in this report from Treasury’s financial statements sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review. EPA’s distribution of LUST Trust Fund money to states depends on data that may not be accurate. States are not required to report data to EPA on the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner. In addition, developing national data on the extent to which releases remaining to be cleaned up are attributed to tanks without viable owners would be useful to both EPA and the Congress. We recommend that the Administrator, EPA, take the following four actions: Ensure that states verify, on a regular basis, that tank owners and operators are maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage. In a 2005 report, we recommended that EPA collect available data from the states regarding the number of tanks in each state that had no viable owners. As of December 2006, EPA Office of Underground Storage Tanks officials stated that EPA had not a viable owner. We continue to believe that such reporting would be worthwhile and would not present an undue burden to most states. We provided EPA with a draft of this report for its review and comment. EPA agreed with our recommendations and provided information on the agency's plans and activities to address each of them. EPA regional officials consider the components of the state formulas, along with additional factors, to determine the actual amount to be distributed to each of the states in their region. Additional factors that may be considered, according to EPA regional officials, include states’ actual need for money in light of such things as funding carryovers from prior years. For the most part, the EPA Regional officials whom we interviewed stated that deviations from the formula distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor. The total for the states within each region. EPA headquarters uses a formula to distribute LUST Trust Fund money to the regions. The formula includes a minimum of $300,000 per state and a need-based amount. It also includes a performance-based bonus to states that meet or exceed the national averages for the numbers of cleanups initiated and completed. The distribution formula does not consider the number of releases from tanks without tanks without water in them, the EPA says. The distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor, the agency says. Tanks include “any one or combination of tanks (including underground pipes connected thereto) that is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances, and the volume of which is 10 percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. This term does not include any. farm or residential tank of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes.’’ “ tank used for storage heating oil for consumptive use on the premises where stored.”