Federal standards for internal control specify that agencies should assess the risks the agency faces. In USPTO’s 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, the agency indicated its intent to evaluate changes to the its system for evaluating if examiners are completing office actions in the time examiners. We conducted this performance audit from November 2014 to June 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.  OPQA made changes to its review processes that should allow the office to perform about 12,000 audits in 2016. In 2015, USPTO drafted a master review form that could standardize OPQa and supervisory examiner reviews with a single, consistent approach and documentation. As of March 2016,USPTO had not made a decision on the master review.unit level, according to agency officials. The agency began using a draft version of the form in November 2015, and began to pilot the form with some supervisory patent examiners in 2016, officials said. USPTO developed a human capital strategy, its 2015-2018 People Plan, which replaced its 2011-2015 Strategic Human Capital Plan. The agency also identified the role of patent examiner as a mission- critical occupation and identified the competencies needed to fulfill that role. USPTO has a workforce with the skills required to achieve organizational goals, according to the plan. The plan is expected to be implemented by the end of the year, the agency said in a press release. The 2015- 2018 People Plan will be implemented over the course of the next three years. Internal control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. These activities are an integral part of an agency’s planning to achieve effective results and efficiently manage government resources. Because information technology changes rapidly, the internal control standards note that controls must evolve to remain effective. These standards also highlight the importance of clearly documenting internal controls. Without a documented, periodically updated strategy to manage information technology, the agency's controls will not be effective. The U.S. Patent Classification system became outdated following budget constraints in the early 2000s. USPTO partnered with EPO to create a new system to be jointly used by both offices. CPC gives examiners greater access to foreign patent literature compared to the prior system and can be expanded more easily to include new technologies, USPto officials say. The potential benefits of adopting the new classification system may be reduced as inconsistently classified patents make it more difficult for examiners to identify relevant literature. System’s usefulness to examiners depends, in part, on the consistency with which the system is applied by its users. Inconsistently applying the classification system to applications undermines its usefulness. USPTO provided examiners and classification contractors with training on how to classify applications and how to search for references using the CPC system. The agency has not identified specific reasons that account for differences between its classifications and EPO's. However, USpTO is updating its contract for the contract with EPO. USPTO is updating its contract for initial classification services to require a higher level of expertise. As of March 2016, EPO and USPTO had not agreed upon a measure of consistency between the offices. Establishing agreement with EPO on a target of consistency in classifying patent applications and a plan for monitoring consistency would help to implement this practice and would the Department concurred with our recommendations. We also provided a draft of this report to EPo and JPO for their views and comment. EPO indicated it had no comments on the draft. wide array of nonpatent literature sources. According to USPTO officials, the capabilities of the new Patents End-to-End system can be expanded in the future to include additionalNonpatent Literature sources. To improve its monitoring with EPO and other patent offices to develop objective metrics to measure the level of consistency. If finalized, such metrics and a plan to monitor consistency could allow USPto to more fully benefit from adopting the new CPC system.. USPPO should develop and periodically update a documented strategy to identify key sources of nonPatent literature for individual technology centers. wide array of nonpatent literature sources. EPO’s primary search tool allows examiners to use a single interface to search through all of EPO's internal databases as well as some external databases of prior art. The system also incorporates features that make it user-friendly, such as grouping documents to avoid examiners facing dozens of copies of the same article from different sources.EPO officials identified their search engine and the large number of indexed prior art resources available within the search engine as strengths of the office. worksharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished applications at other offices. These search reports may include prior art relevant to similar applications filed with EPO. EPO and JPO incorporate specific nonpatent literature resources into their offices’ main search tools. Using classification systems to help examiners narrow their searches and find relevant patent literature even if the patent application uses inconsistent terms or is written in a foreign language.. JPO’s internal databases include JPO patent literature, some foreign patent USPTO examiners use two systems, the Examiner’s Automated Search Tool (EAST) and the Web-Based Examiner Search Tool. Examiners may access additional foreign patent documents through other web-based tools. STIC also provides subscriptions to various web- based sources of nonpatent literature. The time it takes examiners to search the large and increasing volume of nonPatent literature and the inefficiency of having to search many different sources individually may lead to less thorough searches. Patent literature consists of previously issued U.S. or foreign patents and published patent applications. Nonpatent literature can include such things as product manuals, standards established by international organizations, textbooks, periodicals, or conference presentations. Both patent and nonpatent Literature may be written in a language other than English, referred to as foreign-language art in this report. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners requires them to conduct a thorough prior art search and directs them to consider U.s. patents and foreign patents. surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art references provided by applicants. According to information from USPTO, third parties submitted prior art for less than 1 percent of the approximately 600,000 patent applications received per year since third-party submissions began in 2012. By potentially reducing the need to search for this prior art, these submissions may address challenges related to the quantity and availability of prior Art. USPto reviewed approximately 2,500 submissions of nonpatent literature prior art it received since September 2012, and found 753 unique, English- language documents. USPTO has had authority to receive submissions from third parties that may help identify potentially relevant prior art for published patent applications. This process, sometimes described as crowdsourcing, allows experts and other interested parties to share documents that they believe will aid USPTO’s examination of an application. The agency considered expanding use of third-party submissions of prior art by allowing examiners to use crowdsourcing to solicit such art for specific applications or topics. But the agency decided not to pursue this option, at least in part, because the agency is uncertain about its legal authority. USPTO’s current search tools do not provide examiners with immediate access to computer-generated translations, known as machine translations. Examiners can request human and machine translation services from STIC and three contracted translation vendors that currently cover 35 languages. As of May 2015, USPTO had nearly 8,300 patent examiners across the eight technology centers we reviewed (see fig. 2) According to examiners, another challenge they face is misclassification of patent applications, which can put confidentiality of the application at risk. USPTO anticipates that a pilot system will be available to a limited number of examiners. The new system could expand upon the capabilities of a currently available system. USPTO uses the current system to perform searches for about one-tenth of the agency’s incoming applications, whereas USPto expects to use the new system for every application. The Patent Linguistic Utility Service has been in use for 20 years and has limitations that prevent it from meeting the agency's search needs. USPTO is in the process of a major, multiyear $405 million effort to upgrade its information technology tools. The new system, called Patents End-to-End, will replace nearly 20 systems currently used to search patent applications. 52 percent of examiners expect that an automated pre-examination search would make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted, according to USPTO’s Strategic Information Technology Plan for fiscal years 2015 through 2018. and interviewed USPTO officials; a group of four supervisory patent examiners; officials of the examiners’ union, the Patent Office Professional Association. We also conducted semistructured interviews with subject matter experts (experts) active in the intellectual property field and knowledgeable about the subject of prior art. We selected and interviewed 18 experts to obtain views of different stakeholder communities. In addition, we conducted a web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336. surveyed a generalizable stratified random sample of examiners, our results provide estimates for each technology center included in our study. See the related e-supplement, GAO-16-478SP, for the original survey language and more detailed results. In addition to the contact named above, Chris Murray (Assistant Director), Tind Shepper Ryen, Krista Breen Anderson, Hilary Benedict, Richard Burkard, John Delicath, Alice Feldesman, Armetha Liles, Rebecca Makar, Rob Marek, Eleni Orphanides, Kelly Rubin. Litigation Could Help Improve Patent Quality. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: Hiring Efforts Are Not Sufficient to Reduce the Patent Application Backlog. USPTO Has Made Progress in Hiring Examiners, but Challenges to Retention Remain. US PTO: Improvements Needed to Better Manage Patent Office Automation and Address Workforce Needing to Better. Manage patent office Automation. GAO-05-1008T. Washington, D.C.: September 8, 2005. will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the USPTO, the Commissioner for Patents, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or neumannj@GAo. Department of Commerce. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Examiners at the GS-14 level or above (44 percent of the examiners in the technology centers we reviewed, as shown in fig. 3) are generally primary examiners. Primary examiners may accept or reject a patent application without additional review. Junior examiners must first be reviewed by a primary examiner before an office action can be sent to the applicant. In addition to applying for a patent from USPTO, an inventor may also seek patent protection in other countries for the same invention. 2.2 million applications were filed with patent offices in the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, and Europe in 2014. EPO issues patents that cover 42 countries, most of which are member countries that are party to the European Patent Convention. Applicants may apply to national patent offices or apply through EPO for coverage in some or all of these countries. These five offices, including EPO and JPO, each receive hundreds of thousands of patent applications each year.are initial filings. According to the World Intellectual Property Organization, around 2.7 million patent applications were filing worldwide in 2014, of which 2.1 million were filed in the U.S. through EPO for coverage in some or all of these 42 countries. EPO has three official languages, one of which must be used for processing an application. These three languages are English (about 80 percent of applications), French (about 5 percent), and German (about 15 percent) EPO and JPO have about one-half and one-fifth as many examiners as USPTO, respectively. According to JPO officials, there is a limit on the number of federal employees JPO can have. EPO and JPO classify applications and patents into groups that describe specific components of the invention. Examiners may then look at other applications and patent within the same group to find similar inventions. A system that has more groups allows for finer distinctions, and prior art searches within a class will produce fewer, more focused results. According to EPO officials, this can be particularly helpful for finding documents in Asian languages that are otherwise difficult for EPO examiners to search. It facilitates searches that are less dependent on the examiner’s choice of keywords. Survey of patent examiners cited. EPO and JPO have systems to share search and examination results. By allowing examiners to review prior art that examiners from other offices found useful in examining patent applications, these systems may help address the challenges related to managing the large quantity literature. USPTO is collaborating with foreign patent offices to give examiners access to examination files from those offices. A third system, PATENTSCOPE, provides access to applications filed with multiple offices under the Patent Cooperation Treaty. patent applications worldwide are part of patent families filed in multiple offices. To gain patent protection in multiple countries, inventors may file applications for the same invention in several different offices. Because the underlying invention is the same, the search and examination results at one office may be useful to examiners in another office. Worksharing can ameliorate the challenges posed by the quantity of potential prior art that examiners must search and the time pressure examiners face by allowing patent offices to leverage others’ work and knowledge. results from foreign patent offices available to examiners and the public. One system, the Common Citation Document, provides bibliographic information of patent and nonpatent prior art citations. Another system, Global Dossier, provides access to the examination history of applications, such as office actions and other correspondence. USPTO examiners gained access to Global D dossier in 2015, and have been using it since 2011, officials say. The system is free and available to the public, with no annual fee. USPTO has entered into two pilot programs to jointly examine certain applications. Applicants who file related patent applications with USPTO and either JPO or the Korean Intellectual Property Office may request to enter the pilot. These collaborative efforts could improve searches for patent and nonpatent literature in foreign languages, as examiners from multiple countries will perform searches in their native languages and share the results. The pilot programs were designed and implemented in collaboration with EPO, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. that share published information among patent offices; (2) engaged in pilot programs to collaborate with other offices during search and examination of related patent applications; and (3) adopted a new, joint classification system with EPO. These efforts may help address several of the challenges relating to prior art and applications, including the large quantity of art available and the availability of prior art, particularly foreign patents and art written in foreign languages. According to USPTO officials, the U.S. Patent Classification system allows examiners to conduct prior art searches independent of an application's language and wording. To minimize nonresponse error, we made a variety of contacts with the sample of examiners during the survey. To adjust the sampling weight for potential nonresponse bias, we used standard weighting class adjustments based on the sampling strata and the examiners’ years of experience at USPTO. The weighted response rate was also 80 percent. In this report and in the related e-supplement, we present the survey results using the nonresponse adjusted weights, which are generalizable to the eligible population. totaling 7,825 eligible examiners. From this list, we drew our stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible USPTO patent examiners for an 80 percent response rate. Because we used a probability procedure based on random selections, our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn. Since each sample could have provided different estimates, we quantified the sampling error and express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample’s results at a 95 percent confidence interval. In developing the survey, we worked with our survey professionals to draft questions that were clear and unbiased. Using a web-based survey provided several advantages, including allowing examiners to enter their responses into an electronic instrument that created an automatic record for each respondent. This eliminated the potential for errors that could have resulted if we had used a manual process to enter respondents’ data from paper surveys. In addition, to account for the complex sample design, we used a separate GAO survey methodologist. technology center 2100 has a 95 percent confidence interval of within +/- 18 percent of the estimate itself. For some other survey questions, we also reviewed examiners’ open- ended responses on selected topics. Examiners’ responses to open-ended questions are not generalizable to other examiners. We do not report the exact number of examiners who provided responses on the topics we reviewed. In addition, we conducted statistical tests of association on the results of certain survey questions. All tests were independently verified to ensure their accuracy. provide a range, such as “5 to 10,’ while others provided a single number for hours spent per application on prior art searches. Some examiners also provided responses that did not clearly indicate the approximate hours per application spent on priorArt searches in the past quarter. Where possible, we coded responses to reflect a range of numbers by assigning a low and a high value. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of the answers. analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of results overall, within strata, and within GS level categories. Results were not statistically different when using the low value, midpoint (average between low and high values), or high value of a range. As a result, we present results for question 3 based on the midpoint. The 95 percent confidence intervals for these results are within +/- 10 percent of the estimates themselves, except for the estimate for technology center 2100 (Computer Architecture, Software, and Information Security) is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn. Within each stratum and overall, the confidence intervals for survey results for percentages are generally within +/- 5 percentage points. The only estimates for which the confidence interval exceed 5percentage points are certain results for the business methods stratum. In these instances, theconfidence intervals are from 5 to 6percent points. In this report, our figures containing survey results show the upper and lower bounds for estimates at the 95 percent confidence interval. the 95 percent confidence interval. For other estimates in the report, we have not provided the upper and lower bounds in the text or tables. Details for all survey results are available in the e- supplement related to this report. The quality of survey data can also be affected by nonsampling error. This includes variations in how respondents interpret questions, respondents’ willingness to offer accurate responses, nonresponse errors, and data collection and processing errors. We took several steps in developing the survey and in collecting and analyzing survey data. ensure their accuracy. All tests of association were carried out at the 5 percent level of significance and were Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) Chi- square tests of general association. The testing was carried out in SUDAAN, which is statistical software appropriate for the analysis of survey data. The null hypothesis was that there is no association between the two tested variables. When the association between two variables, conditional on a third variable, is of interest, this is referred to as the stratum-adjusted CMH test. JPO officials reported taking steps to ensure that the patents it issues are of high quality. These steps include a director quality check, consultations with other examiners, and quality audits of a sample of examinations. USPTO has taken or begun planning various actions that may help address challenges in identifying relevant prior art, but some of these actions have limitations that may have limitations. According to JPO officials, the office has randomly selected applications. The number of audits is not large enough to allow tracking of individual examiner performance. at least a master’s degree and almost all JPO examiners join the office after graduate school. At EPO, examiners must also meet a requirement that they understand English, German, and French. EPO examiners spend their first 2 years in training, alternating periods of classroom training with periods of on-the-job training. JPO officials identified the longevity of examiners as a strength, stating that examiners are well trained and have experience that may enhance the quality of patent application examinations. EPO and JPO examiners use classification and keyword searches instead of more complex search tools. EPO uses some automated tools that assist in keyword-based searches or provide automated search results. Another EPO tool provides examiners with the results of an automated search based on the concepts and words drawn from the claims in applications. At EPO, applications are examined by a panel of three examiners: a first examiner, second examiner, and chair. According to EPO officials, the first examiner performs the bulk of the search and administrative tasks. USPTO does not have a process to assess and measure each technology center’s progress toward closing any gaps in examiners’ technical knowledge and skills, authors say. USPTO defines technical competence as the ability to analyze and interpret written technical materials, rules, regulations, and reports. The agency has not conducted an overall analysis of the technical competence of its examiners to identify potential competency gaps for each technology centre, they say. principles in workforce planning include identifying critical occupations, skills, and competencies and analyzing workforce gaps. Technology center ranging from an estimated 10 percent to 34 percent of examiners. EPO and JPO use several approaches that may help their examiners address challenges in identifying prior art. These approaches include worksharing, creating and abilities needed for examiner positions. Agency officials said these were based on the hiring needs derived from a hiring model created by senior management. The extent to which examiners participated in this technical training program varied by technology center, from a low of 48 percent to a following 3 technology centers. art search in the time allotted for applications with a subject matter in which they have knowledge of existing prior art based on their education or previous work experience. As of May 2015, approximately 39 percent of all examiners in the technology centers we reviewed had been at the agency for less than 5 years. USPTO officials told us that the agency has aimed to match new hires’ previous work experiences and educational backgrounds to technology centers. The training examiners receive may also affect their ability to maintain the technical competence they need to identify relevant prior art. As of May 2016, USPTO had not clarified the extent to which this evaluation will specifically consider the time needed for a thorough prior art search for different technologies. Without this information, the agency does not know if it is allotting examiners appropriate amounts of time to complete their work. Based on our survey, most examiners find that they do not have sufficient time for thorough prior. art searches, and many were not confident in their ability to identify the most relevant prior art without working voluntary overtime. be allotted about 32 hours for an application related to data processing. The allotted time includes the time needed to review the application, perform a search for prior art, and complete all office actions. Examiners have minimum production goals, based on the time allotted, for the number of office actions they must complete. USPTO uses several different information technology systems to assist examiners in conducting prior art searches. For example, to search U.S. patent literature, examiners use two systems, the Examiner’s Automated Search and CPC. search in some technologies. We continue to believe that the agency should review the time allotted for all technologies, and not only those identified through feedback related to CPC. The Department concurred with our recommendation to assess whether the technical competence of examiners in each technology center matches those necessary and develop strategies to address gaps if identified. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary. complete a thorough prior art search, compared to 20 percent of examiners in the Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry technology center. How often examiners searched for foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations, or foreign-language nonpatent literature was statistically associated with their description of the sufficiency of time they had to complete a thorough Prior Art Search. An estimated 30 percent worked an average of more than 10 hours of voluntary/uncompensated overtime per biweekly period, although examiners’ overtime varied by GS level (see app. III). Less than half of the examiners were moderately or very confident that they found the most relevant prior art during the time allotted. When they included their additional voluntary overtime, the number of examiners who were moderately and very confident increased to an estimated 69 percent. Even with the inclusion of their overtime, an estimated 23 percent remained not at all confident to somewhat confident. Federal standards for prior art search could have important implications for examiners' prior art searches. For more information, visit the U.S. National Gallery of Art. Examiners are expected to complete their examination of an application in a certain number of hours. The time allotted varies depending on factors such as the technology and the seniority of the examiner. An estimated 80 percent of examiners spent, on average, from 6 to 20 hours initially examining patent applications and completing a first office action. If examiners feel pressure to finish their examinations quickly rather than thoroughly, it could have important implications. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is a not-for-profit organization. Patent application without additional review, most examiners below the GS-14 level must have their actions reviewed by a more senior examiner. Examiners provided a variety of open-ended responses. Some respondents chose to provide a range, such as “5 to 10,” while others other GS levels. Tables 8 through 15 provide information related to the effects of the quantity of prior art, examiners’ overtime, and continuing education provided by USPTO in examiners' art areas. Misclassification occurs when an application is not classified into the group most closely associated with the invention. This can result in applications being routed to the wrong USPTO technology center or art unit for examination. An estimated 75 percent of examiners encountered misclassified applications sometimes, often, or always in the past quarter, and an estimated 76 percent find that the misclassification of patent applications makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted, according to our survey. The effect of unclear applications may be exacerbated by USPTO’s practice that examiners should attempt to identify all applicable grounds for rejecting a claim or claims during their first review. The practice aims to avoid unnecessary delays. In our patent quality report (GAO-16-490), we provide additional information on how the clarity of applications affects patent quality. “Issued patents and publications containing these non-standard terms also make searching in foreign collections exceptionally challenging because it is not possible to anticipate which synonyms to use.”  compact prosecution may discourage examiners from resolving any issues of clarity or ambiguity before conducting their initial searches for relevant prior art. In order to follow the compact prosecution practice, an examiner must guess what unclear claims mean in order to search for prior art related to the claims. If examiners do not have a clear understanding of the scope of the claims, they may not be able to conduct a proper search for the prior art that is relevant to the claim. Such delays could be caused by examiners waiting to continue examining an application until previously identified issues are resolved. Excessive references make it more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search. Excessive references can be particularly challenging for examiners. Applicants are generally not required to explain the relevance of the references or to point examiners to the particular portions of references that are relevant. One examiner recalled often receiving information disclosure statements from applicants with numerous prior art references, of which only a handful were relevant, according to the survey. The survey found that 88 percent of examiners sometimes, often, or always encountered applications with irrelevant references. examiners in identifying relevant prior art. Expert: Large volume of prior art available from multiple sources makes searching for relevant prior Art challenging. Expert says certain general types of prior Art are more difficult to find. Expert also says software-related prior art and foreign-language prior art are difficult to obtain. Prior art related to computer technologies has also been hard to find, according to one expert we interviewed, in part because a lot of information is commonly known in this field but may not be found. to most of the experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed, the clarity of applications can pose a challenge to finding relevant prior art. For example, as one expert noted, there often are no standard terms to describe technologies. Inconsistent terminology can make it more difficult for examiners to findrelevant prior art because searching for one term using keyword searches is one common method of searching for prior art, experts say. According to four of theExperts we interviewed, the absence of standard terms is particularly a challenge for software-related applications. our survey. On the basis of survey responses from our random probability sample of examiners, we found that some examiners find that the CPC classifications make it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. In response to an open- ended survey question, one examiner described their difficulty, saying that proper classification of prior art is essential to quality and efficiency of examination. Many CPC categories still contain large amounts of prior Art despite having more detailed classification methods. commonly known in this field but may not be found by searching a public database. USPTO examiners we surveyed also reported difficulties obtaining to subsequently use as prior art in later examinations. This is because misclassified applications may be difficult to find when examiners search for patent literature using technology-specific patent classification categories. Ensuring that examiners have sufficient and appropriate technical backgrounds, knowledge, or skills for conducting thorough prior art searches is also a challenge. The role of patent examiner is a difficult one that can take years to learn. Examiners we surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior and examiners’ technical competence. According to most of the experts we interviewed, time pressures may reduce examiner’s ability to conduct thorough prior art searches. As figure 5 shows, we estimate on the basis of our survey that 67 percent of examiners find they have somewhat or much less time than needed to complete thoroughPrior art searches given a typical workload. For varied among technology centers, as shown in appendix III. by technology center, with one technology center separated into two strata, as described in table 6. Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License and Review technology center includes a diverse set of technologies. In our review, we separated the art units—subunits of a technology center—focused on electronic commerce and business methods. This resulted in nine strata with a target survey population totaling 7,825 eligible examiners. From this list, we drew our technology center. Experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed had mixed opinions on USPTO’s search tools. Of the 18 experts, 10 agreed that the search tools and capabilities available to examiners create challenges to conducting thorough prior art searches. Expert suggested that US PTO needs more comprehensive databases of prior art. 82 percent of examiners find it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough priorArt search in the time allotted for applications.year. USPTC has not established goals and indicators for improving priorArt searches. examiner’s search. If a reviewer finds that the examiner should have made a rejection but did not, the form asks the reviewer to identify the source of prior art needed for the missed rejection. The March 2016 draft of the form does not include, as an October 2015 draft we reviewed did, questions assessing if search queries were likely to result in identification. The Department said it would ensure adequate search data are collected to assess the quality of searches at the technology center level. It would investigate using audits to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches over time. USPTO has not documented technology-specific guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search. As of March 2016, USPTO’s draft of the new master review form did not require OPQA or supervisory examiners to evaluate the thoroughness of an examiners’ search. Instead, the form asks if the examiner (1) should consider nonpatent literature as well as the sources of prior art the examiner should consider. In regard to our recommendations to ensure that reviews of examiner’ prior art searches collect sufficient information, we adjusted our report to acknowledge the information USPto provides on these suggested search areas. prior art searches specific to individual technology centers and monitor search thoroughness over time. USPTO uses two methods to review examinations, which may help the agency monitor the effects of the challenges described above as well as the thoroughness of searches. In recent years, the number and consistency of OPQA staff and supervisory patent examiners’ reviews of examiners' prior art searches have not been sufficient to examine trends at the technology center or art unit level, the agency says. Limits to USPTO’s ability to monitor examiners’ prior art searches at a technology center or art unit level may hinder the agency's ability to identify and address issues. Federal standards for internal control state that agencies’ monitoring of their internal controls should assess the quality of performance over time. Without greater clarity on what constitutes a thorough prior art search, the agency cannot address issues that are more prevalent in certain technology centers or art areas. Without consistently collecting the information needed to assess the thoroughness of priorArt searches and monitoring at a Technology Center or Art Unit level, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office may not be able to identify issues. Examiners face a number of challenges in their efforts to search for prior art. USPTO should assess whether the technical competencies of examiners in each technology center match those necessary. The Department of Commerce concurred with our recommendations. We provided a draft of this report to the Department of commerce for its review and comment, reproduced in appendix IV, the Department concurred in the report's recommendations and provided additional technical assistance. The report was published on October 31, 2013. It is published by request of the US Patent and Trademark Office. Patents End-to-End system requires examiners to consider U.S. patents, foreign patents, and nonpatent literature, unless they can justify with reasonable certainty that no more pertinent references can be found. Examiners have access to guidance and training on classification-based searches, but USPTO has not documented technology-specific guidance. Without goals and indicators for assessing the thoroughness of prior art searches, the agency cannot reliably assess the thoroughs of its searches or improvement in searches over time. USPTO examiners face a variety of challenges in identifying relevant prior art during patent examination. USPTO’s actions span the following areas: leveraging the work of foreign patent offices, encouraging submission of prior art from third parties, improving prior art search tools, monitoring examiners’ prior art searches, and strengthening the technical competence of the examiner corps. These actions may help address challenges related to prior art and applications, but some of these actions have limitations that may hinder their effectiveness. A web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible USPTO patent examiners from across 8 of the 11 technology-based subject matter groups (referred to as technology centers) The survey was designed to collect information on challenges UPTO faces in finding relevant prior art. The extent of the challenges may vary by technology center or examiners’ GS level (see app. III). We excluded the Designs technology center, the examiner workforce, human capital management efforts, training practices, and international cooperation. The focus of patent examination is to determine whether the invention in a patent application satisfies the legal requirements for a patent, including that the invention be novel and not obvious. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners establishes certain requirements and processes that examiners must follow in examining patent applications. There are generally two types of prior art—patent literature or provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Based on our survey results, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office examiners in some technology centers or at some General Schedule (GS) levels face certain challenges in identifying relevant prior art. USPTO is making improvements to its prior art search tools that may help address some of the challenges examiners face in identifying relevant prior art. USPTO has not developed a strategy to assess incorporating new sources of art into these tools over time. The law requires the agency to establish procedures to ensure that no protest or opposition is initiated during examination of a patent application. It is unclear if requests for third-party submissions on a specific application could be viewed as allowing opposition, officials say.