Almost a third of DHS’s major investments received funding without having validated mission needs and requirements. Without validated requirements, life-cycle cost estimates, and regular portfolio reviews, DHS cannot ensure that its investment decisions are appropriate and will ultimately address capability gaps. 15 of the 57 DHS major investments we reviewed were designated by the Office of Management and Budget as poorly planned and by DHS as poorly performing. Among other things, we recommended that DHS reinstate the Joint Requirements Council or establish another departmental joint requirements oversight board. In fiscal year 2015 alone, DHS planned to spend approximately $7.2 billion on these acquisition programs. DHS and its underlying components are acquiring systems to help secure the border, increase marine safety, screen travelers, enhance cyber security, improve disaster response, and execute a wide variety of other operations. Each of DHS’s major acquisition programs generally costs $300 million or more and spans multiple years. The department expects it will ultimately invest more than $180 billion in them. To help, visit www.dhs.gov. gain insight into the magnitude of the cost growth for 16 of 77 programs we reviewed, but we found that their aggregate cost estimates had increased by 166 percent. Nearly all of the DHS program managers we surveyed in 2012 reported their programs had experienced significant challenges. Sixty-eight of the 71 respondents reported they experienced funding instability, faced workforce shortfalls, or their planned capabilities changed after initiation. The department is to be commended for the efforts its leadership has taken to address the acquisition management shortcomings we have identified. of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to achieve the actions and outcomes, but did not identify sufficient resources for the 4 remaining initiatives. In September 2012 we also found that DHS had not consistently met the policy’s requirements. In 2012, most major programs lacked reliable cost estimates, realistic schedules, and agreed-upon baseline objectives. In our 2015 report, we concluded that DHS needs to continue to of the policy. However, in September 2012, DHS had only verified that 4 of 66 programs documented all of the critical knowledge the policy requires. Costs) of 10 percent or greater, including five programs that faced gaps of 30 percent or more. Inconsistencies in how components were implementing the department’s acquisition management policy. Funding plans for Coast Guard programs continued to be incomplete, in that they did not account for all of the operations and maintenance funding the Coast Guard planned to allocate to its major acquisition programs. These gaps in information reduce the value of the funding plans presented to Congress and obscure the affordability of Coast Guard acquisition Programs. We found in our 2015 report that DHS had made important progress across all of its management functions and significant progress in the area of management integration. We also found that DHS continued to face significant management challenges that hindered the department’s ability to accomplish its missions. Over the last year DHS has continued to take actions to address these challenges but they persist, as discussed in more detail below. addressing these and other management challenges will be a significant undertaking that will likely require several years, but will be critical for the department to mitigate risks. DHS has identified a 30-percent gap between the 5-year funding needed for its major acquisitions and the actual resources expected to be available. To address these issues, we have, among other things, recommended that DHS assess program-specific affordability tradeoffs at all acquisition review meetings. DHS concurred with these recommendations and is taking actions to implement them. To ensure that recent efforts are sustained, the department must continue to implement its sound acquisition policy consistently and effectively across all components, the report says. In November 2008, we found that billions invested in major acquisition programs continued to lack appropriate oversight. Of DHS’s 48 major programs requiring milestone and annual reviews, 45 were not assessed in accordance with this policy. At least 14 of these programs had reported cost growth, schedule slips, or performance shortfalls. The department is to be commended for the efforts its recent actions correspond to the high risk outcomes, as shown in the table 4 of the report. The report also found that DHS had taken steps to improve oversight of its major acquisition Programs. $300 million or more and spans multiple years. DHS has established an acquisition management policy that we found in September 2012 to be generally sound. However, we also have found that DHS has lacked discipline in managing its programs according to this policy. These challenges can contribute to poor acquisition outcomes, such as cost increases or the risk of end users receiving technologies that do not first responders in a disaster. We have made 64 recommendations to DHS on acquisition management issues; 42 of which have been implemented. Our findings also formed the basis of the five acquisition management outcomes identified in the high risk list, which DHS continues to address. it has taken to improve the maturity of its system acquisition management practices, leaving additional work to fully address the remaining 20 outcomes. As of March 2016, DHS has partially addressed 9 and initiated 4 of the actions and outcomes. DHS has fully addressed 1 of the 5 acquisition management outcomes, mostly addressed 2 outcomes, partially addressed 1 outcome, and initiated actions to address remaining outcome. We will continue to monitor DHS’s efforts in this high-risk area to determine if the actions are achieved and sustained over the long term. In March 2005, we reported that a lack of clear accountability was hampering DHS’s efforts to integrate the acquisition functions of its numerous organizations into an effective whole. DHS has taken a number of actions to fully address establishing effective component-level acquisition capability. In addition, DHS has conducted staffing analysis reports that quantify gaps in acquisition personnel by position. Moving forward, DHS must develop and implement a plan for filling key vacant positions identified through its staffingAnalysis reports. Further, DHS should continue to improve its acquisition program management by effectively using the Joint Requirements Council. components. We continue to track DHS’s progress through ongoing reviews of the Joint Requirements Council, non-major program acquisitions, and our annual assessment of major acquisition programs, in addition to our high risk updates. We would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time. For further information about this testimony, please contact Rebecca Gambler at (202) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov or Michele Mackin at ( 202)-512-4841 or mackinm@gaO.gov. Homeland Security: Oversight of Neglected Human Resources Information Technology Investment Is Needed. Immigration Benefits System: Better Informed Decision Making Needed on Transformation Program. Homeland Security Acquisitions: Major Program Assessments Reveal Actions Needed to Improve Accountability. Department of Homeland Security: Progress Made; Significant Work Remains in Addressing High-Risk Areas. DHS Training: Improved Documentation, Resource Tracking, and Performance Measurement Could Strengthen Efforts. The report is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection. our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Larry Crosland, Jennifer Kamara, James Kernen, Emily Kuhn, Elizabeth Luke, Valerie Freeman, David Lysy, Taylor Matheson, Shannin O’Neill, Lindsay Taylor, Nathan Tranquilli, Katherine Trimble, and Shaunyce Wallace. Key contributors for the previous work that this testimony is based on are listed in each product. reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. DHS’s efforts to strengthen and integrate its management functions have resulted in progress addressing our criteria for removal from the high-risk list. In February 2015, we found that DHS had met two criteria and partially met the remaining three criteria. DHS subsequently met an additional criterion—establishing a framework for monitoring progress—and therefore as of March 2016, has met three criteria and partial met the other two. We will report on our findings in our 2017 high- Risk Update, which will be released later this year. processes through strengthened departmental structures and increased capability. We found that DHS has established a plan for addressing this high-risk area. Key to addressing the department’s management challenges is DHS demonstrating the ability to achieve sustained progress. Achieving sustained progress requires leadership commitment, effective corrective action planning, adequate capacity, and monitoring the effectiveness and sustainability of supporting initiatives. In doing so, it will be important for DHS to maintain its current level of top leadership support and sustained commitment to ensure continued progress in executing its corrective actions. over the last year that the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security, the Under Secretary for Management at DHS, and other senior officials have continued to demonstrate exemplary commitment. They have taken actions to institutionalize this commitment to help ensure the long-term success of the department’s efforts. For example, in April 2014, the Secretary of DHS issued a memorandum entitled Strengthening Departmental Unity of Effort, committing to, among other things, improving DHS's planning, programming, budgeting, and execution processes. DHS issued its initial Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management in January 2011. The integrated strategy includes key management initiatives and related corrective actions plans for addressing DHS’s management challenges and the actions and outcomes we identified. DHS has sustained its progress in fully addressing 3 of 4 outcomes. DHS could strengthen its financial management monitoring efforts and estimated completion dates for implementing each of them, the authors say. They conclude that in the coming years, DHS needs to continue implementing its Integrated Strategy and show measurable, measurable progress. We found that DHS had implemented a number of actions demonstrating the department’s progress in strengthening its management functions. DHS had made important progress in several areas to fully address 9 actions and outcomes, 5 of which it had sustained as fully implemented for at least 2 years. For instance, DHS fully met 1 outcome for the first time by obtaining a clean opinion on its financial statements for 2 consecutive years. Since our 2015 update, DHS has fully addressed another outcome as a result of actions it has taken to improve the maturity of its system integration outcome. that DHS could strengthen its financial management monitoring efforts. DHS had not yet entered into a contract for independent verification and validation services in connection with its efforts to establish this program. Effective implementation of these modernization projects is important because, until they are complete, the department’s current systems will not effectively support financial management operations. As we concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe, moving forward, DHS will need to closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective measures. We currently assess DHS to have met the framework to monitor progress criterion. Information security remains a major management challenge for the department. DHS has fully addressed 2 financial management outcomes, partially addressed 3, and initiated 3. Most notably, DHS received a clean audit opinion on its financial statements for 3 consecutive years, fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015, fully addressing 2 outcomes. However, the remaining material weaknesses reported by DHS auditors continue to hamper DHS’s ability to improve its financial management. The department has made progress in remediating findings from the previous year. its human resource environment, which with respect to learning management, included limitations resulting from nine disparate learning management systems that did not exchange information. DHS established the Performance and Learning Management System (PALMS) program to provide a system that will consolidate DHS’s nine existinglearning management systems into one system. However, in our February 2016 report we found that selected PALMS capabilities had been deployed to headquarters and two components, but full implementation at four components was not planned. We further found that DHS did not fully implement effective acquisition management practices. The Office of Personnel Management’s 2015 Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey data showed that DHS ranked last among 37 large federal agencies in all four dimensions. DHS has developed plans for addressing its employee satisfaction problems, but as we previously recommended, DHS needs to continue to improve its root-cause analysis efforts related to these plans. The agency has also developed and implemented mechanisms to assess training programs but could take additional actions. For example, in September, the agency launched a new training program to improve employee morale. programs but could take additional actions. In February 2016, we reported that DHS had initiated the Human Resources Information Technology (HRIT) investment in 2003 to address issues presented by its human resource environment. With respect to learning management, we found that the five DHS components in our review all had documented processes to evaluate their training programs. However, to fully achieve this outcome, DHS also needs to, among other things, issue department-wide policies on training and development and strengthen its learning management capabilities. In October 2014, DHS identified that it had resources needed to implement 7 of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to capability goals. DHS has fully addressed 3 of the 6 IT management outcomes, mostly addressed another 2, and partially addressed the remaining 1. The department has also made progress in implementing its IT Strategic Human Capital Plan for fiscal years 2010 through 2012. However, in January 2015 DHS shifted its IT management focus to IT human capital management instead of IT management. The agency has not been removed from our high-risk list. reported by DHS auditors continue to hamper DHS’s ability to establish effective internal control over financial reporting and comply with financial management system requirements. DHS continues to make progress on three multi-year projects to modernize selected components’ financial management systems. According to its January 2016 strategy update, DHS has made the most progress on its U.S. Coast Guard modernization project; whereas additional planning and discovery efforts need to be completed on its projects tomodernize Federal Emergency Management Agency and Immigration and Customs Enforcement systems. will be in a position to implement modernized solutions for these components and their customers. Without sound controls and systems, DHS faces long-term challenges in sustaining a clean audit opinion on its financial statements. DHS has fully addressed 1 human capital management outcome, mostly addressed 3, and partially addressed the remaining 3. For example, the Secretary of Homeland Security signed a bill to improve the ability of the federal government to monitor and respond to terrorist threats. The bill was passed by the Senate Homeland Security Committee and signed into law by the President. through 2012. In January 2015 DHS shifted its IT paradigm from acquiring assets to acquiring services, and acting as a service broker. According to DHS officials in May 2015, this paradigm change will require a major transition in the skill sets of DHS’s IT workforce. As such, this effort will need to be closely managed in order to succeed. Additionally, we found that DHS continues to take steps to improve the quality of its IT services and IT support to the Department of Homeland Security and the general public.