tenant agency representatives and officials from FPS told us they met regularly, but GSA officials said they were not invited to these meetings. Survey results indicated that the roles and responsibilities of FPS and tenant agencies are unclear. FPS and GSA fundamentally disagree over how much of the information in the BSA should be, the authors say. They recommend that FPS collect and maintain an accurate and comprehensive list of all facility- designated points of contact, as well as a system for regularly updating this list. FPS, GSA, and tenant agency representatives did not all meet together regularly to make security preparations or manage security operations during construction. FPS officials told us they had not been invited to project meetings, although GSA officials said they had invited FPS and that FPS attended some meetings. In May 2008, FPS discovered that specific surveillance equipment had been removed. As of May 2009, FPS officials tell us they did not know who had removed the equipment and were working with tenant agency reps to recover it. 53 percent of e-mail addresses and 27 percent of the telephone numbers for designated points of contacts were missing from FPS’s contact database. Complete and accurate contact information is critical for information sharing and an essential component of any customer service initiative. FPS needs to improve its services to GSA and other tenant agencies to improve customer service to them and their clients. The agency is working with the GSA to improve the service it provides to tenant agencies and their tenants. The GSA is also working with FPS to improve service to its tenants. station. GSA property manager knew the appropriate screening procedure, but told us there was no written policy on the procedure that members could access. At one location, FPS had received inaccurate square footage data from GSA and had therefore overcharged the primary tenant agency for a guard post that protected space shared by all the tenants. Once GSA was made aware of the problem, the agency obtained updated information and replaced the guard post. BSC members told us that the committee met as needed.. worked with the tenant agencies to develop a cost-sharing plan for the guard post. BSC members told us that the committee met regularly. At one location, members of a BSC told us they met as needed, although even when they hold meetings, one of the main tenant agencies typically does not participate. GSA officials commented that this tenant adheres to its agency's building security protocols and does not necessarily follow GSA’s tenant policies and procedures, which GSA thinks creates security risks for the entire building. GSA is updating a risk assessment tool that it began developing in 1998, but has not recently used. Risk assessments must be completed before GSA can take possession of the property and lease it to tenant agencies. An inefficient risk assessment process for new lease projects can add costs for GSA and create problems for tenant agencies that have been planning for a move. GSA officials told us that in the future they may use this tool for other lease projects, as well as other risk assessment tools. The ability to share security-related information can unify the efforts of federal agencies. In the absence of comprehensive information-sharing plans, many aspects of homeland security information sharing can be ineffective and fragmented. It is critical that FPS and GSA reach consensus on sharing information in a timely manner to support homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts, the authors say. They recommend that FPS reach consensus with GSA on what information contained in the BSA is needed for GSA to fulfill its responsibilities. summaries across all regions. GSA wants to receive BSAs in their entirety so that it can better protect GSA buildings and the tenants who occupy them. According to GSA, building protection functions are an integral part of its property preservation, operation, and management responsibilities. In a post-September 11th era, it is crucial that federal agencies work together to share information to advance homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts. Information is a vital tool in fighting terrorism, and the timely dissemination of that information to the appropriate government agency is absolutely critical to maintaining the security of our nation. FPS is limited in its ability to assess the effectiveness of its efforts to protect GSA buildings. FPS has identified some output measures that are a part of the Office of Management and Budget’s Performance Assessment Rating Tool. But FPS has not developed outcome measures to evaluate the net effect of its attempts to protect buildings. This is important because it can provide FPS with broader information on program results, such as the extent to which its decision to move to an armed guard was a good one. create building security assessments (BSA) rather than taking a more comprehensive, strategic approach. The current approach provides less assurance that the most critical risks at federal buildings across the country are being prioritized and mitigated. GSA and tenant agencies have concerns about the quality and timeliness of FPS’s risk assessment services and are taking steps to obtain their own risk assessments. For example, GSA officials told us they have had difficulties receiving timely risk assessments from FPS for federal buildings. inspector-based workforce will enhance security at GSA facilities. FPS does not have a reliable data management system that will allow it to accurately track these measures or other important measures. Without such a system, it is difficult for FPS to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of its efforts to protect federal employees and facilities, allocate its limited resources, or make informed risk management decisions, according to the report. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office, which is part of the Department of Justice. For example, weaknesses in one of FPS’s countermeasure tracking systems make it difficult to accurately track the implementation status of recommended countermeasures such as security cameras and X- ray machines. Without this ability, FPS has difficulty determining whether it has mitigated the risk of GSA facilities to crime or a terrorist attack. FPS is taking some steps in each of the key practice areas to improve its ability to better protect GSA buildings. GAO has recommended that FPS implement specific actions to promote greater usage of key protection practices and otherwise improve security. levels are inconsistent, and overall, FPS and GSA disagree over what information should be shared. FPS is only required to meet formally with GSA property managers and tenant agencies as part of the BSA process. FPS believes that this document contains sufficient information for GSA to make decisions about purchasing and implementing FPS’s recommended countermeasures. GSA officials at all levels cite limitations with BSA executive summary saying it does not contain enough contextual information on threats and vulnerabilities to support FPS's countermeasure recommendations. FPS assesses risk and recommends countermeasures to GSA and tenant agencies. FPS’s ability to influence the allocation of resources using risk management is limited because resource allocation decisions are the responsibility of GSA. It is critical that FPS and GSA have well-established lines of communication with each other and with tenant agencies to ensure that all parties are aware of the ever- changing risks in a dynamic threat environment, the authors say. The types of information shared at the regional and building level is important, they say. tool, methodology, and process, potentially leaving GSA and tenant agencies dissatisfied. FPS will continue to rely on its disparate workforce data management systems and CERTS or localized databases that have proven to be inaccurate and unreliable. We recently recommended that FPS provide the Secretary of Homeland Security with regular updates on the status of RAMP including the implementation status of deliverables, clear timelines for completion of tasks and milestones. DHS concurred with our recommendation and stated that FPS will submit a monthly report to the Secretary. the government are facing. Our key practices provide a framework for assessing and improving protection practices. The Interagency Security Committee is using our key facility protection practices as key management practices to guide its priorities and work activities. For example, the committee established subcommittees for technology best practices and training, and working groups in the areas of performance measures and strategic human capital management. The committee also issued performance measurement guidance in 2009. Without greater attention to key protection practices, FPS will be ill equipped to efficiently and effectively fulfill its responsibilities of assessing risk, strategically managing. its workforce and contract guard program, recommending countermeasures, sharing information and coordinating with GSA and tenant agencies to secure GSA buildings. implementing our specific recommendations related to areas such as human capital and risk management will be critical steps in the right direction. Overall, following this framework would enhance FPS’s chances for future success and could position FPS to become a leader and benchmark agency for facility protection in the federal government. Mr. Chairman, this concludes the report on GSA facility protection. physical security activities, such as conducting other types of risk assessments and determining security countermeasures for new facilities. FPS continues to struggle with funding challenges that impede its ability to allocate resources to more effectively manage risk. FPS faces challenges in ensuring that its fee-based funding structure accounts for the varying levels of risk and types of security measures that are needed to protect buildings. This is an inefficient approach considering that tenant agencies are paying FPS to assess building security. It is also difficult to ensure that FPS is able to manage risk in a cost-effective way. FPS charges federal agencies the same basic security fee regardless of the perceived threat to a particular building or agency. In fiscal year 2009, FPS charged 66 cents per square foot for basic security. Although FPS categorizes buildings according to security levels based on its assessment of security levels, it does not account for the level of service provided, or the cost of providing services. of services provided at federal facilities. FPS funds its operations through security fees charged to tenant agencies. However, FPS’sbasic security fee, which funds most of its operations, does not accounts for the risk faced by specific buildings. providing a service promotes equity, especially when the cost of providing the service differs significantly among different users, as is the case with FPS. In our June 2008 report, we recommended that FPS improve its use of the fee-based system by developing a method to accurately account for the cost. We also recommended an evaluation of whether FPS’s current use of a fee- based system or an alternative funding mechanism is the most appropriate. The report was published in June 2008 and is available on the U.S. Department of Justice website. by two high-security locations that, according to FPS officials, would cost around $650,000. While members of one building security committee (BSC) told us they approved spending between $350,000 and $375,000 to fund their agencies’ share of the countermeasure, they said that the BSC of the other location would not approve funding. FPS could not upgrade the system it had recommended. In November 2008 FPS officials told us that they were moving ahead with the project by drawing on unexpended revenues from the two locations’ building-specific fees. Each building’s risk and size, this assessment does not affect the security fee FPS charges. For example, level I facilities typically face less risk because they are generally small storefront-type operations with a low level of public contact. But level IV facilities are charged the same basic security fee of 66 cents per square foot as a level IV facility that may contain high-risk law enforcement and intelligence agencies and highly sensitive government records. We also have reported that basing government fees on the cost of The National Park Service lacks clearly defined security roles and a security training curriculum. The Park Service does not manage risk servicewide or ensure the best return on security technology investments. With millions of people visiting the nation’s nearly 400 park units annually, ensuring their security and the protection of our national treasures is paramount. More emphasis on the key practices would provide greater assurance that Park Service assets are well protected and that Park service resources are being used efficiently to improve protection, the report says. We identified information sharing gaps at several level III and IV sites that we visited. In some cases these deficiencies led to decreased security awareness and increased risk. At one location, we observed during our interview with the BSC that the committee members were confused about procedures for screening visitors who are passengers in employees’ cars that enter the building via the parking garage. One of the tenants recounted an incident in which a security guard directed the visitor to walk through the garage to an appropriate screening. We found that in some cases this led to increased risk and decreased security. Lack of training may have contributed to several incidents where guards neglected their assigned responsibilities. At a level IV facility, the guards did not follow evacuation procedures and left two access points unattended, thereby leaving the facility vulnerable. FPS has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post-emergency procedures, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Security Studies at the University of Florida. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. high-security facilities where guards neglected or inadequately performed their assigned responsibilities. For example, a guard failed to recognize or did not properly X-ray a box containing handguns at the loading dock at a facility. FPS became aware of the situation because the handguns were delivered to FPS. Because guards were not properly trained and did not comply with post orders, our investigators passed undetected through access points controlled by FPS guards at 10 of 10 level IV facilities in four major cities where GAO conducted covert tests. components for this device, items used to conceal the device components, and the methods of concealment that we used during our covert testing are classified. Of the 10 level IV facilities our investigators penetrated, 8 were government owned and 2 were leased facilities. The two leased facilities did not have any guards at the access control points at the time. The facilities included district offices of a U.S. Senator and aU.S Representative as well as agencies of Homeland Security, Transportation, Health and Human Services, Justice, State, and others. safety during this testing, we took precautions so that the IED would not explode. For example, we lowered the concentration level of the material. To gain entry into each of the 10 level IV facilities, our investigators showed a photo identification (a state driver’s license) and walked through the magnetometers without incident. Our investigators also placed their briefcases with theIED material on the conveyor belt of the X-ray machine, but the guards detected nothing. We did not receive any secondary searches from the guards that might have revealed the Ied material that they brought into the facilities. At security checkpoints at 3 of the 10 facilities, our investigators noticed that the guard was not looking at the X-ray screen as some of the IED components passed through the machine. A guard questioned an item in the briefcase at one of the10 facilities but the materials were subsequently allowed through theX-ray machines. At each facility, once past the guard screening checkpoint, our Investigators proceeded to a restroom and assembled the Ied. At some of those facilities, the restrooms were locked. Our investigators gained access by asking employees to let them in. of our testing. Using publicly available information, our investigators identified a type of device that a terrorist could use to cause damage to a federal facility and threaten the safety of federal workers and the general public. The device was an IED made up of two parts—a liquid explosive and a low-yield detonator—and included a variety of materials not typically brought into aFederal facility by employees or the public. Although the detonator itself could function as a IED, investigators determined that it could also be used to set off a liquid explosive to cause significantly more damage. our testimony. For further information on this testimony, please contact Mark L. Goldstein at (202) 512-2834 or by e-mail goldsteinm@gao.gov. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tammy Conquest, John Cooney, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Brandon Haller, Denise McCabe, David Sausville, and Susan Michal-Smith. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission. from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For more information on suicide prevention in the UK, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Samaritans can also be found on the Internet. related corrective actions and FPS faces implementation challenges as well. FPS is developing the Risk Assessment and Management Program (RAMP), which could enhance its approach to assessing risk, managing human capital, and measuring performance. FPS believes RAMP will provide inspectors with the information needed to make more informed and defensible recommendations for security countermeasures. According to FPS, the agency plans to transfer data from several sources to RAMP to improve the accuracy and reliability of the information that will be entered into RAMP. It is not clear that FPS has fully addressed some implementation issues. is unclear whether FPS will meet the implementation goals established in the program’s proposed timeline. FPS began designing RAMP in early 2007 and expects to implement the program in three phases, completing its implementation by the end of fiscal year 2011. Until RAMP components are fully implemented, FPS will continue to rely on its current risk assessment. The program is expected to be fully implemented by the beginning of fiscalyear 2010, according to FPS officials. It is not clear whether FPS plans to implement a pilot version of RAMP by that time. FPS does not have a strategic human capital plan to guide its current and future workforce planning efforts. Instead, FPS has developed a short-term hiring plan that does not include key human capital principles, such as determining an agency’s optimum staffing needs. FPS has been transitioning to an inspector-based workforce, thus eliminating the police officer position and relying primarily on FPS inspectors for both law enforcement and physical security activities. In the absence of a strategichuman capital plan, it is difficult to discern how effective an inspector.-based workforce approach will be. long-term strategic human capital plan that addresses key principles for effective strategic workforce planning. DHS concurred with our recommendations. FPS did not meet its fiscal year 2008 mandated deadline of increasing its staffing level to no fewer than 1,200 full-time employees by July 31, 2008, and instead met this staffing level in April 2009. FPS’s staff has steadily declined since 2004 and critical law enforcement services have been reduced or eliminated. For example, FPS has eliminated its use of proactive patrol to prevent or detect criminal violations at many GSA buildings. because new directives appear to be based primarily on what works well from a headquarters or National Capital Region perspective. Second, FPS has not completed any workforce analysis to determine if its current staff of about 930 law enforcement security officers will be able to effectively complete the task. In addition, another regional official estimated that his region is meeting about 10 percent of the required oversight hours. Officials in another region said they are struggling to monitor the delivery of contractor-provided training in the region. The new directives are expected to be implemented by the end of the year. example, FPS officials in some of the regions we visited said they implement their own procedures for managing their workforce. Additionally, FPS does not collect data on its workforce’s knowledge, skills, and abilities. These elements are necessary for successful workforce planning activities, such as identifying and filling skill gaps and succession planning. We recently recommended that FPS improve how it collects data to help it better manage and understand current and future workforce needs; and use these data in the development and implementation of a workforce plan. magnetometer training to its 1,500 guards since 2004. X-ray training is critical because guards control access points at buildings. For example, at a level IV federal facility in a major metropolitan area, an infant in a carrier was sent through an X-rays machine due to a guard’s negligence. In that region, a woman with her infant in an infant carrier attempted to enter the building with the infant. She was stopped by a guard and the infant was sent back to the mother. that region could not tell us whether the X-ray machine’s safety features had been repaired. FPS does not have a fully reliable system for monitoring and verifying guard training and certification requirements. 62 percent of the guards had at least one expired certification, including a declaration that guards have not been convicted of domestic violence, which make them ineligible to carry firearms. Some guards were not provided building-specific training, such as what actions to take during a building evacuation or a building building fire. The guard was not paying attention and the machine's safety features had been disabled. FPS investigated the incident and dismissed the guard. The guard subsequently sued FPS for not providing the required X-ray training. FPS could not produce any documentation to show that the guard had received the training, an FPS official said. In addition, FPS officials from the facility could not be reached for comment for this article. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. of its legacy systems, including the Contract Guard Employment Requirements Tracking System (CERTS), into RAMP. FPS subsequently conducted an audit of CERTS to determine the status of its guard training and certification. The results of the audit showed that FPS was able to verify the status for about 7,600 of its 15,000 guards. FPS was not able to explain why it wasn't able to check on the remaining 5,900 guards. In 2008, we recommended that FPS develop and implement specific guidelines and standards for measuring its performance. months. FPS does not fully ensure that its contract security guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a GSA building. FPS requires that all prospective guards complete about 128 hours of training including 8 hours of X-ray and magnetometer training. However, in one region, FPS has not provided the X-rays or magnetometers needed for this training. We have noted that the effectiveness of a risk management approach depends on the involvement of experienced and professional security personnel. Further, that the chances of omitting major steps in the risk management process increase if personnel are not well trained in applying risk management. FPS does not have specific national guidance on when and how guard inspections should be performed. Inspections of guard posts at GSA buildings are inconsistent and the quality varied in the six regions we examined. Guard inspections are typically completed by FPS during regular business hours and in locations where FPS has a field office, and seldom on nights or weekends. However, on an occasion when FPS officials conducted a post inspection at night, they found a guard asleep at his post after taking a pain-killer prescription drug. visited, not providing proactive patrol has limited its law enforcement personnel to a reactive force. FPS officials stated that in the past, proactive patrol permitted its police officers and inspectors to identify and apprehend individuals that were surveilling GSA buildings. In contrast, when FPS is not able to patrol federal buildings, there is increased potential for illegal entry and other criminal activity. In one city we visited, a deceased individual had been found in a vacant GSA facility that was not regularly patrolled by FPS. FPS's BSA includes cost estimates but no analysis of alternatives. GSA and tenant agencies have limited assurance that investments in technologies are cost-effective. For example, at one location, an explosives detection dog was used to screen mail that is distributed elsewhere. In 2006, FPS conducted a BSA of the site in 2008 and determined that using an enhanced X-ray machine and an explosives Detection Dog would bring the projected threat rating down from moderate to low. It did not include the estimated cost and risk of the following mail screening options: usage of the dog and the additional countermeasure. recommended, based on the results of its risk analysis, the use of this dog and an X-ray machine. The dog and handler work 12-hour shifts Monday through Friday when most mail is delivered and shipped. The GSA regional security officials we spoke with questioned whether this approach was more effective and efficient than using an on-site enhanced X-rays machine that could detect biological and chemical agents as well as explosives and could be used anytime. In accordance with the GSA's recommendation, the dog was being used at the time of our visit. in a briefcase, our investigators walked freely around several floors of the facilities and into various executive and legislative branch offices. Leveraging technology is a key practice over which FPS has somewhat more control. FPS does not have a comprehensive approach for identifying, acquiring, and assessing the cost-effectiveness of the security equipment that its inspectors recommend. Individual FPS inspectors have considerable latitude in determining which technologies and other countermeasures to recommend. But the inspectors receive little training and guidance in how to assess the relative cost- effectiveness of these technologies. the cost- effectiveness of alternative technologies into FPS’s planned improvements in the security acquisition area would represent an enhanced application of this key practice. We recently recommended that FPS develop a methodology and guidance for assessing and comparing the cost-effectiveness of technology alternatives, and DHS concurred with our recommendation. Another concern is that FPS had planned to implement the program throughout fiscal year 2009, but extended implementation into fiscal year 2010. Until the National Countermeasures Program is fully implemented, FPS will continue. National Countermeasures Program should provide the agency with a framework to better manage its security equipment inventory. FPS officials told us they believe this program will result in increased efficiencies. Inspectors will not have to spend their time facilitating the establishment of contracts for security equipment because these contracts will be standardized nationwide. Although the National Counter Measures Program includes improvements that may enhance FPS’s ability to leverage technology, it does not enhance the agency's ability to Leverage Technology, the agency says in a statement. Security professionals are faced with a multitude of technology options offered by private vendors. Having tools and guidance to determine which technologies most cost-effectively address identified vulnerabilities is a central component of the leveraging technology key practice. FPS officials told us that the National Countermeasures Program will enable inspectors to develop countermeasure cost estimates that can be shared with GSA and tenant agencies. However, incorporating a tool for evaluating the cost- effectiveness of competing technologies and countermeasures has been delayed, FPS officials said. officials, in May 2009, told us that all cameras had been repaired and all monitoring and recording devices had been replaced. As we reported in June 2008, we have found other instances in which recommended security countermeasures were not implemented at some of the buildings we visited. Compounding this situation, FPS takes a building-by-building approach to risk management, using an outdated risk assessment tool to do so. The two BSCs had approved additional upgrades and that FPS was implementing them. FPS officials said they established an X-ray machine contract and that future program contracts will also explore the use of the schedule as a source for national purchase and service contracts. According to FPS, the program will also include life-cycle management plans for countermeasures. The program will include X-rays, magnetometers, surveillance systems, and intrusion detection systems. It will also look at how the program can be used to improve the quality of the nation's military equipment and services. It is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. FPS had anticipated that X-ray machine and magnetometer contracts would be awarded by December 2008. In May 2009, FPS officials told us that the X-rays machine contract was awarded on April 30, 2009. They anticipated awarding the magnetometer contract in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009 and an electronic security services contract for surveillance and intrusion detection systems during the second quarter of 2010. We recently recommended that FPS not rely on individual inspectors to make technology decisions. We recommend that FPS stop relying on individual Inspectors to make tech decisions. immediate actions with respect to contract guard management in response to our covert testing. For example, in July 2009, the Director of FPS instructed Regional Directors to accelerate the implementation of FPS’s requirement that two guard posts at Level IV facilities be inspected weekly. FPS is also taking steps to implement a more systematic approach to technology acquisition by developing a National Countermeasures Program, which could help FPS leverage technology more cost-effectively. According to FPS, the program will establish standards and national procurement contracts for security equipment. FPS inspectors receive some training in identifying and recommending security technologies as part of their initial FPS physical security training. Since FPS was transferred to DHS in 2003, its refresher training program for inspectors has primarily focused on law enforcement. Consequently, inspectors lack recurring technology training. FPS does not provide inspectors with specialized guidance and standards for cost-effectively selecting technology. In the absence of specific guidance, inspectors follow the Department of Justice minimum countermeasure standards. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. 15-minute training video designed to provide information on bomb component detection. According to FPS, each guard was required to read the information bulletin and watch the video within 30 days. Despite the steps FPS has taken, there are a number of factors that will make implementing and sustaining these actions difficult. First, FPS does not have adequate controls to monitor and track whether its 11 regions are completing these new requirements. Thus, FPS cannot say with certainty that it is being done. The FPS regional official says implementing the new requirements may present a number Of challenges, in part, because of the lack of controls.