The Coast Guard did not conduct MSRAM assessments for all 50 of the OCS facilities that are subject to federal security requirements in 2011. Coast Guard officials added that they are working with DHS’s Office of Risk Management and Analysis in studying ways to improve how it assesses secondary economic impacts. We recommend that the Commandant of the Coast Guard revise policies and procedures to ensure that MSRAM analysts receive the annual updated list of security- regulated O CS facilities. We provided a draft of this testimony to DHS and DOJ for comment. The Coast Guard has taken steps to implement prior GAO recommendations to enhance energy tanker security. Improvements in security could help to prevent a terrorist attack against this infrastructure, which could have significant consequences, such as those resulting from the Deepwater Horizon incident. The Coast Guard does not consider OCS facilities that it has assessed in MSRAM to be high risk. However, it is important to assess all OCS Facilities as required by Coast Guard guidance. Our evaluation will focus on Coast Guard security inspections and other measures to better secure O CS facilities and deepwater. Coast Guard has coordinated efforts with the intelligence community and key stakeholders. OCS facilities are not considered to be high-risk targets. Based on the assessments of threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences, MSRAM produces a relative risk ranking for the OCS. The Coast Guard’s Intelligence Coordination Center inputs threat assessment data into MSRAM. Coast Guard analysts also use information from other stakeholders, such as reports produced by the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement. The Coast Guard does not have data on the ability of an OCS facility to withstand an attack. The Coast Guard recognizes that target hardness is an important consideration in assessing the vulnerability of OCS facilities. MSRAM analysts described challenges in assessing target hardness because empirical data are not available or research has not been done. The challenges are not unique to the Coast Guard’s risk assessment model and that these challenges are faced by others in the homeland security community involved in conducting risk assessments, the report says. Coast Guard expects to issue its report in the fall of 2011. The input for secondary economic impacts can have a substantial effect on how MSRAM’s output ranks a facility relative to other potential targets. However, the Coast Guard has limited data for assessingsecondary economic impacts from an attack on OCS facilities or deepwater ports. Undervaluing secondary economic impact could result in a lower relative risk ranking that underestimates the security risk to a facility, or inversely, overvaluingsecondary economic impact may result in overestimating security risk. Coast Guard analysts use MSRAM to assess security risks against energy infrastructure. MSRAM assesses three main factors—threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences. Research on whether a hijacked boat or an underwater attack could sink an offshore oil or natural gas platform would give the Coast Guard a clearer sense of whether this attack scenario could result in major consequences. The Coast Guard may recommend conducting more research on the vulnerability to and consequences of attack scenarios as a result of a study it is conducting on OCS facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. Coast Guard units throughout the country use this tool to assess security risks to about 28,000 key infrastructure in and around the nation’s ports and waterways. DHS issued an updated version of the 2006 National Infrastructure Protection Plan in 2009. The plan placed an increased emphasis on risk management and it centered attention on going beyond assessments of individual assets by extending the scope of risk assessments to systems or networks. The Coast Guard has also taken actions to supplement MSRAM by, among other things, including new data fields on the frequency with which tankers visit a port. associated with MODUs, such as the Deepwater Horizon, could improve the quality of program decisions. MSRAM does not assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, these types of assessments are beyond the intended use. The study involves examining whether analysts should use MSRAM to assess MODUs in the future. The Coast Guard is studying the “lessons learned” from the Deepwaters Horizon incident and part of the study involves examine whether MSRAM should be used. face risks from various types of attack. Suicide attacks, armed assaults by terrorists or armed bands, and launching a “standoff” missile attack using a rocket or some other weapon fired from a distance. Terrorists have attempted, and in some cases carried out, attacks on energy tankers since September 11, 2001. To date, these attacks have included attempts to damage tankers or to kill crew members or crew members on board the tankers. In recent years, we have issued reports that discussed risks energy tanker face from terrorist attacks and attacks from other criminals, including pirates. 30 percent (490 of 1,650) of vessels reporting pirate attacks worldwide from 2006 through 2010 were identified as tankers. pirate attacks against tankers have tripled in the last 5 years. From January through June 2011, 100 tankers were attacked, an increase of 37 percent compared to tankers attacked from January to June 2010.available for patrolling them, make protecting energy tankers difficult. See table 1 for a summary of tanker attacked by pirates during 2006 to 2010. For more information, visit the International Maritime Bureau's website. in their levels of security, and the Coast Guard is limited in the degree to which it can bring about improvements abroad when security is substandard. In addition, while tankers are in transit, they face risks because they travel on direct routes that are known in advance and, for part of their journey, they may have to travel through waters that do not allow them to maneuver away from possible attacks. According to the Energy Information Administration, chokepoints along a route make tankers susceptible to attacks. tankers remain at risk upon arrival in the United States because of the inherent risks to port facilities. Beyond the relatively rare threat of terrorist attacks against tankers, the threat of piracy has become relatively common. In particular, piracy threatens tankers transiting one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes near key energy corridors and the route through the Suez Canal. The vast areas at risk for piracy off the Horn of Africa, combined with the small number of military ships, is a major concern. In 2002, terrorists conducted a suicide boat attack against the French supertanker Limburg off the coast of Yemen. In 2010, an incident involving another super tanker, the M/V M. Star, in the Strait of Hormuz is suspected to have been a terrorist attack. Our work on energy tankers identified three main places in which tankers may be at risk of an attack: (1) at foreign ports; (2) in transit, especially at narrow channels, or chokepoints; and (3) at U.S. ports. Media reports indicate a steady increase in ransoms for tankers. The U.S. Maritime Administration and the Coast Guard have issued guidance for commercial vessels to stay 200 miles away from the Somali coast. However, pirates have adapted and increased their capability to attack and steal cargo from ships and cargo ships.shows one of the recent suspected pirate attacks. In addition, tankers are fetching increasing ransom demands from Somali pirates. In June 2011 for the Kuwaiti tanker MV Zirku, the ransom was $12 million. There are two main types of offshore energy infrastructure that the Coast Guard oversees for security. The first type are facilities that operate on the OCS. The second type are deepwater ports, which are fixed or floating manmade structures used or intended for use as a port or terminal for the transportation, storage, or handling of oil or natural gas to any state. There are currently four licensed deep water ports in the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean. The U.S. Coast Guard regulates 50 facilities that, in 2011, are regulated for security because they meet or exceed the threshold criteria. The Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) contains an estimated 85 million barrels of oil. The Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP) is responsible for transporting about 10 percent of imported oil. As the lead federal agency for maritime security, the Coast Guard seeks to mitigate many kinds of security challenges in the maritime environment. Doing so is a key part of its overall security mission and a starting point for identifying security gaps and taking steps to close them, the agency says. The U.S. Coast Guard is based in New Orleans, Louisiana. About 49 percent of the nation’s crude oil supply was transported by tanker into the United States in 2009. The remaining oil and natural gas used in the U.S. comes from Canada by pipeline or is produced from domestic sources in areas such as offshore facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The United States’ economy and security are heavily dependent on oil, natural gas, and other energy commodities, the authors say. The authors say the government needs to do more to ensure the safety and security of the country. officials acknowledged that their policies and procedures did not include this requirement. The number of OCS facilities could change each year. For example, some facilities may drop below the production or personnel thresholds described earlier in this statement, thereby falling outside the scope of 33 C.F.R. part 106, or other facilities could meet or exceed such thresholds, thereby rendering them subject to part 106. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government state that policies and. procedures enforce management directives and help ensure that actions are taken. Mobile offshore drilling units (MODUs) do not generally pose a risk of a terrorist attack. There is a brief period of time when a drilling unit strikes a well, but the well has yet to be sealed. The Deepwater Horizon was in this stage when it resulted in such a large oil spill. MODUs could be at risk of an attack that could have significant consequences despite a facility not meeting production or personnel thresholds. For example, such risks could involve the reliability of blowout preventer valves. in an oil-distribution network offers opportunities for improving the resiliency of the network within a given budget. How the Coast Guard assesses offshore infrastructure within the broader set of networks is important. The findings of the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill incident illustrate how examining networks or systems from a safety or engineering perspective can bring greater knowledge of how single facilities intersect with broader systems. The report noted that “complex systems almost always fail in complex ways” and cautioned that attempting to identify a single cause for the Deepwater Gulf incident would provide a dangerously incomplete picture. incomplete picture of what happened. As a result, the report examined the Deepwater Horizon incident with an expansive view toward the role that industry and government sectors played in assessing vulnerabilities and the impact the incident had on economic, social, and environmental systems. Enhancing knowledge about the vulnerabilities of networks or systems with which OCS facilities and deepwater ports intersect could improve the quality of information that informs program and budget decisions on how to best ensure security and use scarce resources in a constrained fiscal environment. The 2009 National Infrastructure Protection Plan, 2010 DHS Quadrennial Review, and a National Research Council evaluation of DHS risk assessment efforts have determined that gaining a better understanding of network risks would help to understand multiplying consequences of a terrorist attack. Examining how such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with malevolent intent is central to this understanding. For example, knowing what damage a malicious adversary could achieve by exploiting weaknesses is key to understanding how a network is vulnerable to a diverse range of threats. Potential attack methods against offshore energy infrastructure identified by the Coast Guard or owners and operators include crashing an aircraft into it. Offshore energy infrastructure may face security risks because this infrastructure is located in open waters and generally many miles away from Coast Guard assets and personnel. In addition to our work on energy tankers, we have recently completed work involving Coast Guard efforts to assess security risks and ensure the security of offshore energy Infrastructure. Specifically, we've been working with the National Security Agency to ensure the safety of the nation's energy infrastructure. guidance and would provide information to decision makers that could minimize the likelihood of being unprepared for a potential attack. Coast Guard officials agreed that assessing “network effects” is a challenge and they are examining ways to meet this challenge. The threat of terrorism against energy tankers and offshore energy infrastructure highlights the importance of the Coast Guard having policies and procedures in place to better ensure the security of the energy infrastructure, officials said. The Coast Guard’s work is this area is in its infancy and there is uncertainty regarding the way in which the Coast Coast Guard will move forward in measuring ‘network effects' Energy tankers often depart from foreign ports and are registered in countries other than the U.S. Offshore energy infrastructure presents its own set of security challenges. FBI shares responsibility with the Coast Guard for preventing and responding to terrorist incidents. We found that actions were being taken, internationally and domestically, to protect tankers and port facilities at which tankers would be present in U.N. meetings in 2007. The Coast Guard visits foreign exporting ports to assess the effectiveness of the anti-terrorism measures in place. hijack vessels to more than 1,000 miles from Somalia using mother ships, from which they launch smaller boats to conduct the attacks. Offshore energy infrastructure also faces risks from various types of attacks. For example, in 2004, a terrorist attacked an offshore oil terminal in Iraq using speedboats packed with explosives, killing two U.S. Navy sailors and a Coast Guardsman. This directive provides vessel owners and operators with direction for responding to emerging security risks. The Coast Guard has issued a directive with guidelines for U.s. vessels operating in high- risk waters. has begun to revise its grant programs, but it is too early in that process to determine whether and how performance measures will be incorporated into those revisions. Performance measures would allow DHS to set priorities for funding on the basis of reducing overall risk, thereby helping ports obtain resources necessary to respond. In accordance with federal statutes and presidential directives, the Coast Guard assesses security risks as part of its responsibilities for ensuring the security of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. We continue to believe that the recommendations not yet addressed have merit and should be fully implemented. The Coast Guard faces complex and technical challenges in assessing security risks. The Coast Guard recognizes these challenges and generally has actions underway to study or address them. Coast Guard officials noted that some of these challenges are more complex than others. The U.S. Navy is considering a deepwater port in the Massachusetts Bay. The port is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, the Coast Guard says. It would be the first of several deepwater ports in the United States. Port stakeholders in the United States have taken steps to address vulnerabilities at domestic ports. The Houston Ship Channel Security District is a public-private partnership that was established to increase preparedness and response capabilities. The security district has installed technology, such as night vision and motion-activated detection equipment, and conducts patrols on land and in the water. However, we also reported on challenges that remained in (1) making federal agencies’ protective actions more effective and (2) implementing plans.place. We will continue to work with the Coast Guard to develop solutions to ensure that inspections of OCS facilities are completed as required. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. We are committed to working with the U.S. Coast Guard on all matters relating to maritime security and safety. We welcome your comments and suggestions on how to improve OCS operations. We look forward to hearing from you in the coming days and weeks. We hope to hear from you as soon as possible. the Horn of Africa. GAO-11-449T. Quadrennial Homeland Security Review: 2010 Reports Addressed Many Required Elements, but Budget Planning Not Yet Completed.GAO-10-940T. Maritime Security: Actions Needed to Assess and Update Plan And Enhance Collaboration among Partners Involved in Countering Piracy off the Horn of African. GAE-10/10/856. Critical Infrastructure Protection: Update to National Infrastructure Protection Plan Includes Increased Emphasis on Risk Management and Resilience. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the GAO is required for the use of the material. For more information, visit GAO's Maritime Security Program at: http://www.gao.gov/maritime-security-program. for a response to an attack, if a terrorist attack were to succeed despite the protective measures in place. We made five recommendations in our 2007 report, three of which were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security. The Coast Guard and the FBI have made progress in implementing these recommendations. Two have been implemented, and the Coast Guard is in the process of implementing a third. But actions have not yet been taken, according to the report, which was compiled by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. DHS is in the process of revising this document and did not have further information regarding whether or how the spill and terrorism response annexes may be revised. Further, the FBI has not taken independent action to implement this recommendation. See table 2 for a summary of our findings, recommendations, and the current status of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. to address the remaining two recommendations. To address our recommendation that the Coast Guard and the FBI coordinate to help ensure that a detailed operational plan be developed, see table 2. recommendation, in part because it did not concur with the need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a successful attack on an energy tanker, ports would need to provide an effective, integrated response to protect public safety and the environment. Clearly defined and understood roles and responsibilities for all essential stakeholders are needed to ensure an effective response, and operational plans for the response should be explicitly linked, the report says. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security recommends that DHS develop performance measures for emergency response capabilities. gathering these data is a challenge because there are few models or guidance available for doing so. During the course of our review, the Coast Guard started using a tool, called ‘IMPLAN,’ that helps inform judgments of secondary economic impacts by showing what the impact could be for different terrorist scenarios. The tool, however, has limits in that it should not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are mainly interruption to land or water transportation. Enhancing DHS’s and the Coast Guards’ ability to assesssecondary economic impacts could improve a MSRAM analyst’’ accuracy in assessing the relative impact of a terror attack. copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the UK, call the national suicide prevention line on 0800 273-TALK (8255). In the Middle East, contact the Syriac Orthodox Church on 020 709090. For more information on the Syriacs, visit www.sriac.org.