pipelines and other infrastructure used to transport crude oil and refined products; (3) the downstream segment, which consists of the refining and marketing of petroleum products such as gasoline and heating oil. (4) the renewable fuels segment, where biorefineries produce renewable fuels that are blended with petroleum products at wholesale terminals before being distributed to consumers. Crude oil, petroleum products, and renewable fuels are transported between market participants through an extensive supply infrastructure including pipelines, tanker vessels, rail, trucks, wholesale terminals, and retail outlets. diesel, increasing a refinery’s ability to process heavier crude oils. U.S. refineries primarily produce gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel that are used in the transportation sector, along with heating oil and liquefied petroleum gases such as propane used in home heating. The industry consists of firms of varying sizes that, in addition to operating refineries, may also have operations in other related industry segments. The upstream segment consists of the exploration for and production of crude oil; the midstream segment, which consists of. different fractions based on their boiling points, which can then be further processed into final products. One barrel of crude oil can be processed into varying amounts of gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and other petroleum products. Through the addition of specialized equipment, refineries can be optimized—or “upgraded” to produce greater proportions of specific types of products. For example, a coker unit upgrades the low-value residual oil from the distillation process into higher value products such as jet fuel.  monthly domestic crude oil production has increased by over 55 percent through September 2013 compared with average production in 2008. According to EIA, increases in production in 2012 and 2013 were the largest annual increases since the beginning of U.S. commercial crudeOil production in 1859. Much of the increase in crude oilProduction has been from shale and other formations, such as the Bakken in North Dakota and the Eagle Ford in Texas. Similarly, crude oil Production in Canada— the largest foreign supplier of crude oil to the United States has also increased significantly in recent years. The rapid growth in U.S. and Canadian crude oil production has lowered the cost of crude oil for some domestic refiners that have the access and ability to process these crude oils. For example, West Texas Intermediate crude oil was $17.60 per barrel less expensive in 2012 than Brent, an international benchmark crude oil from the European North. From 2005 through 2012, total Canadian crudeOil production increased by 32 percent and U.s. imports from Canada increased almost 50 percent. The domestic petroleum refining industry has been and is expected to continue to be affected by several profound changes. Some of these changes, such as the growth in crude oil production in the United States and Canada, are reshaping the industry and creating new business opportunities. To take advantage of some of these opportunities, refiners and other market participants will need to invest—to upgrade refineries to be able to process different crude oils or to build pipelines or rail connections to move more crude oil from production to refining. Constraints have contributed to discounted prices for some domestic crude oils. Increasingly, the crude oil being produced in the U.S. and Canada has different characteristics from the crude oils that some domestic refineries are configured to use. Production of new domestic crude oil has tended to be light and sweet, whereas a portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour crude oils, EIA says. Some refineries can use these crude oils to a certain extent, but some have invested in new equipment in order to do so. that it has been inadequate. Some refineries may not have been able to take full advantage of crude oil production increases or had to rely on other more expensive crude oil transportation options such as truck, rail, or barge. Two of the refineries we visited recently installed facilities to enable them to receive crude oil from North Dakota or Canada by rail. According to EIA data, while refinery receipts of crudeOil by these methods of transportation is a small percentage of total receipts, they have increased 57 percent from 2011 to 2012. assumes more domestic crude oil and natural gas resources projects higher export levels. Several stakeholders told us that various issues could mitigate U.S. refiners’ ability to take advantage of growing crude oil supplies. It is unclear whether planned expansions in pipelines and rail transportation will keep pace with growing production, and these infrastructure expansions could be affected by regulatory actions to address pipeline and rail safety. Potential future increases in crude oil exports, which are currently minimal, could put pressure on refiners, stakeholders said. of the system of crude oil pipelines in the United States was constructed in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. The infrastructure was designed primarily to move crude oil from the South to the North. But emerging crude oil production centers in Western Canada, Texas, and North Dakota have strained the existing pipeline infrastructure. Though pipeline capacity has increased, investment increased pipeline capacity to deliver crude oil to a key Cushing, Oklahoma hub by about 815,000 barrels per day from 2010 through 2013. Recent improvements in technologies have allowed companies to extract oil from shale formations that were previously considered inaccessible. In particular, the application of horizontal drilling techniques and hydraulic fracturing have increased U.S. oil production. The process injects a combination of water, sand, and chemical additives under high pressure to create and maintain fractures in underground rock formations that allow oil and natural gas to flow. The United States increasingly relied on imported crude oil to meet growing domestic energy needs during the 1990s and early 2000s. September 5, 2012. Biofuels: Challenges to the Transportation, Sale, and Use of Intermediate Ethanol Blends. Washington, D.C.: June 3, 2011. Vehicle Fuel Economy: NHTSA and EPA’s Partnership for Setting Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards Improved Analysis and Should Be Maintained. GAO-10-336. Energy-Water Nexus: Many Uncertainties Remain about National and Regional Effects of Increased Biofuel Production on Water Resources. Increases in Production and Use. Federal Rulemaking: Improvements Needed to Monitoring and Evaluation of Rules Development as well as to the Transparency of OMB Regulatory Reviews. Energy Markets: Refinery Outages Can Impact Petroleum Product Prices, but No Federal Requirements to Report Outages Exist. Vehicle Fuel Economy: Reforming Fuel Economy. Energy markets: Increasing Globalization of Petroleum Products Markets, Tightening Refining Demand and Supply Balance, and Other Trends Have Implications for U.S. Energy Supply, Prices, and Price Volatility. Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light Trucks, and Other Options Could Complement These Standards. GAO-07-921. Washington, D.C.: August 2, 2007. Motor Fuels: Understanding the Factors That Influence the Retail Price of Gasoline. GAE-05-525SP. Washington,. D.c.: May 2, 2005. MotorFuels: understanding the factors that influence the retail price of Gas gasoline. GAo-05/525SP: Understanding The Factors That influence the Retail price of gas. GAO will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and to the Secretaries of Energy and Transportation and the Administrator of the EPA. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao,gov. See appendix IV for EPA’s letter to theGAO. regulations, (2) the Department of Transportation’s Corporate Average Fuel Economy and EPA's greenhouse gas vehicle emission standards. We reviewed agency regulatory impact assessments and industry and other studies on the effect of these regulations on industry. We also summarized the results of semistructured interviews with a nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. (See app. II for a list of these stakeholders.) Stakeholders included representatives from refining companies, oil refineries, and other industry groups. environmental organizations, consultants, and officials from federal and state agencies. We also visited several refineries of selected refining companies. We selected these stakeholders to represent broad and differing perspectives on these issues. For example, to select refiners, we considered, among other factors, the size and location of their refineries, and whether they were vertically integrated or merchant refiners. When possible, we used a standard set of questions in interviewing stakeholders, including questions about the effect of the key regulations we reviewed. on additional questions tailored to these stakeholders’ expertise and sought opinions from stakeholders on key issues. Because we used a nonprobability sample, the views of these stakeholders are not generalizable to all potential stakeholders. Similarly, the conditions at the refineries we visited are notgeneralized to all refineries. The stakeholder views we summarize were not necessarily supported by all types of stakeholders, though we identify differing views where appropriate. Stakeholders and information we reviewed identified a number of issues that need to be addressed. This report provides information on the domestic petroleum refining industry and its market and regulatory environment. It addresses what is known about (1) major changes and (2) major factors that may affect the future of the industry. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V.our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. We identified five key regulations that were recently strengthened or proposed: the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard. changes that have affected the industry and a number of factors that may affect its future. To illustrate major changes over time and to describe the domestic petroleum refining industry, we summarized historical data from the Energy Information Administration. To assess the reliability of EIA data, we took several steps including reviewing documentation, interviewing EIA staff, and consulting with stakeholders. We determined the EIAData to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. The U.S. refining industry is one of the largest in the world. has fallen since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic market for refiners. U.S. and Canadian crude oil production has increased in recent years, leading to lower crude oil costs for some refiners, according to several stakeholders we contacted. According to EIA data, U.s. production of crude oil reached its highest level in 1970 and generally declined through 2008, reaching a level of almost one-half of its previous peak in 2008. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards and the RFS have likely recently contributed to declining consumption. The U.S. market is important for domestic refineries because they have historically sold their products domestically. On average, the United States exported almost 1 million barrels per day of domestic petroleum products from 2000 through 2005. According to stakeholders and the information we reviewed, two recently strengthened key environmental regulations—the coordinated CAFE and GHG—could have a significant impact on the refining industry. The refining industry has shifted sales to export markets amid a declining domestic market. As discussed below, the industry could see a decline in sales to the domestic market as a result. According to EIA data, increases in crude oil costs have been the largest component of the recent increases in gasoline prices. The refining component of prices has fluctuated over time but has not increased in a significant way since 2000. The five key environmental regulations affecting the domestic refining industry that we reviewed are concerned with various health, environmental, and other issues. Under the RFS, since 2000, since U.S. refineries have been required to comply with the EPA’s RFS. Retail prices for regular gasoline averaged $3.63 per gallon in 2012, the highest annual average price when adjusted for inflation since 1976. Retail prices have declined in 2013, but are still near historic highs. Market dynamics anywhere along the supply chain can influence consumer prices, beginning with upstream crude oil production, the production of renewable fuels, and the refining of crude oil and gasoline. The refining industry was a low-return industry for much of the prior two decades, according to industry officials and experts. 2013 compared with the first 11 months of 2012. The recession of 2007 to 2009 reduced economic activity and demand for gasoline. Historically high gasoline prices have discouraged the use of gasoline. More stringent fuel economy standards and the RFS are discussed in the next section. The RFS was established in light of concerns about the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil, and decreased consumption of petroleum products may further some of the objectives of the R FS, the authors say. It has contributed to investment in the U.S. Domestic consumption of petroleum products peaked in 2005 at 20.8 million barrels per day. Consumption of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel peaked in 2007 and declined by over 8 percent through 2012. EIA estimated that petroleum product consumption increased in the first 11 months of international markets. Most of the scenarios in forecasts we reviewed from IHS and EIA project total consumption to increase slightly by 2020, with projections ranging from a decline of 2 percent to an increase of 7 percent compared with 2012 consumption.  consumption has declined since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic market for refiners. In 2007, EIA projected that U.S. consumption would increase by nearly 30 percent between 2005 and 2030. EIA projects that inputs to refineries in 2020 would be about 1 million barrels per day higher in scenarios with higher domestic consumption—a difference of about 7 percent of 2012 inputs. This difference is equivalent to about eight average-size U.N. refineries, according to several stakeholders we contacted. Faster economic growth tends to increase consumption of petroleum products. Higher prices for crude oil and petroleum products tend to decrease consumption. Changes in consumer behavior, such as reduced driving, along with demographic trends such as an aging population, can also affect consumption. The scenario that assumes high future oil prices projects lower domestic consumption of Petroleum products, the EIA says. The EIA’s forecast scenario with higher economic growth assumptions projects greater future consumption ofroleum products than a scenario with low economic growth. There were 143 petroleum refineries in the United States as of January 2013, with a capacity to process 17.8 million barrels of crude oil per day. Most refining capacity (almost 90 percent) is located in the Gulf Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. These refineries employed over 70,000 people in 2013. Refineries process crude oil into products primarily through a distillation process that separates crudeOil into products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry is one of the largest industries in the world. IEA: Global consumption of petroleum products was about 78.9 million barrels per day in 2012. Growth concentrated in Asia and the Middle East and consumption declining in Europe. IEA projects refining capacity may grow even faster, resulting in excess capacity (refining capacity beyond that needed to meet consumption) of nearly 15.5 million barrels a day by 2020, in contrast to an estimated 4.8 million barrels by 2012. The U.S. refining capacity is estimated to be about 4.7 million barrels. All of the forecast scenarios we reviewed from EIA, IEA, and IHS anticipate increases in U.S. crude oil production, but the projections are uncertain and vary widely. The extent of the increase in future crude oilProduction can have implications for future petroleum product exports. The reference scenario in EIA’s most recent forecast projects domestic crudeOil production to approach a historical high of 9.6 million barrels per day in 2020, higher than the reference scenario from the prior year. We reviewed forecasts from EIA, the International Energy Agency (IEA), and IHS. We selected these forecasts because they made projections through 2020. While forecasts are subject to inherent uncertainties, we found these forecasts to be reasonable for describing a range of views about potential conditions of the domestic refining industry. We identified some differences in the metrics reported in the four forecasts and did not make direct comparisons in these instances. We conducted this review and compiled data from relevant scenarios and compared them where appropriate. Since 1949, the United States had been a net importer of petroleum products. In 2011, the U.S. became a net exporter of total petroleum products, EIA says. Exports of petroleum product represented 7 percent of refinery production in 2007. Forecasts generally project that exports will remain strong until 2015, the EIA writes. the extent of the increase in exports is unclear, it says. As a result, exports are expected to increase until 2015 but not as much as previously forecast. EIA scenarios project export levels from 2.6 to 3.4 million barrels per day by 2020. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product exports in 2020 is above 2010 levels. The extent to which domestic refiners are able to export their products will depend on the competitiveness of domestic refiner compared with foreign refiners. The challenges that may inhibit competitiveness and opportunities that may increase it in the future are discussed in the next section of this report. The full report is available at: http://www.eia.org/news/energy/energy-policy. Stakeholders and information we reviewed suggest that various factors may affect the U.S. refining industry’s future competitiveness. Balance between global refining capacity and global demand for petroleum products, costs associated with environmental regulations, exports to nations with stringent fuel standards, and increasing domestic and Canadian crude oil production. IEA data indicate that competition from foreign refiners may increase. New Middle Eastern refineries are intended to be export facilities and may present increased competition to U.s. refiners. per day of excess capacity in 2012. A large share of the new capacity is expected in China, India, and the Middle East. Two refiners indicated concern that capacity additions in some of those regions may present competition for U.S. refiners. Several other stakeholders were optimistic about domestic refiners’ ability to compete in the future. According to IEA,capacity additions in China and India are intended to keep pace with growing consumption in those regions, but not to meet demand. annual RFS standards, and several factors contribute to the delays. RFS Has Had Three Main Effects Stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed identified three main ways the RFS has affected U.S. petroleum refiners. compliance has recently increased costs for some refiners, (2) required blending of renewable fuels has contributed to declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels, and (3) EPA’s delays in issuing annual RFS Standards may have contributed to investment uncertainty. EPA officials told us that there is no indication that delays have caused significant problems for refiners. EPA delays in issuing RFS standards are important because delays do not change refiners’ compliance periods accordingly. Uncertainty among refiners, renewable fuel producers, and other market participants about how EPA will address the blend wall can affect the RFS. The extent to which RFS increases costs in the future could also be affected by the outcome of any relevant litigation and of to monitor and evaluate progress in developing regulations. The RFS compliance period is set by statute to be a full calendar year, and delays do not change this compliance period. When the RFS standards are issued late, the industry has less time to plan and budget effectively. Several representatives of refiners told us that delays in issuing annual RFS Standards increase uncertainty for refiners renewable fuels is a large component that could contribute to economic hardship from compliance. EPA stated that it adjusted the 2013 deadline to provide additional time to demonstrate compliance. We acknowledge that EPA can extend the compliance deadline. EPA has not issued annual RFS standards on time since 2009. Most recently, EPA issued 2013 standards in August 2013. Uncertainty can affect the market climate within which these investment decisions will be made. EPA may waive the statutory volumes in whole or in part according to statutory criteria, which EPA has identified as potentially factoring in the blend wall, market developments, and other issues. However, EPA has missed the annual deadline for issuing annual standards under the RFS in most years. EPA proposed the 2014 standards on November refining centers. to the length of the regulatory development process, which includes interagency and public reviews. The interagency review process is to ensure that regulations are consistent with the President’s priorities. Under the public review process, EPA must publish a proposed standard in the Federal Register. According to EPA officials, the RFS standards involve complex and controversial issues and balance competing agricultural, energy, and environmental policy interests. In 2009, we recommended that EPA and other agencies track their performance for developing significant regulations against targeted milestones to identify opportunities for improvement. EPA tracks 14 milestones as it develops proposed rules and additional milestones in developing final regulations. For example, EPA tracks when its senior management approves of a document describing the scope of the regulation and the analytical work necessary to develop it. In comments to our 2009 report, EPA said monitoring actual versus estimated performance could help agency managers identify steps in the process that account for substantial time and provide information necessary to evaluate whether time was well spent. In this regard, EPA says it uses an agency-wide Action Development Process. to our 2009 report, EPA stated that it used an internal tracking system along with additional information to develop regulatory management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA officials told us that they develop RFS regulations using the same procedures used for developing all EPA regulations. However, even with these systems, EPA has not met its statutory deadlines under the RFS in the five annual standards since 2009. EPA has also not conducted a systematic review of RFS rules to ensure that they are being implemented on time. 2013, EPA proposed the Tier 3 standards, and on March 3, 2014, EPA announced the final Tier 3 Standards. The standards establish more stringent vehicle emission standards and reduce the sulfur content of gasoline. additional time for obligated parties to purchase credits, and its inability to adjust the compliance period. EPA stated that the finalTier 3 program is very similar to what it proposed, though EPA made some changes based on public input. EPA provided technical comments to incorporate information from the final rule which we incorporated into the report, as appropriate. review of its experience issuing RFS regulations to identify the underlying causes of repeated delays. EPA has not identified changes in its approach that may help to avoid these delays in the future. The other key regulations that we reviewed have had minimal effects to date because these regulations either have not yet been implemented (Tier 3 standards) or, with respect to the other two, have not affected industry operations or costs in a major way. Without such analyses and a plan to address the underlying cause of the delays, EPA risks repeating them. way, according to stakeholders and information we reviewed. Tier 3 standards were proposed on May 21, 2013, and EPA announced final standards on March 3, 2014. Stationary source GHG requirements have been burdensome to refiners, but several other stakeholders said they have not had a major effect. EPA officials told us they were aware of only three refineries that have received majorSource GHG permits since the GHG permitting program began in 2010. The EPA says it has no immediate plans to change its GHG standards. EPA entered a settlement in which the agency agreed to develop national performance standards. EPA has no current schedule to issue these standards, but it committed in its settlement to issue them. Several stakeholders expressed concern that future standards could impose more strict controls involving higher costs at refineries. A stakeholder told us that until EPA clarifies its approach for NSPS, many refiners will be reluctant to make certain investments in their refineries out of fear of higher costs. The settlement is expected to be finalized by the end of the year. CAFE standards are administered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 instituted several changes to the CAFE standards. In 2009, the administration announced a new program to increase vehicle fuel economy and reduce vehicle GHG emissions. NHTSA and EPA put the national program into place by issuing coordinated regulations covering vehicle model years 2012 to 2025.equal to taking about 27 million vehicles off the road. As shown in figure 6, fuel economy standards for cars largely remained unchanged from 1990 through 2010, but vehicle manufacturers are now expected to meet increasingly stringent standards. vehicle emission standards, and the RFS—have likely affected the refining industry by reducing the consumption of petroleum fuels. The other three key environmental regulations we reviewed have had minimal effects to date because they have either not yet been implemented or have generally not affected the industry in a major way. According to information we reviewed and two stakeholders we contacted, CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards have contributed to reductions in the Consumption of us that have had a marginal effect on petroleum demand. DOE officials also told us that the impact of the standards has been limited because they affect new car sales. petroleum fuels, but the extent is unclear. These standards aim to reduce oil consumption, and although they do not require changes at the refinery level, they can affect refineries indirectly. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards will require more efficient vehicles in the future, which may reduce future consumption of fuels. EPA estimated that the model year 2012-2025 standards are projected to reduce U.S. consumption of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels per day by 2025, according to EIA. expected to save 1.3 billion gallons of gasoline in 2013 compared with model year 2011 standards. This is equivalent to about 1 percent of EIA’s projection of gasoline consumption in 2013. A stakeholder told us that the CAFE and GHG vehicle emissions standards have likely had a relatively large impact on petroleum demand declines in the past few years. It is unclear how much declining demand overall can be attributed to these standards versus other factors such as the recent economic recession and higher fuel prices. permits and certain other permits issued to refineries and other stationary sources that trigger GHG emissions thresholds. Since 2011, construction of any new refineries has generally been subject to the use of the “best available control technology’ for GHGs emissions. The best available controlTechnology is determined for each facility based on an analysis of available technologies considering cost and other factors. For example, for refineries, this could involve the installation of heat recovery units, which are energy efficiency improvements.  stationary source GHG requirements do not apply unless an existing refining facility proposes a major modification or a new refinery is proposed for construction. A refining company representative expressed concerns to us about the lengthy permitting process to authorize GHG emission increases. An EPA official said that, in most cases, best available control technologies selected to comply with GHG requirement for refining facilities involve energy efficiency improvement measures that could help refiners reduce fuel consumption and save money. In some cases, delays can occur when the refinery applicant has not yet been approved. approximately $1.5 billion in 2030, including costs for refiners to install and operate equipment to remove sulfur from gasoline. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to take certain steps to address emissions from stationary sources, including refineries. EPA recently issued rules concerning how GHGs are to be included in certain existing permitting processes. Specifically, permitting authorities are to include GHG emission control requirements in Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) and Prevention of significant harm to the environment. the current caps, but far more difficult if the caps were lowered. Stationary source GHG requirements could become more stringent in the future. One study estimated that industry could incur additional capital expenses to achieve lower sulfur caps, ranging from $2 billion to over $6 billion dollars depending on the sulfur cap level in the final standards. The current permitting framework is a case-by-case determination that takes into account costs, among other factors, and places no requirement on existing refineries unless they undertake it. The standards set more stringent tailpipe emission standards for new vehicles. The standards generally require refiners to lower the sulfur content of gasoline from 30 parts per million (ppm) to 10 ppm on an annual average basis by 2017. According to EPA estimates, by 2030, annual emission reductions from the Tier 3 standards would generate annual benefits of between $6.7 and $19 billion and prevent up to 2,000 premature deaths annually. EPA estimated that the vehicle and fuel standards would cost. projected combined average fuel economy of about 50 miles per gallon by 2025. The standards are about 80 percent more efficient than required under the 2011 standards. EPA estimated that the 2011-2025 standards may save consumers and businesses $1.7 trillion, reduce oil consumption by 12 billion barrels, and reduce GHG emissions by 6 billion metric tons. On May 21, EPA is authorized to establish certain standards for new motor vehicles and fuels to address air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. To meet the Tier 3 fuel sulfur standards, refiners would need to install or upgrade hydrotreating capacity or take other steps to reduce the sulfur content in fuels. EPA projected that 67 out of 108 refineries would modify or purchase some equipment. The capital costs of installing this equipment and operating costs to run it would average about $0.0065 per gallon, and total $804 million in 2017. A stakeholder told us that Tier 3 would be manageable if EPA maintained the current 80 ppm cap. In particular, CAFE and GHG vehicle standards do not impose requirements on refiners. In general, U.S. refineries are among the most sophisticated in the world. RFS and Tier 3 standards could impose requirements with potential associated costs on some refiners, but they would not apply to exported fuels. They apply only to fuels sold in the United States regardless of where they are produced. IEA has pointed out that refiners in many parts of the world face similar challenges. Some U.S. refiners may benefit from any trend toward higher quality and more stringent environmental performance standards. Actions refiners take to reduce gasoline sulfur to comply with proposed Tier 3 standards could enable them to export to markets that already require low sulfur gasoline. On the other hand, representatives of a refiner pointed out that refiners could undertake such investments on their own—without Tier 3. If such exports were sufficiently economically attractive. Increasing domestic and Canadian crude oil production. increasing domestic andCanadian crude oilProduction. The LCFS would change the mix of fuels and vehicles in California to reduce emissions. The original LCFS statewide reduction targets for gasoline, diesel, and their substitutes started at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 10 percent by 2020. In 2013 a state Court of Appeal found that CARB must correct certain aspects of the procedures by which the LCFS was originally adopted. CARB officials subsequently announced a regulatory package would be proposed in 2014, and that the 2013 standards will remain in effect through 2014. not provided EPA with the proper information to proceed with processing the permit. The Clean Air Act requires that EPA approve or deny such permits within 12 months of receiving a complete application. LCFS is the subject of several ongoing lawsuits, which resulted in a 4-month delay in some regulatory activities and uncertainty about the status of the regulation. According to a study conducted by a consultant on behalf of industry, the ongoing legal challenge has increased fuel prices by about $0.01 per gallon to date. California refiners have thus far been able to comply with LCFS requirements by blending lower carbon intensive renewable fuels. Stakeholder told us that the decisions CARB makes with respect to the LCFS may affect California refiners’ ability to stay in business and compete with refiners in other states and countries. Forecasts and data from EIA and IEA suggest that future domestic refinery production levels may depend on exports of petroleum. The industry’s future competitiveness is uncertain and that foreign markets present both challenges and opportunities for U.S. refiners. LCFS disincentivizes the use of carbon intensive heavy crude oils. Industry study estimated that the LCFS could cost the refining industry an average of $0.70 per gallon by 2020. Study also projected that 5 to 7 of 14 California refineries could cease production by 2020, and the LC FS could raise other compliance challenges because of insufficient supplies or consumer uptake of cellulosic, Brazilian sugar- cane ethanol. CARB officials told us that if it proves more difficult than expected to meet LCFS requirements, CARB could introduce cost containment provisions. Current regulations do not require existing facilities to take any steps to control GHG emissions unless they undertake a major modification. Examples of major modifications at a refinery include a significant expansion of crude oil processing units, or installing new secondary processing units. California’s LCFS aims to lower GHG. emissions by reducing the level of carbon in transportation fuels. Established by the California Air. Pollution Control Board, the LCFS was established to reduce carbon in transport fuels. It was created to reduce the carbon in. transportation fuels, such as gasoline and diesel. The 2020 targets would reduce GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector in California by 10 percent in 2020, or 23 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. Stakeholders identified three major changes that have likely recently affected the domestic petroleum refining industry. Crude oil production in the United States and Canada has increased, which has lowered the cost of purchasing crude oil for some refiners. After many years of generally increasing domestic consumption of petroleum products, consumption has slowed in the U.S. and Canada. the “blend wall.” A refiner we spoke with also attributed the decline in credit prices in the second half of 2013 to EPA’s statements expressing its desire to address the blend wall. The blend wall may remain a concern into the future because statutory renewable fuel blending requirements continue to increase. Several stakeholders told us that the effect of the RFS depends in particular on how EPA addresses the blending wall in the annual standards it issues in the future. Furthermore, EPA”s timeliness in issuing the standards is also a concern. of the U.S. refining industry will also depend on the extent to which some key regulations—RFS, Tier 3, stationary source GHG requirements, and LCFS—increase costs for refiners. The requirements on domestic refiners from the key regulations we reviewed generally are expected to collectively have a greater effect in the future. Such uncertainty can discourage investments in the industry overall. RFS may increase costs for some refiners depending on the percentages of renewable fuels required by EPA and on other factors.  compliance has been most difficult for refiners with less of a retail presence. Some industry participants may be relatively advantaged when the price of RINs rises. EPA officials told us that the RFS program affects all refiners equally because obligations are the same regardless of whether refiners blend their renewable fuels.to deliver those fuels. For example, an ExxonMobil official said that RIN costs did not have a significant impact on the company’s financial performance during the second quarter of 2013. EPA generally agreed with our findings and recommendations and clarified three topics discussed in the report. EPA asserted that refiners experience the same compliance costs regardless of whether they are fully integrated, with blending capabilities, or merchant refiners that purchase credits for compliance. For example, in a 2011 study, DOE identified the degree to which a small refiner can actively blend production with production. Based on our work, we found the views of several stakeholders differed from EPA's. We incorporated these views into our final drafts. Under the RFS regulations, refiners and other obligated parties are required to ensure U.S. transportation fuels include certain amounts of renewable fuels. Refiners can purchase and blend renewable fuels themselves, or they can pay others to blend or use renewable fuels by purchasing credits. These credits can be freely traded, and prices for credits are established based on the market and generally reflect the stringency of requirements and the costs of incorporating additional renewable fuels into the transportation fuel system. If costs increase, credits prices would tend to increase as well. 2006, transportation fuels sold in the U.S. have been required to contain increasing amounts of renewable fuels such as ethanol and biodiesel. Congress established the RFS in light of concerns such as climate change and the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil. As shown in figure 5, the law generally required that transportation fuels contain 9 billion gallons of renewable fuel in 2008, and that volumes increase in 2009. In 2009, EPA required that gasoline and diesel fuels contain at least 10 billion gallons. The extent to which these regulations will reduce future consumption depends on actions by regulators and market and other developments. EPA has proposed to reduce renewable fuel requirements for 2014 due to an inadequate supply in light of the blend wall and other issues. The potential for RFS to reduce petroleum-based fuel consumption will depend on the percentages finalized by EPA. The development of advanced renewable fuel sources and market infrastructure could be affected by legal challenges, as well as any legislative action to modify the RFS. Stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed generally suggest that the outlook is positive. quality, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity. Under the RFS’ statutory provisions, the increasing amounts of renewable fuels are to primarily come from renewable fuels other than corn ethanol. The RFS could reduce GHG emissions by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, the EPA says. According to EPA, achieving the R FS’s statutory blending levels in 2022 could result in total benefits of between $13 and $26 billion, the agency says. The benefits include those related to fuel costs, energy security, health, and GHG effects. The Administrator of EPA is authorized to waive the RFS levels established in the act. The major source of renewable fuels has traditionally been ethanol produced from corn. The increased cultivation of corn for ethanol, its conversion into renewable fuels, and the storage and use of these fuels could affect water supplies, water officials say. The Administrator determines if implementing the requirement would severely harm the economy or environment, that there is an inadequate domestic supply, or in certain other situations, the EPA says. The RFS is set to increase by 2.4-fold through 2022 to 36 billion gallons. RIN is a unique 38-character code that renewable fuel producers and importers assign to each gallon of renewable fuel produced or imported. To demonstrate compliance with the RFS, refiners must provide sufficient RINs for the volume of gasoline and diesel they produce for use in the contiguous U.S. and Hawaii. Rins are valid for the calendar year in which they were generated, and up to 20 percent of a year’s standard can be met with R INs from the previous year. renewable fuels themselves or purchase RINs. In particular, EPA stated that refiners experience the same costs. If a company generates its own Rins, there is a cost associated with doing so, namely the cost for the renewable fuel compared to the petroleum fuel it displaces. GAO-12-732. Oil and Gas: Information on Shale Resources, Development, and Environmental and Public Health Risks. Washington, D.C.: O&G: The Future of Shale Energy in the United States. performance audit from November 2012 to March 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To demonstrate compliance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) annual blending requirements under the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), refiners use renewable identification numbers (RINs), which we refer to in this report as credits. We plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. High corn prices, which made ethanol more expensive relative to gasoline, also contributed to higher RIN prices during this period. EPA officials recently said the blend wall would be reached in 2014 when about 13.2 billion gallons of E10 could be consumed. Blending additional renewable fuels can be difficult and costly once the blending wall is reached. The EPA has said it wants to address the "blend wall" by the end of the year, but no date has been set for when this will happen. According to EIA, corn-based ethanol credit prices were low between 2006 and much of 2012. In 2013, prices for these credits increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July before declining to about $0.20 per gallon as of mid- November 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in RIN prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuels, referred to as of renewable fuels compared with the petroleum fuels they displace.