DHS’s progress on this outcome. DHS has fully addressed 3 of poorly planned and by DHS as poorly performing IT management. DHS must develop and implement a plan for filling key vacant positions identified through its staffing analysis reports. DHS should continue to improve its acquisition program management by effectively using the Joint Requirements Council, which it reinstated in June 2014, the authors say. They recommend that DHS reinstate the Joint. Requirements Council or establish another departmental joint requirements oversight board to review and approve acquisition. requirements. 2 outcomes, partially addressed 1 outcome, and initiated actions to address the remaining outcome. DHS has taken a number of actions to fully address establishing effective component-level acquisition capability. We continue to track DHS’s progress through ongoing reviews of the Joint Requirements Council, non-major program acquisitions, and our annual assessment of major acquisition programs. To ensure that recent efforts are sustained, the department must continue to implement its sound acquisition policy consistently and effectively across all components. We would like to thank Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Carper, and members of the committee for their time. Security, improve disaster response, and execute a wide variety of other operations. Each of DHS’s major acquisition programs generally costs $300 million or more and spans multiple years. DHS has established an acquisition management policy that we found in September 2012 to be generally sound. In September 2012 we also found that DHS had not consistently met the policy's requirements. At the time of our 2012 review, the department had only verified that 4 of 66 programs documented all of the critical knowledge the policy requires. the risk of end users—such as border patrol agents or first responders in a disaster— receiving technologies that do not work as expected. Reflecting the shortcomings we have identified since 2005, we have made 64 recommendations to DHS on acquisition management issues; 42 of which have been implemented. Our findings also formed the basis of the five acquisition management outcomes identified in the high risk list, which DHS continues to address. As detailed below, DHS has fully addressed one outcome, mostly addressed two outcomes, partially addressed one outcomes, and initiated efforts to address the final outcome. We found that DHS remained a collection of disparate organizations, many of which were performing functions with insufficient oversight. We concluded that unless DHS’s top leaders addressed these challenges, the department was at risk of continuing to exist with a fragmented acquisition organization that provided stopgap, ad hoc solutions. In November 2008, we found that billions of dollars had been spent on the Department of Homeland Security since 2007. We also found that the department had lost $1 billion in revenue in the same period. invested in major acquisition programs continued to lack appropriate oversight. Of DHS’s 48 major programs requiring milestone and annual reviews, 45 were not assessed in accordance with this policy. At least 14 of these programs had reported cost growth, schedule slips, or performance shortfalls. DHS has concurred with and presented plans for addressing all of the acquisition management recommendations that we have addressed to the Secretary since September 2012, the implementation of which will enhance acquisition management, the report says. The report is published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. leadership has taken to address the acquisition management shortcomings we have identified over the past 10 years. However, in our April 2015 review, we continued to find enduring challenges to acquisition programs, such as staffing shortfalls. 11 of the 22 programs we reviewed faced funding gaps (projected funding vs. estimated costs) of 10 percent or greater, including five programs that faced gaps of 30 per cent or greater. Inconsistencies in how programs are funded and managed are still a problem. issues, we have, among other things, recommended that DHS assess program-specific affordability tradeoffs at all acquisition review meetings and ensure that funding plans submitted to Congress are comprehensive. DHS concurred with these recommendations and is taking actions to implement them. For example, DHS established that department leadership would, during all acquisition program reviews, specifically address affordability issues and make explicit tradeoffs as necessary, and DHS officials told us that DHS leadership is discussing affordability at all program reviews to help ensure adequate funding. components were implementing the department’s acquisition management policy. The funding plans for Coast Guard programs continued to be incomplete, in that they did not account for all of the operations and maintenance funding the Coast Guard planned to allocate to its major acquisition programs. These gaps in information reduce the value of the funding plans presented to Congress. Further, as we noted in our most recent high risk update, the department has additional work to do to fully address the remaining acquisition management outcomes. To address these This testimony is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from the published product. This testimony is based on are listed in each product. Homeland Security: Weak Oversight of Human Resources Information Technology Investment Needs Considerable Improvement. DHS Training: Improved Documentation, Resource Tracking, and Performance Measurement Could Strengthen Efforts. DHS: Progress Made; Significant Work Remains in Addressing High-Risk Areas. GAO-14-228T. DHS Financial Management: Continued Effort Needed to Address Internal Control and System Challenges. GAO-13-524. Department of Homeland Security: Taking Further Action to Better Determine Causes of Morale Problems would Assist in the Agency’s Morale Improvement Efforts.GAO: Additional Executive Review Sessions Needing to Address Troubled Projects. GAE: Additional OMB and Agency Actions Are Needed To Achieve Portfolio Savings. GAo: Additional Efforts Needed. to Resolve Deficiencies in Internal Controls and Financial Management Systems. be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Larry Crosland, Jennifer Kamara, James Kernen, Emily Kuhn, Elizabeth Luke, Valerie Freeman, David Lysy, Taylor Matheson, Shannin O’Neill, Lindsay Taylor, Nathan Tranquilli, Katherine Trimble, and Shaunyce Wallace. For further information about this testimony, please contact Rebecca Gambler at (202) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov. The daily transcript is a written version of each day's featured news story. Use this transcript to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The Daily Transcript is published weekly and is curated by CNN's iReport team. For more information, go to the Daily Transcript's News Quiz, or go to http://www.cnn.com/newsquiz/2013/01/07/26/29/28/290715/news/features/top-stories/topstories. letter to DHS, we identified and DHS agreed to achieve 31 actions and outcomes that are critical to addressing the challenges within the department’s management areas. DHS issued its initial Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management in January 2011. DHS has generally made improvements to the strategy with each update based on feedback we provided. In our 2015 report we found that DHS established a framework for monitoring its progress in implementing the integrated strategy it identified for addressing the 30actions and outcomes. But, as we concluded in our report, it is too early to assess their impact. DHS’s efforts to strengthen and integrate its management functions have resulted in progress addressing our criteria for removal from the high-risk list. As of March 2016, DHS has met three criteria and partially met the remaining two criteria, as shown in table 1. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that it will be important for DHS to maintain its current level of top leadership support and commitment to ensure continued progress in successfully executing its corrective actions through completion. We found that DHS has established a plan for addressing this high- risk area. of Homeland Security, the Under Secretary for Management at DHS, and other senior officials have continued to demonstrate exemplary commitment and top leadership support for addressing the department’s management challenges. For example, in April 2014, the Secretary of Homeland Security issued a memorandum entitled Strengthening Departmental Unity of Effort. Further, in August 2015, DHS identified four integrated priority areas to bring focus to strengthening integration among the department's management functions. These priorities include, for example, strengthening resource allocation and reporting ability and developing and deploying secure technology solutions. executing its corrective actions through completion; continue to implement its plan for addressing this high-risk area and periodically report its progress to us and Congress. identify and work to mitigate any resource gaps and prioritize initiatives as needed. closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective action and make midcourse adjustments as needed; and make continued progress in achieving the 20 actions and outcomes it has not fully addressed. demonstrate that systems, personnel, and policies are in place to ensure that results can be sustained. outcome by continuing to use performance measures to assess progress made in achieving department-wide management integration. Since our 2015 update, DHS fully addressed another outcome as a result of actions it has taken to improve the maturity of its system acquisition management practices. As of March 2016, DHS has partially addressed 9 and initiated 4 of the actions and outcomes. DHS has fully addressed 1 of the 5 acquisition management outcomes, mostly addressed 3 since our 2015 report, and still has work to do on the remaining 20 outcomes. DHS agreed were needed to address the high-risk area. The 30 actions and outcomes address each management function (acquisition, IT, financial, and human capital) as well as management integration. Achieving sustained progress requires leadership commitment, effective corrective action planning, adequate capacity, and monitoring the effectiveness and sustainability of supporting initiatives, the DHS said in a statement. For example, one of the outcomes focusing on acquisition management is validating required acquisition documents in accordance with a department-approved, knowledge-based acquisition process. We found in our 2015 report that DHS had made important progress across all of its management functions and significant progress in the area of management integration. DHS continued to face significant management challenges that hindered the department’s ability to accomplish its missions. For example, DHS did not have the acquisition management tools in place to consistently demonstrate whether its major acquisition programs were on track to achieve their cost, schedule, and capability goals. DHS has continued to demonstrate important progress over the last year by, for example, obtaining a clean opinion on its financial statements for a third consecutive year. have ready access to reliable information for informed decision making. Over the last year DHS has continued to take actions to address these challenges but they persist. As we concluded in our 2015 report, addressing these and other management challenges will be a significant undertaking that will likely require several years. Key to addressing the department’s management challenges is DHS demonstrating the ability to achieve sustained progress across the 30 actions and outcomes we identified and discussed in this report. The report concludes that the department's management weaknesses pose a risk to mission accomplishment. 2014 update. DHS had not yet entered into a contract for independent verification and validation services in connection with its efforts to establish this program. Effective implementation of these modernization projects is important because, until they are complete, the department’s current systems will not effectively support financial management operations. As we concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe, moving forward, DHS will need to closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective measures. We currently assess DHS to have met the framework to monitor progress criterion. 2015, the department’s financial statement auditor designated deficiencies in IT systems controls as a material weakness for financial reporting purposes. This designation was due to flaws in security controls such as those for access controls, configuration management, segregation of duties, and contingency planning. DHS continues to make progress on three multi-year projects to modernize selected components’ financial management systems. According to its January 2016 strategy update, DHS has made progress on 2 financial management outcomes, partially addressed 3, and initiated 3. the most progress on its U.S. Coast Guard modernization project. Additional planning and discovery efforts need to be completed on its projects to modernize Federal Emergency Management Agency and Immigration and Customs Enforcement financial management systems. Without sound controls and systems, DHS faces long-term challenges in sustaining a clean audit opinion on its financial statements and in obtaining and sustaining an internal control over financial reporting, the report says. The report concludes that DHS will be in a position to implement modernized solutions for these components and their customers. Each year, DHS invests billions of dollars in its major acquisition programs to help execute its many critical missions. In fiscal year 2015 alone, DHS reported that it planned to spend approximately $7.2 billion on these acquisition programs. DHS expects it will ultimately invest more than $180 billion in them. We will continue to monitor DHS’s efforts in this high-risk area to determine if the actions and outcomes are achieved and sustained over the long term.over time. The department is acquiring systems to help secure the border, increase marine safety, screen travelers, enhance cyber. DHS could not ensure that annual funding decisions for its major investments made the best use of resources and addressed mission needs. Almost a third of DHS’s major investments received funding without having validated mission needs and requirements. Two-thirds did not have required life-cycle cost estimates. In July 2008, 15 of the 57 DHS major investments we reviewed were designated by the Office of Management and Budget as “critical’ or “urgent” by the White House. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. steps to implementing the outcomes, if implemented effectively and sustained, should provide a path for DHS to be removed from our high- risk list. In October 2014, DHS identified that it had resources needed to implement 7 of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to achieve the actions and outcomes. DHS did not identify sufficient resources for the 4 remaining initiatives. In addition, our prior work has identified specific capacity gaps that could undermine achievement of management outcomes. For example, in April 2014, we reported that DHS needed to increase its cost-estimating capacity. the department had not approved baselines for 21 of 46 major acquisition programs. In its January 2016 strategy update, DHS stated that the department had addressed capacity shortcomings it previously identified. We are analyzing DHS’s capacity to resolve risks as part of our 2015 report. The report concludes that DHS needs to continue to identify resources for the remaining initiatives; work to mitigate shortfalls and prioritize initiatives, as needed; and communicate to senior leadership critical resource gaps. It also states that DHS self-assesses the capacity criterion as fully met. leadership’s ability to effectively manage those programs and provide information to Congress. Nearly all of the DHS program managers we surveyed in 2012 reported their programs had experienced significant challenges. Sixty-eight of the 71 respondents reported they experienced funding instability, faced workforce shortfalls, or their planned capabilities changed after initiation. Most survey respondents reported a combination of these factors. We were only able to gain insight into the magnitude of the cost growth for 16 of 77 programs we reviewed. We found that their aggregate cost estimates had increased by 166 percent. its human resource environment, which with respect to learning management, included limitations resulting from nine disparate learning management systems that did not exchange information. DHS established the Performance and Learning Management System (PALMS) program to provide a system that will consolidate DHS’s nine existinglearning management systems into one system. We made 14 recommendations to DHS to, among other things, address HRIT's poor progress and ineffective management. DHS concurred with all 14 recommendations and provided estimated completion dates for implementing each of them. DHS has also developed and implemented mechanisms to assess training programs but could take additional actions. In February 2016, we reported that DHS had initiated the Human Resources Information Technology (HRIT) investment in 2003 to address issues presented by employees. In September 2014, we found that DHS has implemented component- specific and department-wide training programs. However, to fully achieve this outcome, DHS also needs to, among other things, issue department- wide policies on training and development and strengthen its learning management capabilities. later versions, most recently in January 2016. The integrated strategy includes key management initiatives and related corrective actions plans. For example, the January 2016 strategy update includes an initiative focused on financial systems modernization. These initiatives support various actions and outcomes, such as modernizing the U.S. Coast Guard’s financial management system and implementing an IT human capital strategic plan. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that DHS's strategy and approach to continuously refining actionable plans is effective. the 6 IT management outcomes, mostly addressed another 2, and partially addressed the remaining 1. DHS has finalized a directive to establish its tiered governance and portfolio management structure for overseeing and managing its IT investments. The department has also made progress in implementing its IT Strategic Human Capital Plan for fiscal years 2010 through 2012. However, in January 2015 DHS shifted its IT paradigm from acquiring assets to acquiring services, and acting as a provider of IT services to the federal government. For more information on DHS' IT strategy, visit the department's website. information for day-to-day decision making as a routine business operation. Human capital management. DHS has fully addressed 1 human capital management outcome, mostly addressed 3, and partially addressed the remaining 3. The Secretary of Homeland Security signed a human capital strategic plan in 2011 that DHS has since made sustained progress in implementing, fully addressing this outcome. DHS also has actions under way to identify current and future human capital needs, an outcome it mostly addressed since our 2015 report. However, DHS has considerable work ahead to improve employee morale. a service broker (i.e., an intermediary between the purchaser of a service and the seller of that service) According to DHS officials in May 2015, this paradigm change will require a major transition in the skill sets of DHS’s IT workforce. The hiring, training, and managing of staff with those new skill sets will need to be closely managed. DHS continues to take steps to enhance its information security program. However, while the department made progress in remediating findings from the previous year, in November it was still struggling. DHS ranked last among 37 large federal agencies in all four dimensions of the survey’s index for human capital accountability and assessment. DHS has developed plans for addressing its employee satisfaction problems, but as we previously recommended, DHS needs to continue to improve its root-cause analysis efforts related to these plans, the authors say. The report was published by the Office of Personnel Management, a division of the Department of Health and Human Services. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/.