would have to consider what it was incentivizing through user fees. For example, if the fee was based on weight, he said, it might “incentivize even smaller planes and more planes,” thereby increasing demands on the ATC system’s capacity. Another issue that would have to be worked out, is how the common costs of air traffic services should be allocated. Whether users should pay only for the incremental costs of the services they use, as most users would argue, or whether some cross-subsidies are needed. A user fee system could be implemented in a government or a public-private type of air traffic services organization. Some method of controlling costs would have to be built into the system, one panelist said. Another panelist pointed out that implementing a user fee alone would not guarantee efficiency, because the air traffic service provider could simply raise the fee when costs increased and the users would be forced to pay, since the service is a monopoly. Most panelists correctly assumed that legislation would be required to institute auser fee system. act like a business when it is not really one, suggested that it was only at the margins that the creators of the ATO had replicated a business. Replacing airline ticket taxes with a user fee is a step that many panelists considered essential for the ATo’s success. While recognizing that such a fee would be controversial, since the costs for most users would likely increase, the panelists maintained that it would be essential for ATO's success. The ATO is still largely a government organization and therefore remains subject to most governmental constraints. “fatal” to implement the fee in any way that did not make the ATO financially independent of Congress, panelist says. Revenue bonding based on a new user fee stream would create an “alternative to capital starvation,” one panelist said. Even if the user fee streams initially produced no more revenue than the airlines are now paying in aviation-related taxes, he said, it would be an ‘alternative’ to “capital starvation” customer-servicing organization. While panelists generally favored a user fee system, they cautioned care in proposing and implementing one. As one panelist said, the fee question, once raised, would be all-consuming and would require the expenditure of political capital. In his view, it was critical that the ATO wait to achieve some successes before seeking auser fee system. Another panelist called for figuring out “not only what problem we’re solving, but what problems we might be likely to create” The budget procedure requiring that capital investments be funded out of annual appropriations means that major acquisitions generally take many years to implement. Particularly when annual appropriations fall short, projects’ development and deployment may be delayed and their costs may increase with time. Until the acquisitions are completed, the benefits of the new technologies are deferred, aging equipment may pose risks to users, and outdated software may require costly upgrades. By the time theisitions are fully deployed, by the time they’re completed, they may have outlived their usefulness. The firewall makes it difficult to see the relationship between software replacement (capital) and maintenance (operating) costs, panelists said. Decision to postpone purchases of new or upgraded software may save capital investment costs, but rising maintenance requirements may increase operating costs. Eventually, the maintenance costs may “far exceed” the replacement costs, one panelist said. The budget is not integrated to show what investments buy in, other panelists noted. It is also difficult to determine the impact of capital investment decisions on operating costs, they said. Project managers overpromise capabilities and underestimate costs to increase the chances that new projects will be accepted. After projects are accepted, they overestimate costs because they assume their requests will be cut. Although managers could include options in their budget submissions to indicate what could be accomplished at different funding levels, they do not do so. Finally, managers are reluctant to revise ongoing projects because they don't want to be seen to be cutting costs.seldom reduces. The budget process establishes incentives for unrealistic planning, a panelist pointed out. seen as fickle. Some panelists criticized the federal budget for failing to show priorities and relationships among proposed investments. By contrast, a private company that operates under a board of directors and obtains revenue from customers does not have incentives to play budget games to get projects approved. “Your money is your own money,” one panelist said. In the budget, “everything is as important as everything else.” Another panelist observed that the budget sets no capital investment priorities. According to a third panelist, a line item budget tears apart a highly layered, interdependent system. Panelists viewed the ATO’s apparent fiscal shortfall as a severe challenge. In terms of operations, this deficit was more likely to have a gradual than an immediately catastrophic onset. One panelist said he did not expect to see major system outages but predicted, instead, “a slow but sure increase in delays.” If the ATo did not carefully analyze demand and determine how that demand could be served, it would find itself facing what a third panelist referred to as a “disaster” “perfect storm,” reiterating a term the ATO itself has used. Severe reductions in the funding for ATC modernization, if required to address the currently projected shortfall, could exacerbate what one panelist described as the government’s traditional underfunding of the ATC system. They suggested, for example, that FAA may have to cut back on some of its air traffic control operations to make up for the shortfall. The government typically assumes such investments will last for 15 years, but a 7-year estimate would be more reasonable.  panelists maintained that the federal budget cycle is too long and inflexible to meet the needs of an ATC system. According to one panelist, it is “impossible’ to run the U.S. A TC system within the classic federal structure. Such a “dramatic,” ‘dynamic’ system requires “more managerial freedom, much more day-to-day, week- to-week, month-to.-month decision- making,’ he said. The panelists generally agreed that structural changes would increase the ATO’s chances of success. These changes would generally require legislative action and take time to implement. The ATO could make some progress in addressing its cultural, technical, and budgetary challenges under its current authorities, the panelists said. The panelists suggested that it be authorized to establish and manage user fees, rather than rely on appropriated tax receipts, and that it should be allowed to issue that it would produce a more predictable, reliable funding stream. ATO could reap a “transition dividend” during the first 5 or 10 years after the bonds are issued. The ATO could cut what the airlines pay and “still have a robust modernization program being financed by the revenue bonds.” He characterized this strategy as “money that’s lying on the sidewalk waiting to be picked up” and saw it as an opportunity to buy some new equipment in bulk and get it installed before it becomes obsolete. Such a ‘sensible’ approach would not allocate and compare costs and measure productivity. Each organizational unit and facility is developing applicable metrics for performance so that the ATO can compare costs, identify factors that affect costs, and use this information to improve performance. For example, each en route facility is determining its hourly cost to control flights. The ATO then compare and analyze these costs to identify positive and negative factors affecting performance and productivity. plan is a response to a congressional mandate, based on a recommendation we made in 2002, that FAA develop a plan for addressing an impending wave of controller retirements. outages—that is, on replacing equipment that would otherwise fail. This panelist also said that FAA needs a customer-oriented business strategy and a business plan. Improving controllers’ productivity would be another way to save money, a fourth panelist said. But he characterized his suggestion as “touch the ground” with the ATO’s operating costs, which account for about three-quarters of its total costs. He suggested that the upcoming wave of air traffic controller retirements would create “an opportunity to redistribute and even to trim the work force in some areas. FAA has not developed a business model or plans for managing the increased air traffic, panelists say. FAA asks for more than it can get and then carries the difference over from year to year, creating “a bow wave” of unfunded requests for capital projects that it doesn’t have the money for, one panelist says. FAA does not evaluate “the anatomy of demand” and determine how that demand will be served, another panelist adds. as training, staffing, pay disparities, and infrastructure. Using the Strategic Management Process to drive budget decisions will help to ensure the establishment and maintenance of a linkage between the capital and operating budgets. To gain a more complete understanding of its costs, FAA is revising its cost accounting practices and changing from a cash flow to a total. As steps toward that goal, the ATO expects everyone to learn the difference between cost and cash flow and get a better handle on unit costs as better cost accounting data become available. FAA plans to finish putting a new cost accounting system in place by 2006 that will allow it to assign, track, and better control costs. FAA updated its cost estimates in light of OMB’s revenue projections for the next 4 years and arrived at a cumulative shortfall for the period of $5 billion for the operating budget and $3.2billion for the capital budget. According to FAA, a business plan that the ATO was preparing at the time of this article was based on the OMB's revenue projections. have the numbers he needed to know where the ATO stood because FAA did not maintain basic information on the costs and value of existing systems. As a result, he spent most of his first year overseeing the implementation of a cost accounting system and collecting other key data. Their performance is constrained because their terms of employment and compensation are based largely on negotiated agreements rather than on performance. In addition, salary caps limit FAA’s ability to pay for technical expertise. As one panelist observed at the end of the panel, The panelists identified and discussed the impact of funding constraints and the federal budget process on ATC modernization. In their view, the most immediate issue is a critical shortage of funds to meet the current modernization program’s plans and users’ demands. The panelists suggested a number of steps that the ATO could currently take to address terms of productivity, safety, or environmental benefits. The ATO recognizes that capital expenditures directly affect operating costs over time, and therefore the two budgets must be developed together. ATO has spent most of its capital investment dollars on sustaining and maintaining existing systems. Only about 14 percent of its expenditures, he recalled, were for flight enhancement. “Who anywhere would have a capital investment plan that was predominantly about standing still?” he asked. Another panelist also considered the federal budget process incompatible with strategic planning. In his words, “it is absolutely a problem at FAA’ that “budget drives strategy and strategy does not drive budget.” Panelists identified options outside the budget process that the ATO could pursue under its current authorities. They said the ATo could pursue procedural and regulatory changes that would take advantage of existing technologies to increase capacity. The ATO also could obtain information on technologies and procedures developed in other countries that could be used in the United States. The panelist also recommended looking at longer term alternatives to annual appropriations that are available within the government and work well for other organizations, such as “working capital accounts and all kinds of industrial funding schemes” any requests for increased funding and would, instead, tell the ATO to find another way of doing business. Panelists noted that funding from annual appropriations is uncertain, and that this uncertainty is incompatible with strategic and capital planning. The amount of money available for appropriation each year cannot be predetermined, one panelist said, and the size of the appropriation may vary from year to year. This uncertainty focuses attention on which technology will receive the funding (the inputs) rather than on what improvements in safety or capacity the technology is supposed to deliver (the outputs) does not reveal synergies between projects. As a result, when the appropriators decide not to fund a project, they may not understand how their decision will affect other projects. Separation of capital and operating costs in FAA’s accounting system may lead, in some instances, to investments in technologies that end up in a warehouse because the ATO can’t afford to operate them. It discourages analyses of life-cycle costs and may lead to investments that are not needed. to the new executive. Technical as well as cultural factors have impeded ATC modernization. FAA does not have “the engineering technical capability to deal with an extremely complex, highly nonlinear adaptive system,” one speaker said. Another panelist further noted that an executive in the private sector replaced the top 200 people in his organization to achieve the transformation he was seeking, according to several of the panelists. In the view of this panelist, the COO’s hiring of only two new managers and reassignment of other managers would not be sufficient to turn the ATO's culture around. FAA lacks a rudder, in a technical sense, for modernization, panelists say. To help address its lack of technical expertise, ATO could obtain advice from an independent board or information from other countries, they say. “The system engineering organization in FAA is nothing more than a process organization,” another panelist said. It doesn’t matter what the systems engineering people do, their job is to keep doing plans and processes, they said. They think that meetings are products. FAA cannot do everything alone from the inside, because airplanes and airports, for example, need to be equipped with the technologies that will help realize the vision. Employing a team concept could help overcome resistance to the implementation of new technologies, according to another panelist. Putting engineers, finance people, controllers, and electronic technologists together, all on the same team, could unite them as they moved through the stages of implementation, the panelist said. When the time comes to field a technology, the focus would be on getting it up and running. utilizes its engineers to build systems rather than manage contractors. As a result, he said, it is now developing the systems it needs faster and at less cost. Maximizing the use of commercial inputs was the recommendation of another panelist, who said that FAA needs to get out of the business of designing systems. According to him, most companies no longer develop their own large, complex systems. Instead, they get other people to do that for them in the private sector, he added. The other employees also had difficulty adjusting and were still adjusting in some respects, he said. Getting management on the right page was the real challenge. Another panelist questioned why the ATO’s new COO had replaced only two top managers in theATO and simply reassigned other managers. Still another panelist suggested that cultural change within the AT o alone would not be sufficient to ensure the ATo’S success, because so much of its fate depends on other organizations, including FAA, DOT, the Office of FAA plans to train or hire people with needed skills to address shortfalls in technical expertise. Recognizing that cultural factors can play a critical role in an organization’s success, the ATO has initiated organizational changes that are designed to create. FAA is addressing some of the cultural and technical factors panelists identified as affecting ATC modernization. The ATO's COO also provides additional information from previous GAO reports and work in progress on how FAA is addressed some of these issues. FAA sent a large number of detailed e-mails in response to a call for recommendations to improve internal communications. FAA’s management culture was “intensely hierarchical, risk averse,” and “reactionary.” Now, FAA is attempting to foster “results-focused, proactive and innovative behavior” Changing the agency’‘s leadership model is also designed to replace a “personality-driven culture” with a sustainable, stable, viable organization. Managers have stopped seeing employees as a problem and have started to see them as part of the solution. The only way to bring about a cultural transformation is to replace those who resist change, either by allowing them to retire or by hiring others to take their places. In the corporate world, one panelist observed, a new executive brings in a new management team to support a cultural turnaround. The new team is then loyal to the company, the panelist said. The key to these positive results is psychological change, he said. The ATO's organizational placement, combined with its dependence on Congress for funding, limits the COO’s ability to make decisions and take actions, panelists said. The COO is not a Chief Executive Officer, as one of the panelists observed. Instead, he reports to his “owners’—who include the FAA Administrator and the DOT Secretary, who in turn receive direction from the administration and Congress. Consequently, there is no oversight group that is expected to provide constructive criticism of FAA, one panelist said. FAA does not get “the kind of constructive advice that you might hope for.” Europe’s Performance Review Commission provides such constructive advice for EUROCONTROL, the European air traffic management organization. The commission serves as a panel of independent advisers and costs about $2.5 million a year. According to several panelists, the ATO's COO lacks the management tools that would be available to a private-sector CEO. His ability to plan modernization projects, set program priorities, and implement new technologies is constrained. The ATO is charged with operating like a business but is not provided with the management tools available to a business, panelists say. In their view, the ATO’s chances for success are limited because the COO is being asked to turn the organization around without being given the tools to do so. One panelist, who said he was skeptical about the AT o's ability to transform itself, says he is skeptical about its ability to get the funding it needs to turn things around. panelists said, they may be out of date. The political process influences budget decisions in the administration as well as in Congress. Congress has generally supported FAA’s modernization program, but funding difficulties have ensued. Other panelists added that the ATO would have difficulty “deliver the bad news” Unless revenue increases are forthcoming. According to this panelist, OMB would deny funding for the modernization program if it were to be approved by the White House and Congress. The ATO will publish a business plan that projects deficit scenarios. Government altogether. For many, the steps taken thus far to create a performance-based organization were insufficient. The ATO still had a long way to go to achieve its goals. Some panelists were united in their desire for the ATO to succeed, but they generally agreed that its opportunities for success were constrained within a government system. At our request, the panelists concluded the panel with their parting thoughts on the day’s discussion, including any advice they had for FAA or for Congress. change can be an issue outside FAA as well as within it, panelists noted. For example, one panelist questioned how much support the ATO was getting from DOT, OMB, and congressional committees for changing “some extremely entrenched political fiefdoms” Another panelist said that he had found the congressional authorizing committees amenable to changes, but the appropriators liked things the way they were. In addition to having a vision, it is important for the ATo to tie that vision to what is expected of them, the panelists said. the ATO, as one panelist said, or “sacrifice the good for the better” in the words of another. Instead, taking a two-pronged approach would be the best way, in the view of most panelists, for the ATO to meet its immediate and longer term challenges. Clinton V. Oster, Jr. (Panel Moderator) Professor of Public and Environmental Affairs. Anthony J. Broderick Independent Consultant. Former FAA Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification. The panel was only an initial step in a possible long-term, evolving effort to develop and sustain discussion on ATC modernization. Because our scope was limited, we could not include a large number of leading experts, institutions, and networks involved in specialized efforts. Although many points of view were represented, the panel was not representative of all potential stakeholders. More thought, discussion, and research are needed to develop greater agreement on what we really know, what needs to be done, and how to do it. FAA is “very resistant” to having private organizations, rather than FAA, develop new procedures and systems for FAA to approve and institute, panelists say. Several panelists saw resistance to change as a consequence of federal employment. A government organization is insulated from changes, the panelists said. They identified multiple, currently available options for addressing these factors, but none are currently available. The FAA’s modernization program is expected to be completed by the end of the year. the economic pressures that the private sector faces, one of the panelists indicated. In his view, federal employees do not have the firsthand experience with layoffs and business failures to understand, as private aviation industry employees do. Other panelists emphasized the reluctance of management to change. According to a panelist with experience in restructuring a foreign air traffic organization, the senior and middle managers could not or would not adjust to the change and had to be let go within the first 2 years of the restructuring. The air traffic controllers’ union is “very political,” several panelists asserted. One panelist charged that it was “hindering the progress’ of a performance-based organization. The union delayed the adoption of technologies such as the User Request Evaluation Tool (URET) because some controllers saw them as a threat to its membership. Another panelist cited the union’s long-term opposition to the implementation of a software program that tracks productivity—a key measure. A change in management’s approach could go a long way toward overcoming controllers’ and other employees’ resistance to change. One foreign air traffic organization changed its whole approach to the unions and the staff, started talking to them as people. Union representatives and managers take the same courses together and address issues of affordability together, one panelist said. As a result, controllers�’ pay has increased, costs have dropped, and productivity has increased. The panelist implied that obstructing its implementation because it might threaten jobs was not a good idea. they believed would impede or prevent success. Among the obstacles they cited were the counterproductive incentives inherent in the budget process. It was important, one panelist said, to overcome this opposition by describing “the difference between how things are and how they might be” Still other panelists looked to the future, calling for international help to develop new air traffic technologies. The U.S. government’s refusal to allow newAir traffic technologies to be used, and opposition to organizational and technological change, were cited as obstacles. FAA: Plan Still Needed to Meet Challenges to Effectively Managing Air Traffic Controller Workforce. Air Traffic Control: FAA’s Modernization Efforts--Past, Present, and Future. National Airspace System: Reauthorizing FAA Provides Opportunities and Options to Address Challenges. Federal Aviation Administration: Challenges for Transforming Into a High-Performing Organization. FAA: Free Flight Tools Show Promise, but Implementation Challenges Remain. FAA has many Investment Management Capabilities in Place, but More Oversight of Operational Systems Is Needed. Steven R. Bussolari Assistant Division Head, Tactical Systems Division Manager, Air Traffic Control System Group, Lincoln Laboratory. John W. Crichton President and CEO, NAV Canada. Richard Golaszweski Executive Vice President, Gellman Research Associates (GRA), Inc. Ian Hall Director of Operations, National Air Traffic Services, United Kingdom. Thomas Imrich Chief Pilot, Research, Boeing Commercial Aircraft. Satish C. Fearnsides Professor of Public Policy, George Mason University Chief Strategist and Partner of MJF Strategies. In addition to the individual named above, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Brandon Haller, Bert Japikse, Maren McAvoy, Beverly Norwood, and Richard Scott made key contributions to this special product. GAO-05-11. Air Traffic Control: FAA Needs to Ensure Better Coordination When Approving Air Traffic control systems. Washington, D.C.: November 17, 2004. Air traffic control: FAA’s Acquisition Management Has Improved, but Policies and Oversight Need Strengthening to Help. The panelists generally considered RNP a highly promising, low-cost option for the ATO to improve service. Two panelists expressed concerns about the government’s approach to regulating the use of onboard navigation equipment and the associated procedures needed to implement RNP. The panelists, who generally assumed that the private sector could provide flight service station services and other air traffic services more efficiently than the government, suggested that if contracting for flight service stations services proved to be effective, FAA could do the same. Airlines are “crying for” FAA to approve RNP, one of the panelists said. Aircraft equipped with RNP capabilities could then fly alternative rolling, moving routes to avoid weather delays. Implementing RNP could also eventually lower the ATO’s costs, another panelist said. RNP technologies have been installed on larger aircraft for so long that some aircraft equipped with them are already in service, panelists say. The FAA has not approved procedures for its use in the United States. the technologies have already been retired to the desert, one panelist said. In addition, pilots have been trained to use the technologies, and the technologies are already being used in some other countries, including Canada. As a first step toward obtaining FAA’s approval of procedures for using RNP, the ATO could make policy announcements to set a tone and direction. These announcements would enlist the user community's support at little or no cost, the panelists said, and could be made as early as next year. Area navigation (RNAV) allows operators of properly equipped aircraft to fly desired flight paths without requiring direct flight over ground-based navigation aids. This provides for more direct routing, avoiding suboptimal routes prescribed by conventional ‘highways in the sky’ RNAV and RNP could potentially increase the capacity of the ATC system to handle air traffic by reducing the required distance (separation) between aircraft equipped with advanced navigation capabilities if the aircraft can safely operate closer to one another. The procedure, invisible to passengers, is called Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum. It is expected to save airlines $400 million in fuel costs during the first year. As technology allows, FAA says, more flight altitude levels will be added. In January 2005, FAA doubled the airspace routes between 29,000 feet and 41,000ft by spacing aircraft 1,000 ft apart instead of 2,000 foot.. Five airports are developing RNP-based procedures in partnership with airlines that that are using the procedure. rational decisions that transcend changes in political leadership. The ATO is trying to better align FAA’s priorities and stakeholders’ interests by developing a strategy map. Called the Strategic Management Process, this effort borrows heavily from a private-sector model. According to FAA, the strategy map will enable owners and customers to clearly understand both the services that the ATo is providing and the effects of products in development on those services. The strategy map is expected to be completed by the end of the year. FAA's Strategic Management Process will ensure linkage between FAA’s operating and capital budgets. Future budgetary conversations will revolve around the desired level of service, instead of focusing on a product. Ultimately, the ATO wants to know how much every unit of output costs so that it can satisfy those needs with cost. The ATO created “value-based” performance metrics; that is, it defined its performance in terms of customers’ needs and connected efforts to satisfy those Needs with Cost. a foundation for cultural change and deliver benefits to customers efficiently. For example, the ATO established collaborative teams of technical experts and ATC system. It reorganized air traffic services and the research and acquisition organization along functional lines of business. It reduced layers of management from 11 to 7 to help address the hierarchical nature of the organization. It conducted an organizationwide activity value analysis to determine the full range of activities that ATO headquarters is engaged in, and the value customers place on those activities. Both the OEP and the JPDO’s plan are designed to help the NAS flow smoothly and meet future needs. The restructuring of U.S. air traffic services that has taken place thus far, through the establishment of a performance- based air traffic organization, constitutes “the first building block” of the longer term effort to transform the aviation system. According to the COO, this vision will incorporate both technologies and processes. However, he acknowledged that the ATO has not yet connected this long- term vision with the financial and other challenges it currently faces. JPDO’s long-term vision, thereby “tie the vision to the viability of the future.” The OEP will then be “not just a set of projects,” but a project plan with a vision and a strategy that goes out 20 years. But given the current budget constraints, he conceded, the path to that goal is not clear. In March 2004, FAA created the Air Traffic Safety Oversight Service (AOV), under FAA’S Office of Aviation Safety. OMB Director can revise his budget request and Congress can make further changes in the ATO’s budget. The 20-year vision of the Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) is at odds with the ATo, according to one panelist. Other panelists observed that the controllers’ union influences management’'s decisions. The COO lacks key financial data needed to determine, analyze, and manage the AT o's costs. When he was “parachuted” into theATO, as one panelists put it, he did not have the financial data he needed. improve its operations and financial management, FAA has worked to develop three longer term planning documents. FAA is participating in a multiagency effort, sponsored by the JPDO, to develop a national plan for aviation in 2025 and beyond. It has developed a rolling 10-year effort, called the Operational Evolution Plan (OEP), through which FAA plans to increase the capacity of the NAS by one- third. FAA has published its Flight Plan for 2005 through 2009, a multiyear strategic effort that sets a 5-year course for FAA. revenue bonds backed by these fees. To give the ATO greater decision-making authority, panelists proposed restructuring it to streamline and strengthen its management. restructuring could resolve the conflict of interest inherent in FAA’s dual responsibility as the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. These changes would allow theATO to implement a “sensible’ capital investment program and hire the technical expertise it needs, the panelists said. The changes would also achieve cost efficiencies and offer better, more responsive service. the ATO’s creation did not address the structural conflict of interest that exists because FAA is both the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. Another panelist noted that when his country restructured its air traffic organization, it immediately eliminated the same structural Conflict of interest. According to the first panelist, other countries that have reorganized their air traffic organizations have also done so. The regulator became more effective and the operators’ safety performance “significantly improved,” the second panelist said. instituted arms’ length regulation if they did not have it already. “We remain one of the few places that somehow thinks that self-regulation is a good idea, in spite of sort of overwhelming evidence in lots of arenas that it's not a very good idea," the ATO’s COO said. The ATO is developing a business plan that the FAA is developing to guide and monitor its operations. The FAA is addressing some of the structural changes that panelists proposed to improve the ATOs success over time. Disproportionate, he said, because it establishes the same safety standards for aircraft of all sizes. “We can’t keep treating airplanes that need 100 cubic miles of airspace the same from a cost and benefit point of view,” he said. He maintained that the role of regulatory management on the evolution of the ATC system has been underestimated and called for significant investment in understanding risk management. The other panelist who expressed concerns about the government’s regulatory. Safety oversight of FAA’s traffic function will be provided by a separate part of the agency. Although both organizations remain within FAA, under the FAA Administrator, they are less closely joined than they were previously. This step is a positive move toward providing “arm’S length’ safety oversight, although it doesn’t go as far as placing the two organizations in separate federal agencies or removing one of the agencies from the federal government. The establishment of the AOV responds directly to a recommendation by the 1997 National Civil Aviation Review Commission. got technical safety risk as a key technical parameter. FAA does not apply rigorous systems engineering expertise early in nonadvocate technical reviews of project proposals. As a result, a number of FAA’s programs had fundamental system engineering technical issues that were not identified early in the program. The risks were not mitigated, and the programs experienced significant cost growth, the panel said. The panel's findings were published in a report titled, “The Future of Air-to-Ground Communications.” relies on the early and ongoing investment of stakeholders, who review the progress of new projects regularly. Reviews of three projects with cost, schedule, and performance issues that our reports had identified led FAA to reduce the funding for them in FAA’s fiscal year 2005 budget request. The ATO says it plans to continue this phased approach to acquiring new systems. Now, during the first phase, FAA is focusing on the Local Area Augmentation System, Controller-Pilot Data Link Communications and Next-Generation Air-to-Ground Communications System. commercial systems have a shorter economic service life than the systems that FAA designs. The ATO could profitably take advantage of the experiences of other countries’ air traffic organizations, one panelist said. He maintained that the ATO should institute “a fundamental requirement and a cultural expectation” that it will review existing technologies before it buys or tries to develop its own. With a multibillion-dollar budget for software and other information technology, he said, the ATo has ample opportunity to save money. Air navigation service business worldwide spends $3 billion to $4 billion a year on writing code for air traffic management software. “We should be using and sharing” the technologies that have already been invented, one panelist said. At least half of that is writing code that “works just fine somewhere else.” on the systems that are used, he said. The ATO is seeking information on technologies and procedures that other countries have already developed, the panelists said. already running in countries, their performance, and their cost. Sharing information on technical standards with international organizations could also help the ATO avoid costly investments in technologies. A shared vision is crucial for a globally based air traffic system, one panelist said. If every country or continent had its own technical standards, an international system could not function effectively, an ATO official said. The following provides additional information from the ATo’s COO and from previous GAO reports and work in the field. approach argued that navigational technology is evolving and shifting from ground-based to cockpit-based systems. He suggested that the private sector could assume the cost of capitalizing the equipment, but “the government’s got to allow that technology to be used, and it hasn’t,” he said. One panelist emphasized the importance of conducting thorough technical evaluations, but said that the government should allow the ATO to change its policies on aircraft separation to allow the technology to do the job. technical benchmarks to promote efficient development, business models that take into account operational trends. As one panelist said, “we have to target the future mix of real operations that we’re really going to see, not build the world’s most perfect system from 1956” Despite their reservations, the panelists generally agreed that stakeholders should not “allow the concept of privatization to be the enemy of moving forward with the ATO,” they said. The ATO is a government organization. third rail of aviation politics. Another panelist emphasized the importance of starting to plan now to accommodate the airplanes that are being bought today to provide service for the next generation. For example, one panelist said that the ATO needed to understand the interconnections between ATC systems and break the big picture into nuggets so that it could clarify for the appropriators why they should not break apart the ATo’s capital investment plan and selectively fund only some components, he said. on technologies that they have already adopted. A technical advisory board made up of system engineers could review proposals for FAA and demand the kinds of data and tests needed to scrub the proposals. Hiring skilled engineers instead of relying on contractors might enable the ATO to develop systems more economically and efficiently, one panelist suggested. This panelist described how a foreign air traffic services organization develops new ATC systems in-house and seldom uses contractors. It now employs skilled engineers, rather than contractors, to develop the systems. stressed the importance of progressing by small steps within the existing system. Small steps might include obtaining good performance and cost information, scoping programs in accordance with current budget projections. It was critical, one panelist said, for the ATO to “have some small early practical successes” to enlist the political support of the user community and help tie the customers to theATO’s mission. Other panelists focused on the obstacles within the system that have been identified as a problem. contract for other air traffic services, such as oceanic, night, en route, or airways facilities services. The A-76 process would then serve not only as a way of saving money but also as “a pilot program for how things could get done,” one panelist said. In the view of another panelist, ongoing government oversight would ensure the safety of contracted operations. “staged outsourcing” of the NAS’s functions might build confidence in the private sector’S ability to provide air traffic. services safely and efficiently. that time will show, when completed, how large a funding gap the ATO faces and how far it will have to go to address that gap. FAA says that it is prepared to identify and eliminate redundancies in the NAS. FAA has already taken some steps to control the costs of ATC modernization. For example, it has adopted the phased approach to implementing new ATC systems that it used under Free Flight Phase 1, called “build a little, test a little.”