Despite association of IRA ownership to individuals with higher incomes, data show that lower- and middle-income individuals also own IRAs. A study by the Congressional Budget Office found that in 2003, 4 percent of workers earning $20,000 to $40,000 contributed to traditional IRAs and 3 percent of these workers contributed to Roth IRas. More households with Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs contribute to their accounts than households with traditional IRas, according to the Investment Company Institute. traditional and Roth IRAs is associated with higher education and income levels. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were headed by an individual with a college degree. Over one- third of these IRA households earned $100,000 or more; about 2 percent earned less than $10,000. Research shows that higher levels of education and household income correlate with a greater propensity to save. It is not surprising that IRA ownership increases as education and incomes rise. The average IRA owner has $1.2 million in assets. from direct contributions, but from transfers, or rollovers, of retirement assets from other retirement plans, including 401(k) plans. These rollovers allow individuals to preserve their retirement savings when they change jobs or retire. From 1998 to 2004, more than 80 percent of funds flowing into IRAs came from rollovers. IRAs play a significantly smaller role in building retirement savings than in preserving them. For example the median amount in a traditional IRA with rollover assets in 2007 was $61,000. while the median amount in a traditional IRA without rollover assets was $30,000. Since 1998, IRA assets have comprised the largest portion of the retirement market. IRA assets in 2004 totaled about $3.5 trillion compared to DC assets of $2.6 trillion and DB Assets of $1.9 trillion. More households own traditional IRAs, which were the first IRAs established, than Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs. In 2007, nearly 33 percent of all households owned traditional IRas, and about 15 percent owned Roth IRas. Simplified Employee Pension IRA (SAR-SEP IRA) contributed to their accounts in 2004, but less than one- third of households with traditional IRAs did so. This, again, may be partly attributed to the emerging role of traditional IR as a means to preserve rollover assets rather than build retirement savings. The median household contribution to traditional IRas was $2,300 compared to the median contribution to Roth IRAs of $3,000. The study noted that this difference may be related to higher contribution limits for employer-sponsored IRAs. Experts offer several proposals to encourage workers to participate in IRAs. They include expanding existing tax credits for moderate- and low-income workers. Automatic enrollment in payroll-deduction IRAs could also increase employee participation. But small business groups and IRA providers said that mandatory automatic enrollment could be burdensome to small employers. The proposals are part of CNN.com’s series, “The Next Generation,” which airs on Sundays at 10 p.m. ET on CNN. Since the early 1980s, roughly half of the private-sector work force has participated in either a defined benefit (DB) retirement plan, commonly known as a pension. Congress created IRAs, in part, to help those individuals not covered by a DB or DC plan save for retirement. Almost half of all U.S. private sector workers in 2006 were employed by firms with fewer than 100 employees, and only 1 in 4 of these workers worked for an employer sponsoring a retirement plan. Many employers with fewer than 100 employees do not offer an employer-sponsored retirement plan for their employees. Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs and several experts we interviewed, individuals are more likely to save in IRAs through payroll deductions than they are without these automatic deposits. Payroll deductions allow workers to contribute to retirement savings automatically before wages are spent, relieving them of making ongoing decisions to save. Some workers overcome a common tendency to procrastinate or not take action to save based on the choices associated with investing or selecting a retirement savings vehicle. participation in 401(k) plans is much higher than in IRAs, which do not typically use payroll deduction. The Congressional Budget Office reported that 29 percent of all workers contributed to a DC plan in 2003. Saving for retirement in the workplace through payroll deductions helps workers save by providing a “commitment device” to make automatic contributions to retirement savings before wages are spent. Such a commitment device helps employees save for retirement before they earn any wages at all, the authors say. Few employers appear to offer their employees the opportunity to contribute to IRAs through payroll deductions. Through payroll-deduction IRA programs, employees may contribute to traditional or Roth IRAs by having their employer withhold an amount determined by the employee and forwarded directly to the employee’s IRA. Small firms may be discouraged from offering these plans because of the requirement that employers must set up a SEP IRA for all employees performing service for the company in 3 of the past 5 years and with more than $500 in compensation for 2007. According to experts and available government data, worker access to employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs appears limited. To address the issue of low retirement plan sponsorship among small employers, Congress created SIMPLE and SEP employer- sponsored IRAs with less burdensome reporting requirements than 401(k) plans. Labor issued a regulation under which an employer could maintain a payroll- Deduction program for employees to contribute to traditional and Roth IRAs without being considered a pension plan under ERISA. SIMPLE IRAs allow eligible employees to direct a portion of their salary, within limits, to a SIMPLE IRA. SEP IRas allow employers to make tax-deductible contributions to their own and each eligible employee’s traditional IRA at higher contribution limits than other IRAs. For example, in 2007, individuals under age 50 were able to contribute up to $10,500 to SIMPLE IRas—more than twice the amount allowed in 2007 for payroll-deduction IRas. Experts report that payroll-deduction IRAs represent costs to employers. Labor: Costs are influenced by the number of employees participating in the program. Some experts reported that such costs were significant, while others reported that they were minimal. But Labor may be unable to readily determine if employers are receiving excessive compensation for the cost of operating such programs, the authors say. programs fall outside the safe harbor and may be considered to have become. employer costs may be significant, particularly for employers without electronic payrolls, they say. Small business revenues are inconsistent and may fluctuate greatly from year to year, making required contributions difficult for some firms. Employers offering SIMPLE IRAs must determine before the beginning of the calendar year whether they will match employee contributions or make nonelective contributions to all employees’ accounts. According to IRA providers, this requirement may discourage some small employers from offering these IRAs. If employers had the flexibility to make additional contributions, some small firms may be unable to commit to these IRas. Small business member organizations and IRA providers said contribution limits for payroll-deduction IRAs do not offer adequate savings incentives to justify the effort in offering these IRAs. Because the contribution limits are significantly lower than those that apply to SIMPLE and SEP IRAs, employers seeking to provide a retirement plan to their employees would be more likely to choose other options. Those options also allow business owners to contribute significantly more to their own retirement account than they would with a payroll-based retirement account. Small business groups say many small employers are unaware that payroll-deduction IRAs are available or that employer contributions are not required. Administration costs associated with setting up and managing IRAs may be a barrier for small employers, particularly those without electronic payroll processing. IRA providers told us employers need greater flexibility in Labor’s guidance. Several bills have been introduced in Congress to expand worker access to payroll- Deductible IRAs, retirement and savings experts say. The goal is to encourage employers to offer IRAs to encourage employees to save for retirement. All workers under age 70½ who lack an employer-sponsored retirement plan could be eligible to contribute to a traditional IRA through payroll deduction, should their employer offer such a program. Experts told us payroll-deduction IRAs are the easiest way for small employers to offer their employees a retirement savings vehicle. Payroll- deduction IRAs have fewer tax consequences than traditional IRAs. The IRS allows employers to deduct up to $10,000 from a worker's salary for IRA contributions, but not more than $5,000. to any questions the subcommittee may have at this time. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tamara Cross (Assistant Director), Matt Barranca, Susan Pachikara, Raun Lazier, Joseph Applebaum, Susan Aschoff, Doreen Feldman, Edward Nannenhorn, MaryLynn Sergent, Roger Thomas, Walter Vance, and Jennifer Wong. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Barbara D. Bovbjerg, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income Security Issues at (202) 512-7215. subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. IRS enforces Title II of ERISA for all types of IRAs. ERISA provides tax benefits for retirement plan sponsors and participants. Labor generally has interpretive jurisdiction over prohibited transactions. IRS has responsibility for imposing an excise tax on parties that engage in a prohibited transaction. Most assets flowing into IRAs come not from IRAs, but from other investments, such as stocks, bonds, and real estate, which are subject to ERISA Title I requirements. The Internal Revenue Code contains various statutory exemptions from prohibited transaction rules. Data on the number of employers offering employees employer-sponsored IRAs and payroll-deduction IRAs is limited. Based on available data, employee access to SIMPLE and SEP IRAs appears limited. Under ERISA Title I, there is no reporting requirement for SIMPLE IRAs, and there is an alternative method available for reporting of employer- sponsored SEp IRAs. Payroll-deductions are not subject to ERISA requirements for employer-sponsored retirement plans and have no reporting requirements. IRS and Labor share oversight responsibilities for IRAs. Payroll-deduction IRAs are not under Labor’s jurisdiction. IRS has responsibility over tax rules for establishing and maintaining traditional and Roth IRAs that may be funded through employee contributions. Congress may wish to consider whether payroll- deduction IRAs should have some direct oversight. I.annual employer contributions are not mandatory. I.E.S.A. also oversees the fiduciary standards for employer-sponsored IRAs and seeks to ensure that fiduciaries, such as employers, operate their plans in the best interest of participants. Currently, IRAs play a major role in preserving retirement assets but a very small role in creating them. Millions of U.S. workers have no retirement savings plan through their employer. Employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs afford an easier way for workers, particularly those who work for their employers. ERISA Title I programs can help you save for retirement on your own or with an employer-sponsored IRA. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Currently, Labor has no process in place to monitor employer- sponsored IRAs. IRS does not have oversight over employer management of these programs. Without direct oversight, employees may lack confidence that payroll-deduction IRAs will provide them with adequate protections to participate in such programs, the authors say. The authors suggest that Congress consider whether payroll- Deduction IRas should have some direct oversight.. If current oversight vulnerabilities are not addressed, future problems could emerge as more employers and workers participate in employer-sponsored IRAs, they say. A minimum level of oversight is important to ensure that employers are acting in accordance with the law and within Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs. Labor officials said that they do not have a process for actively seeking out and determining whether employer- sponsored IRAs are engaging in prohibited transactions or not abiding by their fiduciary responsibilities. Instead, Labor primarily relies on participant complaints as sources of investigative leads to detect employers that are not making timely and complete IRA contributions.consistent reporting of these data could give policymakers and others a more comprehensive view of the IRA landscape. current focus in Congress on expanding payroll-deduction IRAs. We are continuing our work on IRAs, and are beginning to examine the fees that are charged IRA participants. Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement and I would be happy to respond to your questions about the issue. I am pleased that the Committee on Ways and Means and this subcommittee are interested in retirement savings, particularly IRAs and look forward to continuingOur work with you. We will continue to work together on this issue. IRS does publish some of the information it receives on IRAs through its Statistics of Income program. IRS officials told us that they are currently facing several challenges that affect their ability to publish IRA information more regularly. More consistent reporting of IRA information could help them ensure that their analyses reflect current and accurate information about retirement assets, such as the fair market value of IRAs. Since IRS is the only agency that has data on all IRA participants, it can be useful to assess the extent to which IRAs are being utilized. not due until the following year after the filing of the tax return. IRS officials said that these returns have numerous errors, making it difficult and time-consuming for IRS to edit them for statistical analysis. They also said that the IRA rules, and changes to those rules, are difficult for some taxpayers, employers, and trustees to understand, which contributes to filing errors. Also, in the past, one particular IRS employee, who has recently retired, took the lead in developing a statistical analysis on IRAs. Since IRS does not have a process in place to train another employee to take over, this could happen again. IRS has published IRA data for tax years 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2004, but none for tax year 2003. Labor officials and retirement and savings experts told us that without consistent reporting of IRA data, a knowledge gap was created. IRS officials told us they recognize this problem and are in the early stages of determining ways to correct it. In addition, IRS officials said they had problems with the IRAData for taxyear 2003, which prevented them from issuing a report for that year.. that low- income workers may opt out of automatic enrollment programs or be more inclined to make early withdrawals. Experts also said increasing public awareness of the importance of saving for retirement and educating individuals about how to do so could increase IRA participation. Earlier this month, we reported that changes at IRS and Labor could encourage employers to offer IRAs and improve IRA information and oversight. We found that regulators lack information about employer- sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs that could help determine whether these vehicles help workers without employer-sponsored pension plans build retirement savings. Congress and regulators should ensure that there is adequate information on employer-sponsored IRAs and payroll-deduction IRAs. Providing complete and consistent data on IRAs would help ensure that regulators have the information they need to make informed decisions about how to increase coverage and facilitate retirement savings. The limited reporting requirements were meant to encourage small employers to offer retirement savings vehicles to employees. There is also a need for agencies that are responsible for overseeing retirement Savings vehicles to have the info necessary to do so. IRS cannot share the information it receives on employer-sponsored IRAs with Labor because it is confidential tax information. Labor also does not receive relevant information from employers, such as annual financial reports, as it does from private pension plan sponsors. Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey surveys employee benefit plans in private establishments, receiving information on access, participation, and take- up rates for DB and DC plans. Without such information, experts said they are unable to determine how many employers and employees participate in payroll-deduction IRAs. who offer these IRAs is limited and we were unable to determine how many employers actually do so. An IRS evaluation of employer-filed W-2 forms estimated that 190,000 employers sponsored SIMPLE IRAs in 2005. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that 8 percent of private sector workers in firms with fewer than 100 employees participated in a SIMPLE IRA in 2005, and 2 percent of these workers participate in a SEP IRA. The IRS estimated that190,000 Employers sponsored SIMPL IRas in 2005; 8 percent participated in SEP IRAs. The reporting requirements for employer-sponsored IRAs are limited. IRS does collect some information on these IRAs through several ‘information’ forms provided by financial institutions and employers. These forms provide information on salary-reduction contributions to employer- sponsored IRAs, as well as information on IRA contributions, fair market value, and distributions. For example, information on retirement plans are reported annually by employers and others to IRS on its Form W-2. The forms contain details on the type of plan offered by the employer.