long-term contracts, as well as the re-renewal of shorter term contracts begun in the 1990s. To offset the budget authority requirements for Section 8 contract renewals, the Congress encouraged HUD in 1995 to begin using available unexpended budget authority that had accumulated over the years. Renewing expiring contracts will require a sharp increase in budget authority over the next few years. The sharp growth in expirations has two causes: First, the number of contracts expiring for the first time will increase sharply in the coming years.  HUD provides housing subsidies through nearly 4,300 contracts with local housing agencies and state housing finance agencies. Housing agencies receive a fee from HUD for administering the tenant-based program. As the federal budget deficit grew larger, HUD reduced contract terms to reduce the amount of budget authority it needed to set aside to fully fund the contracts over their whole terms. HUD’s actions have resulted in contract lengths ranging from as long as 15 years to as short as 1 year. HUD estimates that the cost of Section 8 contract renewals will increase from $2.5 billion in fiscal year 1997 to $10.5billion in fiscalyear 2002.  HUD does not factor the effect of this requirement into its budget estimates for Section 8 tenant-based assistance. Reserves accumulate in the housing agencies’ reserve accounts because the agencies do not make housing assistance payments to landlords for housing units not under lease. The build-up of reserves is indicative of long-standing problems in HUD’s tenant- based program, the report says. It adds that HUD could not determine whether housing agencies actually needed additional funding or were using available reserves for contingencies. was, in part, required by law. To build up reserves, HUD based its estimate of the amount of budget authority needed to fund the program on two conservative assumptions. HUD assumed that all certificates were in constant use, even though the leasing of housing units would necessarily take some time to accomplish. As a result, the larger housing agencies, especially those receiving new certificates every year, developed significant reserves. For instance, currently, a statutory requirement exists that once a once a housing certificate is used, it is no longer required to be renewed. Under the certificate program, an assisted household pays 30 percent of its adjusted income for rent. In contrast, households with vouchers may elect to pay more or less than 30 percent. HUD enters into contracts with local and state housing agencies, including public housing agencies. These agencies certify applicants for eligibility, inspect units found by the tenant for compliance with housing standards, and verify that the lease terms meet HUD’s requirements. When the housing agencies pay the rent subsidies to owners of private rental housing for the assisted households, HUD also pays the housing agency a statutorily determined administrative fee. In fiscal year 1998, the Congress appropriated $25 billion in discretionary budget authority for the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s programs. HUD provides rental housing assistance that enables about 4.7 million low-income households to obtain safe, decent, and affordable housing. HUD assists about two-thirds of these households through its Section 8 housing assistance program. In fiscal year 1996, HUD spent about $7 billion to provide tenant-based rental assistance.. HUD predicted an annual need of $150 million for fiscal years 1998 through 2002 to amend its contracts with public housing agencies. In the past, HUD field offices deducted tenants’ expected contributions to rent from the local fair market rent. HUD did not compare these estimates with the actual cost of that assistance for the most recently completed year. As a result, HUD overfunded many tenant-based contracts, the report says. The report says HUD should have taken into account the amount of budget authority each housing agency is likely to need annually to operate its tenant- based program. It should also have taken account of the cost to HUD of assisting low-income families to live in decent housing. 15 years—may not have been sufficient to provide adequate rental assistance over the life of the contract. In fiscal year 1995, HUD began reducing the terms for renewed expiring contracts from 3 to 5 years to 1 year. This change to shorter contract terms has made estimating contract renewal needs more certain because changes in housing costs or tenants’ incomes could be predicted more easily over the shorter period. Because of the greater certainty about the future costs, HUD does not appear to need additional funding for tenant-based amendments beyond fiscal year 1998. stated that the Budget Office was unaware of the program office’s budgeting assumption that all tenant-based certificates are in constant use. As stipulated by current appropriations law, after a certificate is turned in by the current holder, the housing agency must wait 90 days before reissuing it to a new household. But because the budget estimate assumes constant use, the effect is to estimate more funding than will actually be needed. HUD could recapture such excess funding when it analyzes the housing.  HUD’s accounting and information systems did not contain reliable, complete, or accurate data on Section 8 contracts. As a result of these problems, HUD had to continually revise its Section 8 estimates and often request of expiring contracts. HUD could not assure the Congress that its Section8 budget requests for fiscal years 1992 and 1993 were reasonably accurate. HUD continued to experience problems developing accurate and reliable Section 8 contract renewal and amendment estimates. For example, the OIG found that because of a breakdown in the budgeting process, the Department's budget office did not use more reliable estimates developed by the program offices for the initial fiscal year 1996 budget submission.  HUD and the Office of Management and Budget formed a joint team to evaluate HUD’s fiscal year 1992 contract renewal and cost amendment estimates. The team determined that HUD was unable to accurately estimate Section 8 contract renewal needs. HUD has a lengthy history of budget estimating problems and faces some uncertainty now about personnel to oversee and make policy for the budgeting function. We are concerned with the agency's ability to sustain such recent corrective actions and implement those it has planned, the authors say. The authors are not making recommendations at this time. not available from its accounting system at the time. HUD’s fiscal year 1998 budget request contained errors and insupportable estimates. HUD plans to no longer extend expiring tenant-based contracts with excess budget authority within the program reserves. HUD has recognized the need for improving coordination and oversight among program, budget, and financial management officials in order to achieve more reliable budget estimates. Although HUD recognizes these problems and has plans to correct them, it is too soon to measure these problems.  HUD has placed all departmental budget operations under the Office of the CFO. HUD also is in the process of implementing two changes directly related to the budget estimate. All program divisions are hiring a chief financial officer to mirror the operations of the Department’s Office ofThe C FO. HUD will consolidate the 10 accounting divisions in HUD’S field offices into one office responsible for all accounting operations. The agency also has implemented a risk management program, directed by the office, to protect HUD's fiscal integrity. budget authority for programs that are at the level of the tenant-based and project-based Section 8 programs. The standards do not, however, require agencies to disclose such information below the major budget account level. Each agency should disclose information that is most useful to the users of their financial statements. In a note to its fiscal year 1996, the Department of the Treasury said it would disclose the amount obligated for certain programs, including the number of programs that would be funded by the federal government. the program office to ensure adequate oversight. At the time of our review, a chief financial officer for the tenant-based program had not been hired. Second, the Office of the CFO is developing a model to analyze all budget submissions, including the contract renewal estimate. Previously, the departmental budget office accepted the cost estimates with only limited review of the supporting documentation that detailed how the estimates were developed. Although the Office Of The CFO also plans to develop budget estimating policies and procedures that will be used in the future. unanticipated costs. HUD valued the welfare supplement at $138 per unit ($46 in 1997 and $92 in 1998) HUD developed the revised unit cost using only the program’s historical expenditure data from the tenant-based information system. HUD would not supplement the average unit cost with additional amounts even if they made sense from a policy standpoint unless the supplementary amounts could be supported with historical or other data. The amount to reflect the impact of welfare reform and an amount to cover contingent costs. 1997, HUD determined that this amount was unnecessary. HUD found that its assumption that housing agencies would begin to feel a significant impact from welfare reform starting in 1997 was not borne out by what was happening across the country. Instead, the states’ early experiences with the impact of welfare reform showed little or no increased cost to the program as a result of the falling incomes of assisted housing residents. As a result, adding a cost factor to address the impact on welfare reform was not necessary. In addition to the inflated unit cost estimate, HUD’s fiscal year 1998. determine whether cost estimates are adequately supported. In commenting on a draft of this report, HUD agreed with the report's major findings and conclusions. HUD also provided several comments to improve the report’s factual representation and to ensure clarity. HUD believed that we should recognize that its initial estimate of the impact of welfare reform on fiscal year 1998 budget needs was based on the best information available. We agreed and made changes to reflect this concern. The report was released to the public on Tuesday. its tenant-based contract renewals by over $1 billion. This error was caused by an ineffective internal budget process that lacked adequate oversight and did not make effective use of actual expenditure data for the program. HUD’s estimate contained contingency costs that could not be justified on the basis of program contract renewal estimate. Although program officials said that the funding was needed to cover unanticipated costs in the program, they could not provide supporting information to justify their request. Subsequently, HUD adjusted its fiscal year 1998 budget request and removed this request for funding. In February 1997, HUD used a value of $6,386 as the average unit cost for renewing tenant-based housing assistance contracts. The value is based on the program’s actual expenditure data for fiscal year 1996. But it also includes several supplementary amounts for administrative fees paid to housing agencies, contingent or unexpected costs, and increased program expenditures caused by residents losing their welfare assistance in 1997 and 1998. We and HUD determined that adding these three amounts to theaverage unit cost either could not be justified or was not necessary. the office of the comptroller, and the departmental budget office could have prevented this error. For example, the program office’s comptroller reviewed the actual disbursement data obtained from the accounting system but did not review the final average unit cost calculation until after HUD submitted its budget to the Congress. The second supplementary amount was for covering unknown costs or contingencies. For this supplement, HUD added approximately $204 to the unit cost, or 2 weeks of disbursements. Also, HUD did not conduct an independent review of the added costs and underlying basis for the estimate. modify its information system to calculate the actual average cost per unit before completing the annual settlement process at each housing agency. HUD plans to improve the security over access to the unit tables within the information system and to compare monthly the number of contracted units in the system to the previous month’s total to reconcile any differences. Finally, to make sure that HUD settles all program costs at the end of the year with the housing agency with the help of a third-party agency, HUD will change the way it calculates program costs. and 1996 also appeared to be overstated. To help correct the deficiencies with its accounting and budgeting for Section 8 contracts, HUD implemented a new Section 8 tenant-based information system in fiscal year 1995. The system contains the actual cost incurred by each housing agency for providing rental assistance. HUD officials believe that these improvements will correct past problems and enhance their efforts to more accurately estimate their Section 8 budget needs.. HUD plans to eliminate overfunding and improve the accuracy of the budget estimating for contract renewals.  HUD’s tenant-based information system is generally reliable, the report says. The report provides a draft of this report to HUD for review and comment. The Congress directed HUD to recapture unexpended budget authority that was not needed to meet the current obligations of the Section 8 tenant- based program. The U.S. House of Representatives is scheduled to vote on the bill on Thursday, June 14. The vote is expected to be followed by the Senate vote on June 21.  HUD recaptured $7.7 billion of the excess budget authority and placed it in the Preservation Account. About $1.2 billion was left in the participating housing agencies’ accounts as a reserve for contingencies equal to about 2 months of assisted housing payments to landlords. The remaining $1 billion was not recaptured because it represented amounts that had not yet been credited to housing agencies' reserve accounts at the time of the recapture. Also established the Section 8 Reserve Preservation Account as an accounting repository for recaptured excess budget Authority. After two congressional rescissions totaling $4.2 billion, about $3.5 billion remains in the Reserve Preservation Account. While a reserve for contingencies is prudent, it is not clear that a reserve of $1.2billion is reasonable and necessary. A report from HUD’s tenant-based information system shows that, in fiscal year 1996, housing agencies used $353 million in excess budget authority to cover contingencies. In fiscal year 1997, HUD used about $300 million in extra budget authority. Housing Authority Directors Association reviewed HUD’s budget formulation process for the Section 8 tenant-based program. We found that HUD had problems with its budget submission; but we also found thatHUD had corrective actions planned or in process to improve its budgeting process. HUD overestimated its need for funding to amend existing housing assistance contracts because accurate data were not available, we found. We discussed programmatic, budgeting, and financial management issues with HUD officials from the Offices of Public and Indian Housing, Budget, the Chief Financial Officer. Housing said that the report presents a balanced assessment. The CFO and officials of the housing office provided several comments to improve the report’s clarity, and we incorporated them as appropriate. Accurate budget estimates are essential to federal agencies meeting their fiscal responsibilities because such estimates facilitate sound policy decisions and effective funding trade-offs. Since 1989, its estimates of Section 8 contract renewals have been either too low or too high. This inability to accurately forecast has been a problem since 1989. $9.9 billion. This was HUD’s second attempt to estimate this figure. The Department revised its initial estimate after an independent accounting firm determined that critical data used could not be verified because they were maintained manually. Price Waterhouse LLP performed tests on a statistical sample of 158 housing agencies to confirm the accuracy of HUD's estimate. HUD concluded that the amount of unexpended budget authority that was not needed to meet existing housing assistance needs at the beginning of fiscal year 1998 would be $9. 9 billion. contingencies, far less than the amount that HUD has reserved for this purpose. During fiscal year 1996, an additional $1.4 billion in excess budget authority accrued. HUD plans to adjust its reserve level after it examines in more detail housing agencies’ actual use of available unexpended budget authority in fiscal years 1996 and 1997. HUD would need to annually review each tenant-based housing assistance contract it has with housing agencies with the intent of recapturing amounts above the level prudently needed. $9.9 billion of budget authority excess to program needs has accumulated in housing agencies’ reserve accounts. Congress rescinded $4.2 billion, and after other adjustments, the current balance is about $3.5 billion. Figure 2.1 provides a chronology of the actions taken by the Congress and HUD to identify and control Section 8 tenant-based funding. In May 1997, HUD estimated that the amount of unexpended budget authority that exceeded the amount needed to meet contract requirements was $20.7 billion. HUD recaptured $7.7billion of this excess balance and retained the difference of $2.2billion. provided the amount of unspent budget authority credited to each housing agency at the end of the agency’s fiscal year. A second means for HUD to improve its reporting of excess unexpended budget authority in the Section 8 tenant-based program is through its financial statements. We believe that to adequately address economic contingencies, such as rising rental rates or falling tenant incomes, HUD should better informed in the future of the amounts of excess budget authority. We recommend that the Secretary of HUD direct the Office of the Chief Financial Officer to modify the agency's consolidated financial statements so that they identify the portions of the unexpending appropriations. of available unexpended funds would far exceed the $1.6 billion that HUD disclosed in its fiscal year 1998 budget request. HUD intentionally established program reserves during the early years of a multiyear housing assistance contract to help fund the program in the later years. HUD is not required to and does not currently report in its annual budget justifications the aggregate amount of excess budget authority credited to housing agencies’ reserve accounts. Until HUD’s recent improvements to its information system, such reporting could not be done accurately.  HUD reviewed and discussed the results of Price Waterhouse LLP’s independent evaluation of available unexpended funds in the tenant-based program. We contacted national associations representing housing agencies. These organizations were the Council of Large Public Housing Authorities, the National Association for Housing and Redevelopment Officials, and the Public. We discussed the need for retaining unexpending funds in housing agencies’ program reserve accounts with housing agencies' program directors and other HUD officials. We also discussed the needs of housing agencies with HUD's Chief Financial Officer and Inspector General.