In February 2002, the Navy had only 91 EA-6Bs available for operations instead of the 104 required. As a result, while the Navy has been able to meet operational commitments, it has been unable to meet some of its training and exercise requirements. The Navy plans to replace a total of 67 wing center sections.that has been delayed until March 2004. But wing fatigue has continued to grow, and the Navy may have to ground additional aircraft. It is currently taking action to remedy wing fatigue and engine failures. The Navy will spend $4.4 million each for such replacements for 17 aircraft in the fiscal year 2002 budget. In 2001, the Navy also began experiencing problems with the EA-6B’s engines. Premature failure of certain engine bearings caused some engines to fail, and it may have caused the crash of two aircraft in 2001. The Navy grounded over 50 engines until they could be overhauled, and the Navy is programming funds for 10 more wing replacements for each year in the Future Years Defense Plan. EA-6Bs are included in all aircraft carrier deployments and support the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. DOD designated the EA-6B as a “low density, high demand” asset to support worldwide joint military operations. To meet a requirement to field 104 aircraft out of a total inventory of 124 (with an average age of 19 years), the Navy refurbished 20 retired EA-4Bs. In 2001, 2 EA-5Bs crashed, reducing the total inventory to 122 aircraft. The Navy says it needs a replacement aircraft to begin entering the force by 2009 if requirements are to be met. The Navy has been upgrading its EA-6B electronic warfare equipment over the years, and it is currently in need of a new fleet of the aircraft. All of the current aircraft will be out of the Navy's fleet by 2015, and the Navy needs to have a replacement ready by 2009 to meet force structure requirements in 2009. The new aircraft will have a range of up to 2,000 miles. The constant deployment of this “low density” EA-6B fleet for contingency operations has contributed to its deterioration and to other maintenance- related problems. The constant deployments also added to personnel problems in terms of quality of life. The Navy expects to have them back in service by late this year. But it expects to be back to full service by the end of the year. The U.S. Navy has not commented on the report. The report was compiled by CNN's John Defterios and published by the Center for Military Analysis. EA-6Bs and EC-130s saw combat in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. Air defenses in Afghanistan were relatively weak compared to those faced by U.S. aircraft in Yugoslavia. This gave the EA-6B an opportunity to jam air defense systems in Europe to their limits. The aircraft can also be used to keep low-flying aircraft such as the Army’s Apache attack helicopters out of combat to reduce risk from infrared missile threats. The EA- 6B is now primarily used for radar jamming and for communications jamming. to exploit new techniques to jam ground communications by working with the EC-130 and other electronic intelligence gathering aircraft. Since our January 2001 report, the services have had some success in improving their suppression capabilities, but they have not reached a level needed to counter future threats. When the Air Force retired the EF-111 without a replacement, the Navy’s EA-6B became DOD's primary airborne radar jammer. High demand for the aircraft has exacerbated current wing and engine problems, and the Navy has been unable to meet its overall requirements.  suppression aircraft such as EA-6B and the now-retired EF-111 and F-4G played a vital role in protecting other U.S. aircraft from radar-guided missile systems. Strike aircraft were normally not permitted to conduct air operations unless protected by these suppression aircraft. The F/A-18 used antiradiation missiles that homed in on enemy radar systems to destroy them. The Air Force replaced the F- 4G with a less capable aircraft, the F/16CG. did not upgrade or replace the EF-111. According to DOD, countries have sought to make their air defenses more resistant to suppression. These efforts include increasing the mobility of their surface-to-air missiles and radar equipment, connecting radars together into integrated air defense systems, and adding sophisticated capabilities so that the radar can detect aircraft while turned on for a shorter period of time. These defenses use various means to track and target aircraft, including modern telecommunications equipment and computers to create networks of early warning radar and missile system radar. The United States experienced heavy aircraft and aircrew losses to enemy air defenses during the Vietnam War. Since then, the services have recognized air defense suppression as a necessary component of air operations. U.S. suppression aircraft focus on trying to neutralize, degrade, or destroy the enemy’s air defense radar equipment. When a crisis arises, suppression aircraft are among the first to be called in and the last to leave. Radar is the primary means used by enemy forces to detect, track, and target U.s. aircraft with missiles and guns. suppressing enemy air defenses after they begin emitting radio-frequency signals. Also, in some cases, aircraft launch antiradiation missiles that can search for and destroy enemy radars if they are turned on. At some risk to the aircraft and aircrews, suppression aircraft must be in the vicinity of the enemy air defense to complete their mission. Enemy radars in the past were usually fixed in position, operated independent of each other, and turned on for lengthy periods of time. All of which made them relatively easy to find and suppress. U.S. suppression aircraft have been continuously deployed to protect fighter aircraft maintaining the no-fly zones over Iraq. These aircraft have also been deployed to Yugoslavia and Afghanistan. In 1999, during Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia and Kosovo, these aircraft were extremely important for protecting strike aircraft from enemy radar-guided missiles. However, according to the Defense Intelligence Agency,these aircraft were unable to protect strike aircraft.from aircraft engines. The U.S.-led coalition forces in Iraq are still using these suppression aircraft. destroy their integrated air defense system because Yugoslav forces often engaged in elaborate efforts to protect their air defense assets. In two separate incidents, Yugoslav forces managed to shoot down an F-117 stealth fighter and a F-16CG. In addition to the two losses, the inability of the United States to counter Yugoslav air defenses that included radar and infrared guided missiles made it necessary for U.S. forces to (1) fly thousands of dedicated suppression missions, and (2) push back with air strikes. modifying its radar signal receiver and related equipment. The modification program, known as the Improved Capability Program (ICAP) III, provides improved radar locating and jamming capabilities. The Navy expects ICAP III to reach initial operational capability in 2005 and to be installed on all EA-6Bs by 2010, about the time when the aircraft begins to reach the end of its service life. As of January 2002, ICap III engineering and manufacturing development was about 94 percent complete, and the modification began testing on the first aircraft in November 2001. complete its inventory objective because of competing priorities. Also, the Navy is upgrading the HARM missile used to attack shipborne and ground-based radars. The first phase of the upgrade improves missile accuracy by incorporating global positioning and inertial navigation systems into the missile. A second upgrade, the Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile, will add millimeter wave capability to allow the missile to target radars that have stopped emitting. While the Air Force employs the H ARM missile as well, it is not involved in the Harm upgrade program. The F-16C/Ds will be modified to carry the HARM Targeting System. The Advanced Target Pod will enable them to deliver precision-guided munitions. The upgrade (known as R-6) provides better and faster targeting information to the missile, but even with this pod the F- 16CJ still lacks some of the capabilities of the retired F-4G. Once 31 additional systems are delivered in 2002, the Air Force will have a total inventory of 202 systems, short of the original goal of 1.1 systems per aircraft. Navy is considering using a modified version of the ICAP III equipment on whatever follow-on suppression aircraft are developed and fielded. The Air Force is procuring 30 additional F-16CJ suppression aircraft to meet force structure requirements for the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. To fully implement its concept of operations for the Expeditionary forces, the Air Air Force also plans to increase the capability of the latest model F- 16C/Ds (block 40) and the F-15CJs (block 25) The Air Force is also upgrading the capabilities of the EC-130 Compass Call Aircraft, which perform primarily communications jamming missions. The upgrades are intended to improve the aircraft’s jamming capabilities, reliability, and maintainability. Officials also stated that they are considering funding for additional R-7 HARM Targeting Systems for F-16CJs and F- 16C/Ds in the 2004 budget submission. The Air Force has a total of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being funded for upgrade. The Miniature Air Launched Decoy (MALD) could make a significant contribution to aircraft survivability. MALD is supposed to mimic an aircraft and draw enemy air defenses away from the real aircraft. A recently completed Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration, it had been funded by the Air Force. The services expect to field both systems in 2004, but they face technology challenges and/or a lack of funding priority for many of these programs. The Air Force analysis has shown that MALD could make an important contribution to the survivability of aircraft. Force for an initial small procurement of 300 decoys, with potential for further procurement. According to the Air Force, after experiencing technical problems, MALD did not meet user needs. The Navy has been developing its own decoy, the Improved Tactical Air Launched Decoy (ITALD), but it has procured only part of its inventory objective. Despite recurring congressional increases for the past several fiscal years, the Navy has not submitted budget requests for ITALDs or procured units to Air Force. The Navy projects that the declining EA-6B inventory will be insufficient to meet DOD's needs beyond 2009. The Air Force’s F-16CJ fleet has grown, but it still lacks some of the capabilities of the F-4G, the aircraft it replaced. Also, the Air Force and the Navy have improvements underway for other systems such as the EC-130 and antiradiation missiles. To the extent there are gaps in suppression capabilities, U.S. fighter aircraft and helicopters must rely on self-protection equipment. The Navy does not have enough EA-6Bs to meet DOD’s suppression needs due to wing fatigue and engine problems that have grounded aircraft. The services have some programs underway to improve this self-protection equipment, such as developing new towed decoys, but, as discussed below, these programs have been hampered by technical and funding issues. Because of its limited numbers and high rate of failure, the Navy has been forced to rely on the U.S. Air Force to suppress enemy air defenses. aircraft make it essential that other aircraft have the ability to protect themselves from enemy defenses. The services have already identified serious reliability problems with current self-protection systems on U.S. combat aircraft. Most of the current systems use older technology and have logistics support problems due to obsolescence. In reviewing test results using the new Joint Service Electronic Combat System Tester, we found that aircraft the services believed to be mission worthy had problems with self- protection systems. Also, as we reported last year, the self- Protection systems on strike aircraft may have more problems than the services estimate. capable were not because of faults in their electronic combat systems that were undetected by older test equipment. For example, 41 of 44 F-15C aircraft and 10 of 10 F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were subsequently found to have one or more faults. The faults ranged from the identification of parts needing to be replaced inside the electronic combat system, to the wiring, antennas, and control units that connect the systems to the aircraft. Coupled with the problems in the suppression aircraft, these shortcomings could be fatal. create survivability problems for the aircraft should they encounter significant enemy air defense capabilities in some future conflict. The services have some programs underway to improve self-protection capabilities such as the joint Navy and Air Force Integrated Defensive Electronic Countermeasures (IDECM) system and the Precision Location and Identification (PLAID) system. The IDECM system will provide the F-15, F/A-18E/F, and B-1B aircraft with improved self- protection through jammers and towed decoys. only intended to address the airborne electronic attack aspect of the suppression mission. The analysis, completed in December 2001, concluded that the services needed a standoff system or a combination of systems to operate at a distance from enemy targets. The Navy took the lead on the joint analysis with participation by all the services. A stand-in system that would act as a backup for aircraft self-protection systems was also needed, the analysis said. The Air Force's MALD program, and the Air Force’s EC-130 modifications, were also needed. issues with various DOD contractors, including RAND Corporation, Northrup-Grumman Corporation, General Atomics Aeronautical Systems, Incorporated, and Raytheon Systems Company. We reviewed pertinent DOD, service, and contractor documents addressing the status of suppression capabilities, plans for maintaining them, and potential solutions for closing the gap in capabilities. Specific locations we visited are listed in appendix I. We performed our review from October 2001 through August 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. The head of a federal agency is required under 31 U.S.C. 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to The report was compiled by the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Defense Intelligence Agency. If you or your staff have any questions, please contact me on (202)512-4841. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.gov. the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs not later than 60 days after the date of the report and to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations with the agency’s first request for appropriations. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of the Army, Air Force, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and interested congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the Congressional Research Service. Coordination and Oversight Group to coordinate operational requirements for airborne electronic attack. A key activity of the group is to coordinate Navy and Air Force proposals for replacing the EA-6B. In June 2002, the services presented their proposals for follow-on capabilities to the Office of the Secretary of Defense. According to the services, the Navy proposed to use the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet to attack U.S. targets in Europe and the Middle East. The Air Force proposed to replace the F-16 with a F-18C/F/A/F Hornet. The development of systems to replace the EA-6B will help close the gap between DOD’s suppression capabilities and needs. However, the service proposals that are currently being considered by DOD do not provide an integrated, comprehensive solution to the overall suppression needs. The Joint Requirements Coordination and Oversight Group provides a mechanism to coordinate the services’ efforts, but it has not been directed to develop a comprehensive strategy. Other assessments have also pointed to the lack of a coordinated approach to addressing the gap in air suppression capabilities. Congress expressed concerns that DOD did not have a serious plan for a successor to the EA-6B aircraft. Congress directed DOD to conduct the Airborne Electronic Attack Analysis of Alternatives. DOD indicated in its response to our January 2001 report that the analysis would lead to a DOD-wide strategy and balanced set of acquisition programs to address the overall gaps between suppression needs and capabilities. However, it was limited to assessing options for replacing the EA/6B rather than assessing the needs of the overall suppression mission. replace the EA-6B with an electronic attack version of its new F/A-18E/F fighter and attack aircraft. Air Force proposed adapting the B-52H bomber for standoff suppression by adding jamming pods to it. Stand-in suppression capability provided by a MALD-type decoy with jamming capabilities or an unmanned aerial vehicle equipped with jammers. DOD is currently conducting an additional analysis of the proposals, and the Secretary will decide later this year what proposals to include in the fiscal year. The analysis established the capabilities of the EA-6B upgraded with ICAP III as the foundation for any future system. It presented the Navy and the Air Force with detailed models of estimated costs and capabilities of 27 mixes of new and/or upgraded aircraft to consider for follow-on electronic attack capabilities. These options ranged in estimated 20-year life cycle costs from $20 billion to $80 billion. In conjunction with the analysis, the services formed a Joint Requirements committee to consider the options. help correct some of the problems DOD faces in electronic warfare acquisition programs. While DOD has not established a coordinating entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has recognized the need for such entities in other cross-service initiatives areas such as the development and fielding of unmanned aerial vehicles. The strategy should provide the means to identify and prioritize promising technologies, determine the funding, time frames, and responsibilities needed to develop and acquire systems. It should also establish evaluation mechanisms to track progress in achieving objectives. The Institute for Defense Analyses studied problems in acquiring electronic warfare systems. The Institute found several causes for the problems, including uncertainties in characterizing rapidly changing threats and systems requirements. Among other things, the Institute recommended that DOD establish central offices for electronic warfare matters in the Joint Chiefs of Staff and in each service, create a senior oversight panel, and prepare an annual electronic warfare roadmap to be used by the military. The report was published in the Journal of Defense Studies and Analyses, a publication of the Institute for Defence Analyses. air defense suppression mission continues to be essential for maintaining air superiority. Over the past several years, the quantity and quality of the services’ suppression equipment have declined while enemy air defense tactics and equipment have improved. DOD has recognized a gap exists in suppression capabilities but has made little progress in closing it, the authors say. They say progress in improving capabilities has been hampered by the lack of a comprehensive strategy, cross-service coordination, and funding commitments that address the overall suppression needs. The authors say DOD relies on individual service programs to fill the void but these programs have not historically received of Systems Integration for Electronic Warfare. a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. We continue to believe that a formal coordinating entity needs to be established to bring the services together to develop an integrated, cost-effective strategy for addressing overall joint air defense suppression needs. A strategy is needed to identify mission objectives and guide efforts to develop effective and integrated solutions for improving suppression capabilities. We believe that creation of a comprehensive strategy and effective coordinating entity would strengthen DOD’s ability to compete for funding and address the gap.