The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their format as well as on the GAO Web site. The GAO evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to Congress. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site daily. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/Fraudnet.htm, E-mails: fraudnet@gao, or 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report for 14 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional committees, the Chairman, FCC; the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information, Department of Commerce; and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. If you have any questions about this report, please call me at 202- 512-2834. Key contacts and major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. the entity must obtain their addresses from among the allocations made by ARIN to their Internet backbone provider. ISPs and end users with whom we spoke expressed concern about method of IP address allocation. In addition to those named above, Naba Barkakati, John Karikari, Faye Morrison, Lynn Musser, Madhav Panwar, Ilga Semeiks, and Mindi Weisenbloom made key contributions to this report. The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities. Several ISPs and end users expressed concern about the manner in which Internet addresses are allocated. Most ISPs and other end users do not directly obtain their own IP addresses. Instead, they instead receive a block of IP addresses from a backbone provider. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons, the authors say.. The method of allocating IP addresses in large blocks enables backbone routers to operate efficiently. Some of the ISPs and. end users with whom we spoke also told us that it makes it difficult for smaller. entities to switch backbone providers. a new block of addresses from the new backbone provider. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of customers due to a change of IP addresses. A few also told us that it is not uncommon for an ISP to retain a relationship with its original backbone provider—paying for a minimal level of connectivity to that provider. We found that the degree of difficulty in changing address space depends on how an individual company’s computer network is configured. It can be time consuming and costly to change address space. use, there is concern about the growth in the number of routing tables entries. Historically, IP addresses were organized into three commonly used classes—Classes A, B, and C. For Class A, there are 126 possible network addresses, each with nearly 17 million hosts. Slightly more than 16,000 networks may have a Class B address, each of over 65,000 hosts. Finally, there can be approximately 2 million networks with a Class C address,Each with a maximum of 254 host addresses. Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) treats multiple contiguous Class C addresses as a single block that requires only one entry in a routing table. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons. CIDR presents unique problems for smaller ISPs and other entities. If an entity seeking IP addresses cannot utilize a large block of address issued by ARIN, it may not be able to use the address at the request of that entity. The number of IP addresses that must be maintained in each router for traffic routing purposes is reduced. signals that were split into separate pieces or “packets” at the transmission point are separately routed over the most efficient available pathway and reassembled at their destination point. The standards that specify most data transmissions are known as the Internet Protocol (IP) Suite. Under part of this protocol, streams of packets are routed to their destination over themost efficient pathway. Other aspects of the protocol facilitate the routing of packets to their appropriate destination by examining the 32-bit numeric identifier— or IP address—attached to every packet. Currently, IP addresses for North America are allocated by the American Registry for An Internet Protocol (IP) address is a number that is typically written as four numbers separated by periods. When information is sent from one network or node to another, the packet of information includes the destination IP address. Because the IP deals with inter-networking, the IP address is based on the concept of a network address and a host address. The network address indicates the network to which a computer is connected, and the host address identifies the specific computer on that network. The IP address uniquely identifies a computer connected to the Internet. known as “routers” send data packets from one network to another by examining the destination IP address of each packet. In its memory, the router contains a “routing table’ which contains information specifying all of the IP addresses of other networks. The router compares a packet’s destination IP addresses with the information contained in the routing table to determine the network to which the packet should be sent. As more and more network addresses come into use, the need for routers to include an entry for each possible network will increase. National Science Foundation designed and partially funded four NAPs, each of which was managed by a different company. Representatives of two companies with whom we spoke noted that the Naps play an important role in helping to keep the market for backbone service open for entry. NAP's provide new backbone firms an efficient, low-cost method for exchanging traffic with numerous other providers. In the first years of their existence, NAP’s became congested with the rapid rate of growth.  congestion and poor quality of connections at the NAPs led backbone providers to engage in “private interconnection.” Private interconnection refers to the exchange of traffic at a place other than a NAP. Despite a variety of technological developments, the majority of Internet traffic exchange occurs at private interconnection points. Of the 17 companies that we met with, 10 provided estimates of how their mix of private interconnections and NAP use would likely change in the future. Only one company said that it was likely to make greater use of Naps in thefuture. In a peering arrangement, two backbone providers agree to exchange traffic destined only for each others’ networks. By the mid to late-1990s, another financial arrangement known as “transit’ emerged. While peering generally entails traffic exchange between two providers without payment, transit entails payment by one provider to another for carrying traffic. When a backbone provider buys transit from another provider, it obtains not only access to the “supplier’s” backbone network, but also access to any other backbone network with which its supplier peers. In a “peering” relationship, backbone providers exchange data destined only for each other’s network generally without the imposition of a fee. Transit payments involve the payment by one backbone provider to another for the mutual exchange of traffic and for the delivery of traffic to other providers. A NAP facilitates the interconnection of multiple backbone providers. In the early to mid-1990s, the place at NAPs as well as at private interconnection points. Currently, there is a segregation of backbone providers into “tiers” as well as that of backbone A (with which backbone C does not have an independent relationship) because B will pass C’s traffic off to A as part of its delivery of transit service to C. A smaller backbone provider generally need only buy transit from one or two large providers to achieve universal connectivity. We found that it is generally not viewed as economical for a backbone provider to peer with a less geographically dispersed backbone provider. Even if there were equal traffic flows, the larger provider will tend to carry traffic a further distance. backbones C and D exchange traffic, C must carry the traffic much farther on the return path before it can hand off the data packets to D. C might consider D to be benefiting from C’s network investment and thus, C would be more likely to view D as a customer purchasing access to its network than as a peer in traffic exchange. The “tiering” of Internet backbone providers and the dual system of peering and transit agreements have caused controversies. Several of the non-Tier 1 backbone providers with whom we spoke expressed concerns about their inability to peer. Reps of ISPs and end users we interviewed throughout the country described the Internet backbone market as competitive. Most of these providers stated that they have several choices of backbone providers from which to obtain services. A few ISPs and other purchasers of backbone services also noted that the extensive choice of providers enables them to engage in “multihoming” — purchasing backbone services from more than one provider. Commonly cited characteristics of importance were a network with a broad geographic scope, many customers, significant capacity and good peering arrangements with other providers. noted that, coincident with increased choice of backbone providers throughout the country, the price of backbone connectivity had declined significantly in recent years. Representatives of several companies told us that although they were presented with standard contracts by backbone providers, they were able to negotiate terms and conditions in their contracts that were important to them. A few ISP representatives with whom we met said they receive frequent sales calls from multiple backbone providers. An ISP representative noted that many backbone providers are working to increase the speed and decrease the latency of transmissions of their networks to improve their networks. Boardwatch reports 41 backbone providers with a national network and many other regional backbones. Approximately five to eight of these national providers are considered to be “Tier 1” backbone providers. Unlike telecommunications services, the provision of Internet backbone service is not regulated by governmental communications agencies. A Tier 1 provider is defined by Boardwatch as having a network of wide geographic scope, having many IP addresses, having extensive information for traffic routing determinations, and handling a large percentage of transmissions. For more information, visit Boardwatch. with the largest providers. We were told that the inability of non-Tier 1 providers to peer with Tier 1 providers puts smaller companies at a competitive disadvantage. To some extent, market forces may be relieving some of these problems. Some backbone providers with whom we spoke stated that the market is competitive, and transit rates have been decreasing. We are also told that peering policies should be made public. We will report back on our findings in the next edition of this column. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. of which were Tier 1 providers and some of which were not) said they already had posted or soon would be posting their peering policies on their Web sites or otherwise making them publicly available. Some non-Tier 1 backbone providers do not want to peer with the largest backbone providers. Some stated that it is difficult to guarantee their own clients a certain level of service if they receive few guarantees themselves. For example, one provider spoke critically of the quality of peering connections and thequality of service provided between peers. A remaining concern regarding the “tiered” segmentation of the market is the potential for the number of Tier 1 providers to decline or for one of these providers to become dominant. The recent economic downturn in the communications sector may portend a further shakeout of backbone providers. Several of the company officials we interviewed expressed concern that there would be consolidation among the Tier 1 provider and thus noted the importance of antitrust oversight of this industry. Moreover, both an FCC Working Paper and the Antitrust Division have expressed concern about this issue. No official data sources were identified that would provide information on the structure and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. The majority of market participants expressed the view that the Internet. backbone market is competitive, if not highly competitive. Market participants noted the importance of Tier 1 backbone providers and the potential for reduced competition if consolidation were to occur at the Tier 1-provider level. Some backbone providers are filling market niches by offering customers additional or unique services to complement their backbone services. The success of the. Internet, as evidenced by its growth, evolution, diversity, and cooperative structure, has occurred with minimal. government involvement or oversight. market or cause other problems, such as the limited number of Tier 1 providers, the limited choice of providers in rural areas. We were also told that the choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet backbone networks may be limited, creating problems for providers of Internet services. We found no official data source that could provide information to allow an empirical investigation of the nature of competition in the Internet backbone market. We interviewed eighteen Internet backbone providers of varying size; two miscellaneous Internet companies that provide backbone-like services; and eight end users of backbone services. Neither the U.S. Census Bureau nor the Labor Statistics collects data directly on Internet backbone providers. To investigate the degree of competition, we spoke with an array of buyers and sellers of backbone connectivity. We asked questions that were designed to provide information about the competitiveness of the market. For example, we asked questions about the availability of choice among providers in the market, the viability of purchasing transport to a distant location to connect to a backbone provider, and the length of the journey to connect. of presence, which are access points to the Internet, and proximity to network access points (NAP), which are points where Internet backbones interconnect. Also considered were the presence of other features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks, state Internet Service Provider (ISP) associations, or Native American reservations. In the selected localities, we conducted 55 semistructured interviews with participants in the Internet backbone market between January and June 2001. For these interviews, we used interview guides containing questions concerning background information about the company. We contacted an additional 32 market participants and industry representatives for purposes of conducting interviews to support this study. In some cases, our request for an interview was declined, our telephone contacts were not returned, or we were unable to schedule an interview after repeated discussions with company officials. In addition to the information collected through interviews, we also conducted technical, legal, and regulatory research on the characteristics and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Each individual network or node that is connected to the Internet is identified by From the Federal Communications Commission, the Department of Justice, the National Science Foundation, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the Census Bureau. We also interviewed two national Internet industry trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. To obtain information from a wide variety of participants within the Internet backbone market, we visited locations in 12 states with varying characteristics. We included large and small cities and rural areas from various regions of the country. Other criteria used for selection of areas were proximity to Internet points. Some companies expressed concern about slow or limited deployment of high-speed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) service in residential areas. Some backbone providers and ISPs said that these problems were more severe or more limiting in rural areas. For instance, we were told that rural areas are least likely to have competitors to the local carrier, and the incumbents were less likely to roll out DSL in their more rural markets. Incumbent local carriers, on the other hand, have stated that there is considerable competition in the provision of special access service. New Internet services, such as video streaming and voice telephone calls over the Internet, are expected to become increasingly common in the coming years. Both Internet backbone networks and local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth and technical capabilities to support such services. Incumbent local telephone companies have stated that the rollout of DSL service is hampered. We found that most of those with whom we spoke were optimistic that backbone capacity and technical features would adapt to new needs. But concern was expressed that limited broadband capabilities in local telephone markets could stall certain new applications.  DSL rollout is hampered by certain regulations that require incumbents to sell parts of their network (including DSL lines) to entrants at cost-based rates. Legislation is pending in the 107th Congress that would address these concerns. Opponents of the legislation believe the bill will not foster increased deployment of broadband services and may stifle competition in the local telephone market. Other bills have been introduced to address the same issues, but none have yet been voted on by the Senate or the House of Representatives. Members of Congress are often concerned about whether telecommunications services reach rural areas. Several representatives of companies we interviewed noted that there are less Internet backbone facilities running through rural areas and fewer points of presence in those areas. As such, purchasers of backbone connectivity in rural areas may have fewer choices among providers than their counterparts in more urban locations. Two rural providers said rural areas sometimes have subsidized networks (e.g., state networks or networks funded, in part, by governmental subsidy) that may discourage private backbone companies from entering such markets. There appears to be ample deployment of fiber optic cable in Internet backbone networks to support high bandwidth services. Concerns were expressed to us that shortcomings in the local telephone market were likely to intensify in the future due, in part, to the increase in demand for broadband applications and content. We found that some companies are concerned about the growth of the broadband market in the U.S. and other countries. Some companies are also concerned that the growth in the broadband marketplace will lead to a decline in the number of telephone subscribers. Most ISPs and other end users connect to a backbone provider’s point of presence through the local telecommunications infrastructure. These systems are typically owned and operated by incumbent telephone companies. Many of the market participants with whom we spoke noted that local telephone markets are, in their view, close to monopolistic. Some companies attempting to compete against incumbent local telephone carriers have recently gone out of business. In particular, interviewees stated that incumbent telephone carriers take a long time to provision or provide maintenance on special access services and other high speed access lines. offering services to address this problem by attempting to bypass incumbent telephone companies’ facilities and bring services directly to customers. Most of these efforts are focused on business customers in urban areas. Metropolitan fiber rings are being constructed as an alternative to using incumbent carrier services. Wireless direct access is also becoming available that will enable a company’s data traffic to bypass local telecommunications infrastructures. For example, we found that Metropolitan fiber Ring customers purchase a direct connection to the fiber ring, which is connected directly to the backbone point of presence. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 sought to increase competition in other communications sectors, primarily the local telephone market. No provisions were contained in the 1996 act pertaining to Internet backbone services. However, the act did provide for the creation of a “telecommunications’ and “information” commission. The commission was created to regulate the Internet backbone market, but it was later expanded to include all Internet services, including voice and data services. The agency is now looking at how to regulate data-processing services on the Internet. treatment of these more established communications services and infrastructures under the Communications Act of 1934 has indirectly affected the Internet medium. Two types of facilities are used for the exchange of data traffic by interconnected Internet backbone providers. The first type of facility, known as a “network access point” (NAP), enables numerous backbone providers to interconnect with each other at a common facility. Internet data traffic is also exchanged at the NAP. The act provided FCC and states the authority to take actions to encourage the deployment of advanced telecommunications capability. found little in the way of official or complete information on the relative size of companies. Neither FCC nor NTIA collect data on the provision of Internet backbone services. FCC does solicit public comments on the deployment of underlying telecommunications infrastructure. DOJ often collects data for merger-specific analyses, but such data are not publicly available. We also found that neither the Bureau of Industry and Security nor the Department of Justice collects data on Internet providers' share of the market in the U.S. and abroad. and trends of the Internet backbone market and the potential effects of the convergence of communications services. If a more formal data collection program is deemed appropriate, FCC should exercise its authority to establish such a program. We provided a draft of this report to the FCC, NTIA of the Department of Commerce, and DOJ for their review and comment. FCC and NTIA officials stated that they were in general agreement with the facts presented in the report. Technical comments provided by FCC,. NTIA and DOJ officials were incorporated in this report as appropriate. FCC said it believes that the appropriate means to collect information on Internet backbone networks at the present time is through informal and experimental efforts, which are currently under way. Because of the trend towards convergence in the communications marketplace and the nation’s increasing reliance on the Internet, FCC may need to periodically reassess its data collection efforts to evaluate whether they are providing sufficient information about key developments in this industry. FCC should develop a strategy for periodically evaluating whether existing informal and Experimental methods of data collection are providing the information needed to monitor the essential characteristics. in Internet traffic. Two of the providers with whom we spoke said that some NAPs were not well managed. If traffic exchange at a NAP became congested, service quality could be compromised. Two typical problems that congestion causes include latency (delay in the transmission of traffic) and packet loss (when transmitted data are actually lost and never reach their destination). For example, one backbone provider told us that the loss of data was so great that the company had to shut down its network. such as IP telephony and interactive video require “bounded delays” These services require very low and uniform delays between sender and receiver. More broadband content is expected to be transmitted over the Internet. Before such broadband content can be provided, both the backbone and the local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth. Many industry representatives with whom we met told us that latency and the loss of data packets due to traffic congestion is a consequence of the current protocols for transmitting Internet traffic. As transmissions of time-sensitive data packets are lost due to congestion. The Internet was not engineered to enable extremely high quality service at all times. The quality of Internet services can be compromised when high levels of traffic flow lead to congestion. Because the Internet is a network of interconnected networks, finding the source, cause, or reason for a problem may be difficult. ISPs and end users expressed frustration that accountability for traffic transmission problems is lacking, the authors say. They underscore the need for adequate information on such items as geographic scope of backbone networks, the number of backbone providers’ customers, traffic flows, and outages. The quality problems inherent in the Internet lead some customers to purchase expensive private network services. One of the initiatives of the current and fifth Network Reliability and Interoperability Council (NRIC V) is a trial program for voluntary reporting of outages by providers not currently required to make such reports to FCC. A focus group of the Council will evaluate the effectiveness of the program upon its completion and analysis of trial data, and it will make a recommendation on outage reporting of these networks. We were told that, due to applications over the Internet become increasingly common in the future, these problems may become particularly acute. A few of those we interviewed noted that these applications can run well across one backbone network, but when traffic must transverse across more than one network, quality cannot be assured given current routing protocols. We found that participants in Internet markets have begun to address latency and reliability problems in Internet backbone networks. For example, NRIC V is in the process of evaluating and will report on the reliability of “packet- switched” networks. Backbone networks link at interconnection points and take traffic to and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large business users. Backbone providers have points of presence in varied locations, although they concentrate these facilities in more densely-populated areas where Internet end users’ demands for access are greatest. Once on an Internet backbone network, digital data data can be sent to other parts of the world. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back To The page you were from. of the 8 end users we interviewed used transport from their location to another location for at least some of their Internet traffic. Sometimes transport was used to move data traffic to a nearby city that was not very far away. But in some cases—particularly for ISPs in rural areas—traffic was transported a few hundred miles to a point of presence of a backbone provider. The majority of officials from these companies told us that the quality of Internet service is not diminished by transporting traffic across such distances. Even ISPs and users in more rural areas told us that they generally had choice among backbone providers that could receive traffic at varied distant locations. The one disadvantage of distant transport noted by several providers, however, was cost. Some company officials noted that it generally costs more to purchase transport to a distant location than it does to connect to a backbone at a local point of presence. Two companies specifically mentioned that they had or were planning to move their facilities to more urban locations. For more information, visit backbone.us. of DOJ have noted that in industries such as the Internet backbone market, interconnection among carriers is critical to the quality of service consumers receive. As such, a much larger provider may have less incentive to have good interconnection quality with other providers. Without quality interconnection, customers may have an incentive to buy service from the largest provider with the best-connected network. This would give the larger provider a competitive advantage, which in turn could cause the market to “tip” — that is, more and more users would choose connectivity from the larger network. A concern among several market participants we interviewed was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of quality for Internet services. We were told that this difficulty is related to the way that the Internet is engineered. Internet traffic is exchanged among providers on a “best efforts’ basis, they said. It appears, therefore, that customers’ feelings of being tied to a provider may lessen the effective level of competitiveness in this market.to avoid having to go through a disruptive readdressing process. The adaptability of backbone networks for new services, such as Internet-based voice and video services, foretell a trend commonly identified as “convergence” in the broader communications sector. There is a strong expectation that traditionally regulated services are already migrating to the Internet and will soon become part of the Internet. This expectation of greater convergence was widely shared by the market participants we interviewed for this study and for other studies we have conducted at your request over the past 3 years.in the Internet backbone market. common applications used by residential and business Internet users. The implications of convergence and greater future reliance on the Internet are at present largely unknown. No evidence came to light in the course of this study to suggest that the long-standing hands-off regulatory approach for the Internet has not worked or should be modified. Further, no evidence that the hands-on regulatory approach has worked or that it should be changed in any way in the future. The Internet has evolved from a nascent but promising information tool to a 21st century medium for commerce and communications. control and encryption. Companies reduce reliance on backbone service by caching frequently used content on their servers. “Internet2’ is a partnership of universities, industry, and government formed to support research and the development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the Internet. The Internet is not viewed as conducive to supporting research capabilities of high-speed technologies and other advanced functions, so alternative methods for such research have emerged. In addition, companies have emerged that specialize in caching frequently accessed content and storing it in varied geographic locations. in Congress proposing various other approaches and strategies to accelerate the deployment of high-speed data services. In the 6 years since the federal government ended its sponsorship of a key backbone network, the Internet has changed the way people of the world live, work, and play. Its rapid growth is seen in the substantial investments made by private sector firms in backbone networks and interconnection facilities, and by the proliferation of interactive applications and content. These developments are particularly noteworthy in light of the dynamic nature of the Internet backbone. Many companies are developing technologies to enable voice services to be provided over IP networks. At present, many backbone networks are not well designed to provision such “time-sensitive” services. New services and some services that were traditionally regulated (such as telephone calls) are expected to become more commonly provided over the Internet in the coming years.by the cost of reengineering parts of the network and existing regulations that require them to sell piece parts of their networks to competitors at cost-based rates. Companies have emerged to build and provide services over networks that do not rely as much on traffic exchange across networks. For example, a few providers are building and relying on private data networks—rather than the Internet—for the transmission of voice services. Some companies are building “virtual private networks”— networks configured within a public network for data transmissions that are secured via access.is also examining issues related to interconnection and peering of Internet backbone providers and the sufficiency of the best efforts standard for Internet transmissions.