would impose a visa ban and an asset freeze on human rights abusers. A provision in the National Defense Authorization Act of 2012 ( P.L. 112-81 ), signed into law on December 31, 2011, that calls for a plan to provide defensive weaponry to Georgia. The Administration's foreign assistance budget for FY2013 submitted to Congress in February 2012 requests $52 million for Russia. Most of it aimed to continue support for democratization, and the Administration additionally has notified Congress of plans to create a $50 million fund to further support these efforts. has condemned such aid as interference in Russia's internal affairs. He may tighten restrictions on such aid for non-governmental organizations or even ban some aid activities. Ongoing congressional concerns about democratization, human rights, and trade will continue and may have been heightened by the Russian election outcome. Russia's legislature will give approval for Russia's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) The growth of U.S. trade and investment would be facilitated by further democratization and human rights reforms. tightening sanctions on Iran, viewing it as a further "regime change" attempt. Russia has used the same rationale in vetoing UNSC resolutions on Syria. Russia is a major arms supplier to Syria and has a Mediterranean naval docking facility at Tartus. Members of Congress have criticized Russia's veto of the Syria resolution; and S.Res. 370 condemns Russia for supplying arms to Syria. On February 24, the Putin-Medvedev "tandem" defended the veto, it faced Russian domestic as well as international criticism. of U.S. intentions." Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress. Recent legislation includes the Senate and House versions of the Magnitskiy Rule of Law bills. Many Members have condemned Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008, the death of lawyer Sergey Magnitkiy after being detained and tortured in a Russian prison in 2009, and the re-sentencing of businessman/oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy in 2010 to several more years in prison. "clear victory," and praised the significant level of civic engagement in the election. At the same time, she urged Russian authorities to address shortcomings mentioned in the OSCE report. She stated that the "EU looks forward to working with the incoming Russian President" to implement pledges of economic and political reforms. The Administration has pointed to successes of the U.S.-Russia "reset" of relations as including approval by Russia in 2009 for the land and air transit of military supplies to support NATO forces in Afghanistan. On other U.S.-Russia foreign policy issues, differences have remained or emerged in recent months. The United States, for example, continues to call for Russia to withdraw its troops from occupied areas of Georgia. In early 2011, Russia abstained on a UNSC resolution calling for a "no-fly zone" to protect civilians in Libya. Almost immediately, Russia denounced NATO actions in Libya as aimed at "regime change" and proclaimed that it would not support another UNSCresolution. some opposition politicians with whom he had met. However, he has reported that he has had fruitful meetings with Russian officials since this criticism. One positive sign is that various meetings of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission have continued in recent weeks. Russian officials have stated that cooperation on the transit of supplies to support U.s. and NATO operations in Afghanistan will not be linked to other issues. Russia continues to support this transit because it helps stanch terrorist threats aimed at Russia emanating from Afghanistan. Putin rejected an argument that U.S.-Russia relations were "cooling off" Putin: "I don't think we are seeing a cooling.... We have a constant dialogue" Putin said he had warm relations with President Obama, whom he viewed as desiring. He praised the START Treaty and WTO accession, as "useful" and "welcome" to Russia-U.S. relations. "In general we have built a partnership over the key issues on the international agenda," he said. missile defense made it unlikely that a NATO-Russia Council meeting would be held in Chicago, and speculated that Putin may not attend the NATO Summit. Clapper suggested that there would be "more continuity than change" in Russian domestic and foreign policy over the next year under a Putin presidency. He projected that Putin would not reverse the course of U.S.-Russian relations, but they might be more "challenging" since Putin has an "instinctive distrust" of the United States. The anti-Americanism exhibited by Putin during the campaign could put a strain on future cooperation under the U.S.-Russia "reset" It is possible that the opposition protests continue in Russia into the summer and are met by a government crackdown. Soon after he arrived in Moscow in December 2011, new U.K. Ambassador Michael McFaul was accused on state-owned television of providing orders and money to the opposition. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution this week condemning the Russian government's use of force against protesters. President-elect Putin is expected to attend the Group of 8 (G-8) industrialized nations meeting at Camp David, Maryland, on May 19-20. The Administration has suggested that Obama and Putin may hold a summit on the sidelines of the G-8 meeting. Some observers have warned that if European missile defense issues remain contentious at the time of this NATO Summit, Putin may deliver a harsh anti-U.S. speech. On February 24, 2012, one Russian official appeared to urge Putin to indicate readiness before the Camp David and Chicago meetings for "serious talks" Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress. The Obama Administration has been critical of the apparently flawed Russian presidential election. Some in Congress also have criticized the conduct of the election, but have endorsed continued engagement, while others have called for stepping back and reevaluating the Administration's engagement policy. Congress may consider the implications of another Putin presidency, lagging lagging behind the U.S. in some areas of economic growth, such as the energy sector and the economy. large number of Russian citizens who turned out to monitor the election. President Obama telephoned President-elect Putin to congratulate him on his electoral victory. The European Union's High Representative Catherine Ashton on March 5 "took note" of Putin's election victory. Other Western governments appeared to take similar viewpoints, including the UK, France, Germany, and the U.S., which all congratulated Putin on his election victory on March 9, 2012, and looked forward to meeting him in May 2012. Putin stressed that he was running for president on the platform that Medvedev would be nominated as prime minister. Some observers suggest that a Prime Minister Medvede would have substantial authority as a former president. According to this view, Putin would be unlikely to fire Prime MinisterMedvedev, at least in the short term. However, prime ministers have been replaced by Putin (and former President Yeltsin) when the economy has declined. The current prime minister has announced several democratization initiatives in his state of the nation address. Former Russian President Vladimir Putin served two elected terms from 2000 to 2008. He was required to step down due to a constitutional limit to two successive terms. He endorsed his then-First Deputy Prime Minister Dmitriy Medvedev as his choice to be the next president. Putin was elected by a wide margin in March 2008, and upon taking office nominated Putin to be his prime minister. In September 2011, Prime Minister Putin and President Medvede were sworn in as the new leaders of Russia. whether a Putin presidency can implement substantial economic and democratic reforms. Some critics have argued that Putin is not attuned to making such reforms, and that he will face rising civil discontent during his third term in office. Some observers have speculated that Putin may not follow through on his announced plans to nominate Medvedev as his successor. Most observers discount such a scenario, but argue that Russian political and economic institutions and civil society will face substantial strains to adapt to the long-term demands of a modern global economy. suggested that former Russian Finance Minister Alexey Kudrin might make a good choice as prime minister. He stated that the United States wanted a "strong, vibrant, and growing Russia," and good U.S.-Russia relations. The former Russian finance minister is now the head of Russia's state-owned bank, Vnesheconombank (Vneshconombank). Vneshomenkov is also a former Russian deputy prime minister, and served as the country's finance minister in the 1990s. to participate in televised debates with the other candidates, but appeared extensively on television in the guise of carrying out his duties as prime minister. Also, from mid-January through late February, he published seven long articles in major newspapers. These "election manifesto" articles covered such policy issues as ethnicity, the economy, democracy, socioeconomic problems, national security, and foreign policy. In the first overview article, Putin boasted that during his rule, he helped "deliver Russia from the blind alley of civil war" Putin also called for greater efforts to combat corruption, which he claimed had strengthened when young greedy people had moved into the civil service. In general, the articles appeared to be a reiteration of existing policies and sentiments, rather than a forum for launching new initiatives, according to many observers. Besides these efforts, Putin boosted or promised large increases in military and government pay, pensions, and student stipends. These benefits may have made many voters very receptive to his argument that they should elect him in order to preserve their benefits. a decade distinguished by one of the world's fastest economic growth rates. In the democracy article, he argued that there was no democracy in Russia in the 1990s, only "anarchy and oligarchy" He defined this democracy in terms of the rights of Russians to employment, free healthcare, and education. However, he warned against creating a contentious electoral environment of "buffoons" rather than one where "responsible" people are elected. He called for retaining a strong federal government and a strong Russian state. announced that they would exchange places so that Putin could re-assume the presidency. The two leaders claimed that they had agreed to consider this switch before Medvedev had been elected in 2008. This announcement created a great deal of resentment among many Russians who felt that a backroom deal had been foisted on them. The resentment was mostly low-key at first, but signs included polls showing growing dissatisfaction with Putin and Medvedeva. The trigger for wider open discontent was a December 2011 election to Russia's legislature, the Duma, that was widely viewed by many Russians as not free and fair. Putin and other observers have pointed to this growing middle class as major participants in the protests that began after the Duma election. Putin reportedly garnered a relatively low 47% of the vote. To some small degree, Putin and Medvedev have become cognizant that this rising middle class increasingly will demand reforms and have already offered some accommodative gestures. A major question is whether Putin will be able to deliver on his promises to reform the economy and the economy in a way that will benefit the middle class. 72 higher-level territorial electoral commissions. Putin (and outgoing President Medvedev) face rising dissatisfaction by many Russians with what are viewed as tainted elections, corruption, and other political and human rights problems. According to some Russian sociologists, about one-quarter of the Russian population belongs to the middle class and this portion could grow to one-third by the end of the decade. These individuals, including many business owners and private-sector employees, want a government that is not corrupt and follows the rule of law. It remains to be seen whether the impetus to create and strengthen civil society organizations will be sustained, particularly if a new Putin administration cracks down on such efforts. The State Department issued a statement that the United States "looks forward to working with the President-elect after ... he is sworn in" The statement pointed to the results of the preliminary report of the OSCE in stating that the "election had a clear winner with an absolute majority," but also urged the Russian government to address shortcomings mentioned in the report. stated that the United States was not seeking to dictate to Russia. He endorsed an idea that Putin not run again after his third term in office. Dreier also praised Medvedev's request for an examination of the sentence against Khodorkovskiy and Khodorovskii. He said the U.S. "could provide a little bit of advice to a country that is just now beginning to enter its third decade of democracy and obviously has had more than a few challenges" Medvedev made proposals in aederation speech on December 22 that he stated were partly spurred by the protests. One proposal was to restore gubernatorial elections, which Putin had abolished in 2004. Putin voiced qualms about this initiative, requesting that he retain control over who may run in such elections, and the draft bill reportedly contains such a provision. Another vague proposal by Medvedev was to increase the openness of legislative elections. Some observers had hoped that this would include the restoration of gubernatorial elections. Putin has asserted that the protests had no bearing on these initiatives. Congress may consider whether to grant Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) to Russia. Russia's human rights and democratization record may well be part of the debate. On March 5, 2012, Representative David Dreier, chairman of the House Democracy Partnership, congratulated Putin on his election victory, but objected to Putin's election night victory speech which appeared to characterize the U.S. as interfering in Russia's domestic affairs. The ratification of WTO accession by mid-2012 could lead to PNTR. Vladimir Churov proclaimed just after the polls closed that only a tiny percentage would prove valid. Zhirinovskiy and Mironov immediately congratulated Putin for what they termed an honest win. Zyuganov and Prokhorov alleged that electoral irregularities meant that the election was not free and fair. According to the final report of the CEC, Putin won 63.6% of 71.8 million votes cast, CEC says. All but Zyug anov met with Putin on March 5, where a discussion of each candidate's platform proposals took place. somewhat less than the 71.3% he had received in his last presidential election in 2004. Some of Mironov's expected supporters instead may have voted for Prokhorov, reducing his result below that gained by his A Just Russia Party in the Duma election. Moscow was the only major city where Putin failed to get over 50% of the vote, even though there may have been a concerted effort to inflate Putin's vote count in the city. Chechnya continued its tradition of reporting a high turnout (99.6%) and vote for Putin. businesses that were gathered up and checked by supervisors to make sure that the employees had voted for Putin. Golos concluded in its preliminary report on the election that although there appeared to be somewhat fewer irregularities than during the Duma election, the presidential election was not free and fair. At a press conference, Golos also stated that its ballot count had given Putin just over 50% of the vote, giving him a win in the first round. Russian physicist Sergey Shpilkin estimated that Putin may actually have received about 58% of the vote. Many voters may well have voted for Putin as the "lesser evil," according to some observers. Over one-quarter of those polled stated that they would never vote for an "oligarch" like Prokhorov (he is said to be the third-richest man in Russia) These negative views greatly hampered the effectiveness of these candidates' campaign efforts, and may have contributed to Medvedev-Putin government's success in wooing wavering voters. The Russian government is allowing protests "for free elections" and holding opposition presidential candidate meetings. Putin and Medvedev hosted a large pre-planned outdoor victory rally and concert in Moscow. Putin proclaimed that the voters had rebuffed attempts to "break up the state and usurp power" The pro-Putin crowds had gathered well before the last polling places in Russia had closed, which ostensibly is illegal. Even before receiving or reviewing most reports of electoral violations, CEC head said there had been no violations of the law. The CEC chief said there were no reports of any electoral violations. The anti-American theme also was prominent in a number of supposedly non-partisan talk shows and "documentaries" aired on state-owned or controlled television. Several major Russian polling organizations are owned by the government or receive government contracts, so their objectivity was of concern. Some critics have argued that VTsIOM's polls were an announcement of.betray their motherland, but to stay with us, to work for [Russia's] benefit and its people. And love it the way we do. Critics point to Putin's award of the Order for Services to the Fatherland to VTsIOM after the 2007-2008 election cycle as evidence of this collusion. On February 27, the last permitted day to release polling results, VT'sIOM estimated that Putin would garner nearly 59% of the vote, so that a second round of voting would not be necessary. The government pointed to the polls as evidence that the results were valid and not due to ballot-box stuffing, according to these critics.  262 monitors led by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) concluded that the election was well organized but that there were several problems. Some of the monitors at a press conference stated that they had not viewed it as free and fair. According to the report, Prime Minister Putin received an advantage in media coverage, and authorities mobilized local authorities.ballot box stuffing, by inflating the voter turnout and allocating these votes to Putin, and by other means, the monitors said. The OSCE reported that the government did not hinder demonstrators calling for fair elections. The report also raised concerns that precinct polling place chairpersons generally appeared to belong to the ruling United Russia Party or were state employees. On election day, the OSCE monitors assessed voting positively overall in the over 1,000 polling places they visited. But witnessed irregularities in vote-counting in nearly one-third of the 98 polling stations visited and in about 15% of the polling places. The OSCE also reported that many monitors at polling places, and installed webcams in most polling place. independent Russian activists, including video of individuals allegedly admitting that they had been paid to vote repeatedly. "hundreds" of buses parked in Moscow that allegedly had carried Putin's supporters into the city to inflate the voting results there for Putin. The performance of the webcams was uneven. Many were not focused on the ballot boxes or views were blocked, or they malfunctioned. The independent Golos (Voice) monitoring group reported the heavy use of "carousel voting," in which buses carried groups that voted at several polling places. owned REN TV showed a program warning that if Putin was not elected, Russia would descend into civil war and destruction within a few months at the hands of the opposition. In an attempt to convince the public that the election would be free and fair, Prime Minister Putin announced in mid-December 2011 that two webcams would be placed in each of about 94,500 polling places. Most of these were installed. Individuals who pre-registered were permitted to view the voting and vote-counting on-line (the latter after a delay until all polls were closed). Analysts have viewed these and many other requirements imposed on prospective minor party and independent candidates as too restrictive and as limiting political participation. Of the 17 individuals who initially announced they would run for the presidency, some dropped out and many were disqualified on technical grounds. Only three managed to submit signatures. Two out of the three were disqualified by the CEC on the grounds that over 5% of their signatures were invalid. The signatures of the third prospective candidate, businessman Mikhail Prokhorov, were also disqualified. were deemed valid and he was placed on the ballot. According to some critics, Mezentsev was a "technical candidate," who was nominated only to ensure that if all other candidates withdrew, Putin would still have an opponent. Yavlinskiy was deemed ineligible on the grounds that some signatures gathered electronically were not handwritten in ink and therefore were invalid. Many observers argued that he was eliminated because he would have been the only candidate left on the election ballot, and so was no longer needed. Five candidates were able to register for the March 4, 2012, presidential election. Four of the five candidates were nominated by parties with seats in the Duma. Other prospective candidates from minor parties were required to gather 2 million signatures of support, with no more that 50,000 in each of at least 40 regions nationwide, within about one month. Many of the candidates were self-nominated or had not been nominated by a political party but by a person or organization. The election was held on March 4. of constituency races and the possibility of self-nominated candidates (Putin had abolished these in 2005). The bill submitted to the Duma called for altering electoral procedures so that voters in 225 new districts would select a party list with identifiable local candidates. Golos researchers have termed these two bills disappointing "propaganda" exercises. Another bill may prove more reformist, however, by greatly reducing the registration requirements for new parties, which may permit many currently unrepresented interests in society to participate in political life. only bona fide opposition candidate on the ballot. Of the registered candidates, all but Prokhorov had run in previous presidential elections and lost badly. Zyuganov and Zhirinovskiy had run several times. Mironov ran in the 2004 presidential election, where he praised Putin's policies. He announced his candidacy just two days after a large opposition demonstration on December 10, 2011, raising speculation that he was urged to run by the government as a candidate who might attract the votes of some of the liberal protesters. revitalized opposition political parties. Udaltsov, who represents the "left wing" nationalists among the protesters, has disagreed. Business interests appeared to welcome Prokhorov's third-place showing and his indication that he would continue a role in politics by forming a party. The proposal also was endorsed by Putin on March 5, and has been endorsed by Mironov and other opposition leaders. It would allow A Just Russia Party to join with the Communist Party to form a new social democratic coalition. Small protest rallies reportedly numbering up to several hundred people occurred in several other cities of Russia. Putin victory rallies reportedly attended by 1,000-7,000 people also were held in several cities across Russia on March 5. The Communist Party has planned to hold protests against the election in coming weeks. Some advocates of "right wing" democratization among the protesters, such as Yavlinskiy, have called for shifting the focus from rallies to organizing new or new protests.. Some observers have discerned a lessening turnout at the protests. 30 other prisoners who had been highlighted by opposition politician Boris Nemtsov as "political prisoners" He also ordered the Prosecutor General to examine the mid-2011 denial of party registration to the Party of People's Freedom. The initial protests after Putin's election by those who view the electoral process as tainted appeared smaller in size and number than after the Duma election. Authorities approved a protest rally in Pushkin Square in central Moscow on March 5, along with Putin victory rallies elsewhere in the city. Demonstrations against the election began even before the polls closed. Over the next few weeks, several protests of up to 100,000 or more people were held in Moscow and many other cities. These protesters demanded that a new Duma election be held, but also called for a scheduled March 4, 2012, presidential election to be free and fair. At first, these protests appeared to shock the Putin government, leading to some arrests, but the government soon decided to permit the protest rallies as a means. The government claimed that over 130,000 supporters attended the rally, although the stadium's capacity is about 84,000. Some individuals reportedly had arrived by bus or train after trips lasting more than 24 hours. In addition to these pro-Putin events, a wave of television shows was launched extolling Putin's rule and condemning alleged U.S. and opposition "subversion" against Russia. Authorities moved to harass and suppress independent vote monitoring groups, the Internet, and certain "old media" newspapers and broadcasters. if not disgruntled voters, including by offering opposition figures jobs and by making some changes in government postings. Russia's ambassador to NATO, the nationalist Dmitriy Rogozin, was elevated to deputy prime minister in a seeming effort to attract the nationalist vote. Also, the Putin campaign orchestrated large-scale rallies, the most prominent of which was a pro-Putin demonstration on February 4 in Moscow aimed at rivaling the attendance at a "for free elections" rally, and a campaign rally in the Luzhniki stadium in Moscow. the shift in tactics by the Putin campaign involved blaming the United States and the West for the protests. This anti-Americanism aimed to define the election as a patriotic vote for Putin. After Secretary Clinton voiced criticism of the Duma election in early December 2011, Putin accused her of "giving orders" for the launch of protests. Rogozin even asserted that Secretary Clinton and former Secretary Madeleine Albright wanted to destroy Russia in order to take over Siberia's mineral resources. At the campaign rally at the Luzhniki stadium on February 23, Putin urged voters "not to look abroad ... and not" Putin government and campaign made several accusations that opposition politicians and other enemies of Putin were involved in criminal conspiracies. The most sensational was an announcement in late February that Ukrainian police had uncovered a plot by Chechen terrorists to assassinate Putin after the election. Other sensational accusations included those by Putin that oppositionist politicians planned to kill one of their own in order to blame the death on him. Another accusation was that oppositionists planned to stuff ballots marked with Putin's name into ballot boxes to declare that the election was illegitimate.