Practices. GAO-07-597. Washington, D.C.: June 18, 2007. United Nations: Management Reforms Progressing Slowly with Many Awaiting General Assembly Review. GAE-06-711T. U.N.: Internal Oversight and Procurement Controls and Processes Need Strengthening.GAO-05-392T U.S.C: March 2, 2005. United. Nations: Oil for Food Program Audits. Washington,. D.c.: February 15, 2005, and April 25, 2006. in New York. We obtained and reviewed official reports of the Secretariat and the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We also interviewed senior officials from UN departments in New York City. During the course of our review, we discussed the status of UN management reforms with officials from the Department of Management, OIOS and the General Assembly Office of the President. In addition to the reports, we also reviewed General Assembly resolutions, Secretary-General bulletins, Web sites, related budget documents and statements from UN officials. addition, we spoke with UN officials in New York. These included officials from the Office of the Deputy Secretary-General, the Department of Management, ACABQ, and OIOS. We also interviewed outside observers of the UN system, including nongovernmental organizations and members of academia. Many cost estimates for the proposed reform initiatives are preliminary, and detailed longer-term cost estimates are being developed. However, we did not analyze the assumptions underlying these estimates to determine whether they are reasonable and reliable. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. To identify and examine the progress of UN management reforms, we reviewed key documents proposing United Nations (UN) management reforms. GAO staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601. had with State, UN, and other officials. After we made our initial assessments of progress, three other GAO staff members not involved in this review used the evidence and the categories to make their own assessments independently of each other. These staff members then met with each other to reconcile any differences in their initial assessments. Finally, they met with us and confirmed that we were all in agreement on our assessments. To identify factors slowing the progress of the UN reforms, we reviewed reports and documentation of the Secretariat, General Assembly, OIOS, and the ethics office. UN member states agreed to continue a review of UN programs and activities (known as mandates) in 2007. Member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review. Consultations among member states on how to move forward on the issue will continue into the 62nd session. New parameters for the continuation of the mandate review process have been proposed, but progress remains to be seen.. Various factors have slowed the UN’s efforts to improve the management of the Secretariat. Many remaining UN management reforms cannot move forward until these factors are addressed. 15 of the 17 delegations told us that the number one challenge to continued progress on management reform efforts is member state disagreements on the priorities and importance of the remaining reform efforts. For example, member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review of UN mandates. Some member states are concerned that mandates important to them will be eliminated. For that reason, no mandates have been eliminated or consolidated as a result of the reviews—two of the goals of the process, according to State. efforts because of the recentness of their implementation. Little or no progress: There is evidence that few or no steps have been taken on the reform effort. Substantial progress: The reform effort has been mostly or fully implemented. The management reform decision-making process at the UN involves multiple entities. For example, when a management reform has budgetary implications, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth Committee are involved in the process. The UN has made little or no. progress in establishing an independent bid protest system for UN procurements. transparency in the UN’s procurement award process. However, per our methodology, we categorize this reform effort under “little or no progress” because there was evidence that few or no steps had been taken towards actual implementation of the system. State said it understood that this assessment was consistent with our evaluation methodology. State and the UN Secretariat provided technical comments that we have incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the Secretary of State, and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations. The UN is composed of 192 diverse member states that have differing views on a wide array of issues. In October 2006, we reported that disagreements between G-77 and developed countries over the broader implications of management reforms may affect the UN’s ability to fully implement them. Four member states have launched the Four Nations Initiative in an effort to provide new ideas and perspectives on governance and management of the UN Secretariat. A State official told us the process appears to be a “credible effort” by member states. reforms: (1) disagreements among member states on UN management reform efforts, (2) lack of comprehensive implementation plans for some management reform proposals. (3) administrative policies and procedures that continue to complicate the process of implementing certain complex human resource initiatives. (4) competing UN priorities, such as the proposal to reorganize the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, that limit the capacity of General Assembly members to address management reform issues. Disagreements within the General Assembly continue to limit the implementation of management reforms. Calls to reform the UN began soon after its creation in 1945. Despite cycles of reform, UN member states continue to have concerns about inefficient management operations. The United States, through the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New York, continues to advocate reform of UN management processes. In July 1997, the Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN. The UN is the largest contributor of 192 member states. In October 2006, we reported slow progress in five key UN management reform areas. Numerous reform proposals were either awaiting General Assembly review or had been recently approved. Many of the proposed or approved reforms lacked an implementation plan with time frames and cost estimates for the goals stated in the 2005 outcome document. The UN has taken steps to improve organizational ethics since the of State in Washington, D.C., and the UN in New York. But the UN has not adopted specific ethics guidance and.a commitment to improving its procurement workforce. State endorsed the main findings and conclusions of our report and noted that our assessment of UN progress on management reform efforts was accurate and balanced. State agreed with us that more could be done to ensure credible oversight at the UN. State also agreed fully with the need to keep Congress informed of the effectiveness of management reforms, adding that the department will continue to monitor and inform Congress, as we recommended. The UN Secretariat did not provide written comments.appendix II, along with our responses to specific points. documents and our discussions with UN and U.S. officials. We focused our work on management reforms that began in 2005 and did not specifically address the 1997 and 2002 reform agendas. The 2005 reforms applied to the Secretariat and the UN’s governing bodies, including the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, and the Security Council. We did not include in our review reforms targeted at UN specialized agencies or UN funds and programs. We also excluded efforts such as the UN Peace Building Commission and Security Council and governance reforms. In September 2005, world leaders gathered at the UN World Summit in New York to discuss global issues such as UN reform, development, and human rights. The outcome document from the World Summit, endorsed by all members of the UN, outlines broad UN reform efforts in areas such as oversight and accountability. Successful management reform requires that its components are ultimately effective in modernizing the management functions of the United Nations. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the Department of State and the UN Secretariat. Completion of the reform agenda will require overcoming several factors, particularly disagreements among member states. Some past reform efforts remain incomplete because they did not get sustained and broad support. The current effort faces this same risk. While implementation is a necessary element in meeting the goals of the 2005 World Summit outcome document, it is not in itself sufficient. It is important to ensure that the reforms are implemented in a way that meets the needs of the world. The reform agenda should be completed by the end of the year or early 2015. of the approximately 20 cost-benefit analyses and other assessments of management reform issues that the Secretariat had planned to complete by March 2007 have not yet been submitted to the General Assembly. The total long-term costs of the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. The UN currently has no formal plan to evaluate the effectiveness of its management reform efforts to determine whether they have achieved the goals set out in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. In addition to the contact named above, Phillip Thomas, Etana Finkler, Grace Lui, Amanda Miller and Jena Sinkfield provided technical assistance. In May 2000, we reported that while the Secretary-General had substantially reorganized the Secretariat’s leadership and structure, he had not yet completed reforms in human resource management and planning and budgeting. In September 2002, to encourage the full implementation of the 1997 reforms, he released a second set of reform initiatives, some expanding on those introduced in 1997 and others reflecting new priorities. In February 2004, we. reported that 60 percent of the 88 reform initiatives in the 1997 agenda and 38 percent of. has not developed comprehensive long-term implementation plans for some management reform proposals. Establishing implementation plans is a practice that increases the transparency and accountability of the reform process. We previously recommended that State work with other member states to encourage the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to include cost estimates and expected time frames for implementation and completion of each reform effort as it is approved. During our current review, we found little evidence that time frames, completion dates, and cost and savings estimates for completing the long- term implementation of specific management reforms had been established. The UN expects to have provided the training to all field staff by the end of March 2008. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in its efforts to develop a risk management framework. In July 2007, a Planning, Compliance, and Monitoring Section was established and a chief was appointed to establish tools to detect potential transaction problems and minimize risks. Also, a proposal for implementing the concept of best-value-for-money is under development. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The UN Department of Management is in the initial planning stages of establishing a UN-wide risk management framework. As of September 2007, the concept is still in the planning stages, time frames and costs for its implementation have not been established, and risks associated with procurement activities remain. For example, the OIOS Procurement Task Force reported in October 2007 that it had found multiple instances of fraud, waste, and mismanagement—including 10 instances of Fraud and Corruption. The concept is expected to be put into practice by theprocurement Division in March 2008. The UN Secretariat has made some progress in strengthening the operating procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment restrictions for former UN staff involved in procurement. The bulletin was issued following several incidents in recent years in which UN officials and former officials were involved in unethical and improper procurement activities. Former UN staff members, for 1 year following UN employment, are prohibited from accepting employment or compensation from any UN contractor. For 2 years, they are prohibited to act on behalf of UN contractors. A proposal to increase the minimum threshold for contracts required to be reviewed by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts from $200,000 to $500,000 has not been approved. The UN also issued, in May 2007, a revised supplier code of conduct. The code requires that suppliers are responsible for adhering to the postemployment restrictions by not employing former UN staff members for at least 1 year following a staff member’s separation from the UN. OIOS previously recommended that the threshold be increased, and, according to Procurement. been made in strengthening the procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers, developing a comprehensive training program for procurement staff, and developing a risk management framework. The UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system and creating a lead agency concept for procurements. In addition, since our October 2006 report, other organizational issues have arisen that may affect the UN’s procurement reform efforts. In a report on procurement reform submitted to the General Assembly in June 2006, the UN projected that implementation of the leadagency concept would take 6 to 12 years. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in developing a comprehensive training program. The program is not expected to be formally in place until early 2008. The training is part of a development plan to provide a career path for procurement staff. Those who complete the training will be eligible to be certified by internationally recognized procurement institutions. In addition, according to UN procurement officials, all procurement staff will be trained in contracting, acquisition, and other specialized subjects. It is expected that the training program will be completed by the end of the year. vendor to protest the outcome of a contract decision to an independent official or office. Such a system would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. The draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices from public- and private-sector procurements, is expected to be finalized by the first quarter of 2008. Officials told us that, in the meantime, they have enhanced communications with vendors, including developing a more systematic debriefing procedure for vendors. The UN Procurement Division is based in Geneva, Switzerland. Since our October 2006 report, the Secretariat has issued several reports on management operations that the General Assembly is expected to consider during the current (62nd) session. The UN has made some progress in improving human resource functions. Little or no progress has been made in reforming the UN’s internal justice system, reforming certain budgetary and financial management functions, and improving the delivery of certain services. Such guidance, some of which has been in existence for decades, is part of the UN's existing resource management framework. human resource issues such as recruiting and staffing, conditions of service, and contractual arrangements. The General Assembly did not consider these issues, which are currently rescheduled for consideration during the 62nd session. According to U.S. and UN officials and most of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with, reforming these and other human resource functions is likely to continue to be difficult because of long-standing disagreements among member states. The UN has made some progress in improving information technology, according to officials. has issued several reports with proposals that, if implemented, could improve some human resource functions. The proposals are, in large part, still awaiting General Assembly review. In late September 2006, the Secretary-General released a report entitled Investing in People that included a human resources management framework aimed at strengthening the UN’s human resources goals. The report included discussions of several human resources issues and specifically stated that staff mobility is essential to creating a more-versatile, more agile workforce. The UN has not completed reviews and analyses of other human resource reform proposals. multiskilled, experienced staff capable of handling the UN’s operations, which have changed dramatically in the last 20 years. An effective career development policy serves both the UN and its staff members by building and maintaining an international civil service. A one-time staff buyout could enable the Secretary-General to realign staff to meet the UN's changing priorities, while facilitating retirement or separation of staff who can no longer meet their career aspirations. The General Assembly considered the report during its meeting in New York. 62nd session, on topics such as the implementation of the ERP and governance of information and communications technology. UN has made little or no progress in reforming its internal justice system. Report concluded that effective reform of the UN is not possible without an efficient, independent, and well-resourcedinternal justice system that safeguards the rights of staff members and effectively helps ensure the accountability of managers and staff members. Although the General Assembly agreed in 2006, there has been little progress since then. The General Assembly has agreed that the UN’s internal Justice system was outdated, ineffective, and compromised. Many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of the new system are still unclear. The UN has made little or no progress in improving certain budgetary and financial management functions. According to the Secretariat, member states aim to implement the newSystem by January 2009. The General Assembly had yet to decide who would be covered by the new System. The Office of the Ombudsman would be nominated and selected, and what resources would be needed. The Secretariat said the system would be in place by the end of 2009. Secretariat had not selected the firm that will implement the new system. According to UN officials, the Secretariat is expected to announce a decision in 2008. The Secretary-General did not submit a comprehensive report on information management, including cost estimates, in March 2007, as requested by the General Assembly. The report was not submitted because the ERP planning process was ongoing, a CITO had not yet been named, and the secretariat was still collecting data on information technology and other issues. whether certain UN services could be improved. Among the services are internal printing and publishing processes; medical insurance plan administration; information technology support; payables, receivables, and payroll processes. Subsequently, the Secretariat initiated several projects to address these reform proposals but has not completed its analyses. The Secretariat has not issued a comprehensive report on public access to UN documentation, which the General Assembly requested be submitted during the 61st session. It is currently collecting data from staff participants in the UN medical plan and reviewing alternative delivery methods for payroll and other functions. The UN is in the process of developing a new organizationwide information system. Creation of the ERP has been in the planning process for several years. The new system, when implemented, will adequately support the global functions of the UN, including an ever-growing number of peacekeeping missions. As of October 2007, the UN had a total of more than 1.2 billion documents in its system, up from about 1.1 billion in 2003. The UN has a turnover rate of about 1 in every 1,000 people. The position of chief information technology officer (CITO) was created by the General Assembly in August 2006. The leadership of a CITO is necessary to help ensure greater integration of the Secretariat’s workflow and knowledge management. The goal is to allow program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data into one process, with the goal to act more transparently and efficiently in managing staff and procuring goods and services of greater quality and quantity, at lower levels of risk.  Phase I of mandate review covered all mandates 5 years old or older and not renewed that originated from the General Assembly. Member states disagreed on which mandates to include in the review and what to do with any savings generated by the potential elimination or consolidation of mandates. No agreement was reached on the remaining mandates, and no mandates were consolidated or eliminated as a result of the review. The planned approach was to review mandates by thematic cluster. The initial goal was to have all mandates reviewed by the end of 2006.  Phase II was delayed by the lack of a co-chair on the Informal Working Group on Mandate Review from January 2007 to April 2007 and again from July to October 2007. In October 2007, the process was far from complete, with only one of the nine clusters addressed. The General Assembly adopted an oral decision to continue consultations among member states on how to proceed with mandate review in the 62nd session. State officials told us that a mandate review committee would be formed in the fall of 2007. The General Assembly did not consider several procurement reform issues during the recently completed 61st session. The UN has taken actions to improve some of the management operations of the Secretariat, but many reform proposals still have not moved forward. Some progress has been spring 2007 session, as planned. Although there has been some progress, many issues are still unclear, the U.S. government says. The U.N. General Assembly is expected to meet in New York on September 14. The meeting is expectedto be the first since the September 11, 2001 attacks. the 61st session and, in large part, postponed making decisions on key issues. The General Assembly has not taken steps to redefine the role of the Deputy Secretary-General to assume formal authority and accountability for the management and overall direction of the operational functions of the Secretariat. The Secretariat submitted reports to the General Assembly, as requested, from March to May 2007, on the performance of the secretariat from 2006 to 2007. In January 2007, a resolution postponed decisions regarding streamlining contractual arrangements and harmonizing conditions of service. for certain administrative services, such as payroll processes, staff benefit administration, and information technology support. The overall restrictiveness of these policies and procedures continues to complicate the management reform process. Since our October 2006 report, competing priorities within the Secretariat and General Assembly have limited the capacity of General Assembly members to address the remaining management reform issues. In February 2007, for example, several procurement-related reform issues were not taken into consideration by the General Assembly during the General assembly during the month of February 2007. retaining budget surpluses for use in subsequent periods, charging interest on arrears of member states’ assessed contributions, and creating a separate account to cover certain unanticipated expenditures arising from exchange rate fluctuations and inflation. The UN has made little or no progress in improving the delivery of certain services. In May 2006, the General Assembly asked the Secretary-General to conduct several cost-benefit analyses to determine the best course of action. The Secretariat has prepared a number of reports that the General assembly is scheduled to review during the current (62nd) session. Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions consists of 16 members appointed by the assembly in their individual capacity. The functions and responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General Assembly concerning any administrative and budgetary matters referred to it. Figure 6 depicts the typical management reform decision-making process at the UN for issues requiring General Assembly approval. We reported in October 2006 that the Secretariat’s estimated costs for implementing management reform were in the region of $1 billion to $2 billion per year. General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no action on others. For example, to improve cash management and operational flexibility, the Secretary-General proposed that peacekeeping accounts be consolidated. In July 2007, the General Assembly rejected this proposal. The Secretary-general also proposed to improve strategic budgetary planning and implementation by reducing the number of sections in the budget from 35 sections to 13. However, as of October 2007,  the General Assembly had not taken action on the proposal. Other financial management reform proposals that have not been adopted include  Steps have been taken to improve UN oversight capabilities. Member states established an Independent Audit Advisory Committee (IAAC) in June 2007. The committee is not expected to be operational until January 2008. UN funding arrangements continue to constrain OIOS’s ability to audit high-risk areas. The General Assembly has not authorized OIos’S financial and operational independence. In June 2007, member states established IAAC to provide an external, independent assessment ofUN oversight capabilities based on best practices in the private sector as well as the experiences of other international institutions. 5 individuals, preferably from a pool of at least 10 candidates proposed by member states, based on regional and geographical representation and selected by the General Assembly. An evaluation process for candidates through consultations with an external relevant institution, such as the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions; and membership appointment for a term of 3 years, with the possibility of one- time re-election. The guidelines and requirements represent a compromise among the member states. Member states disagreed on some of the initially proposed responsibilities of IAAC. states disagreed. In addition, State wanted IAAC to be responsible for assessing the work of all UN oversight bodies, including the UN Board of Auditors and the UN Joint Inspection Unit. Both of these bodies strongly resisted having IAAC oversee their respective functions, and it was ultimately decided that IAAC would focus primarily on OIOS. State Department officials told us they were satisfied overall with the creation of IAAC despite the various compromises. The five members of the newly created IAAC were elected. OIOS faces two conflicts that have been impeding its independence. Without operational independence, OIOS is constrained in its ability to prevent or mitigate risks to the UN’s resources and personnel. These risks include fraud, waste, abuse, inefficiencies, and mismanagement. The UN does not yet have a formal and structural internal control framework that would provide reasonable assurance that its financial resources are being handled effectively and that its objectives are being achieved. Some progress has been made in improving the UN procurement process. In April 2006, we reported on weaknesses in the UN’s oversight and procurement systems. The document also called for the Secretary-General to submit proposals for implementing reforms to improve management functions of the Secretariat. We found that UN funding arrangements constrained the ability of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) to operate independently and direct resources toward high-risk areas as needed. In addition, we found serious weaknesses in procurement internal controls. Specifically, the UN lacked an effective organizational structure for managing procurement. reported that UN funding arrangements adversely affect OIOS’s budgetary independence and constrain its ability to audit high-risk areas. Discussion of the revision of OiOS”s funding arrangements was deferred from the 61st to the 62nd session of the General Assembly due to a lack of consensus on funding issues. State and OI OS generally agreed with our overall findings and recommendations, according to the report. The report was published to coincide with the 62th session of UN General Assembly. UN has made some progress in strengthening the Office of Internal Oversight Services. Office has strengthened the capacity of its internal audit, investigation, and evaluations and inspections sections. Funding arrangements at OIOS continue to impede the independence of internal auditors. In order to reduce some of its multiple responsibilities and focus more directly on its oversight responsibilities, the office has shifted several nonoversight related functions to the UN Department of Management. In 2006, the evaluation section was strengthened by the addition of two posts to increase the number of evaluations that can be undertaken. OIOS argued that such a shift would significantly diminish the UN’s oversight functions. Since 2006, about 16 new posts have been created for the investigations division. OIOS has established a separate special investigations task force for sexual exploitation and abuse. The UN has made progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the quality of its investigations, says the report. The report was based on an external evaluation of the UN Office of Legal Affairs, which is part of the Secretariat. OIOS established a professional practices section that is responsible for implementing OIOS’s risk assessment framework. Member states decided to keep investigations in OiOS rather than move it to a single division. OIos also established an information and communication technology section, which has developed an audit strategy and conducted risk assessments for various departments at headquarters. Several steps have also been taken to improve OI OS’S investigations division. The group is currently working on a report on how to improve the efficiency of the European Union. The report will be published in full in September. In the past year, the UN has made substantial progress in staffing its ethics office. In the fall of 2006, we reported concerns of UN experts that the newly created UN ethics office was insufficiently staffed. As of October 2007, the ethics office had made some progress in developing and circulating ethics standards and guidance. The office reported that it had received 287 requests for services from staff at different levels of the Secretariat between August 2006 and July 2007, including ethics advice on issues such as potential and actual conflicts of interest. training within the organization, including half-day ethics training workshops for over 3,000 staff members at all levels of the Secretariat. The office has also developed new ethics standards, such as postemployment restrictions standards. The ethics office has begun to develop a systemwide code of ethics for all UN personnel, including those of UN bodies and agencies other than the UN Secretariat as requested by the General Assembly in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. The director of the ethics office told us the development of a system Wide Code of Ethics was one of his top priorities and would be undertaken in 2007. fall of 2006. In the past year, the ethics office has hired a permanent director and additional staff. The office has begun to enforce a whistleblower protection policy. Concerns have been raised about the policy’s lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. The UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. The primary purpose of the financial disclosure program is to identify potential conflicts of interest arising from staff members’ financial holdings, private affiliations, or outside activities. A private contractor developed an online e-filing system in liaison with the ethics office to simplify and expedite filing requirements. The ethics office plans to review the online financial disclosure form and accompanying guidelines in consultation with other UN offices to decide whether modifications need to be made. The process for the 2006 review was ongoing, and, as a result, the compliance rate was not finalized as of September 2007, according to the UN ethics office. The online financial Disclosure Form is available online at www.un.org.uk. declaration of interest statements for 2005. About 98 percent of staff complied, and the remaining 2 percent were referred to the Office of Human Resources Management for disciplinary action. A total of 2,548 staff members were required to file forms for 2006. The office reported that the increase in staff required to filing likely reflects an increased awareness of the program by the heads of departments and their staff members. In addition, as a confidence-building measure, the current UN Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary- General voluntarily made their recent financial disclosure forms public. a private contractor and analyzed to determine any potential conflicts of interest between the staff members’ confidentially disclosed private interests and their official duties and responsibilities. In May 2007, the contractor identified potential conflicts. of interest in 17 of the cases reviewed, or about 1 percent. Of these cases, 14 staff members accepted the advice of the private contractor to address the potential conflict and 3 cases were referred to the ethics office for final resolution. The 2006 review is not yet complete. The deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May. in cases with an aggregate value of over $610 million—resulting in misappropriation of resources or the unjust enrichment of vendors and their agents in excess of $25 million. The task force reported that a number of cases have been referred to national authorities for criminal prosecution or to the UN for consideration of subsequent legal action. It has also recommended civil recovery of monetary damages. As of October 2007, an independent bid protest system had not been established. The lack of an independentbid protest system limits the transparency of the procurement process. justice system that effectively executes corrective action in cases of retaliation or threatened retaliation, staff may not submit cases to the ethics office. 2. State notes that the General Assembly’s approval of the creation of an independent bid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing transparency in the UN's procurement award process. Per our methodology, approving the creation. of a protest system, while demonstrating intent, is not equivalent to actual implementation of the system, which has yet. to be implemented. The annual activities report of the ethics. office states that protection against retaliation is linked to the internal justice system. need for the UN to establish a formal internal control framework. State notes that the General Assembly’s approval of the creation of an independent bid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing whistleblower protection. State did not agree with our statement that successful whistleblower protections cannot be established without substantial reform of the UN's internal justice program. During our review, we found that UN and nongovernmental organization staff had concerns about weaknesses in the UN internal justice system. We agree with these concerns. believe that the cost estimates and the associated funds that the General Assembly has appropriated to date for reform efforts are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. We conducted our work from March to November 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. During our review, we found that UN and nongovernmental organization staff had concerns about weaknesses in the UN internal justice system and the potential impact of these weaknesses on the implementation of a successful whistleblower protection policy. We agree with these concerns. The UN has made substantial progress in enforcing a whistleblower protection policy. The ethics office has begun receiving complaints of retaliation, and several concerns have arisen during the handling of cases. Between August 1, 2006, and July 31, 2007, the ethics office received 52 complaints of whistleblower retaliation. The office was copied on six complaints that were primarily addressed to other offices or departments in the UN. In these instances, the office keeps track of and follows up on any pending action by other offices. UN and State officials have raised concerns regarding the UN’s whistleblower protection Policy. UN and State officials told us another concern about the whistleblower protection policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. In August 2007, after initially reviewing a whistleblower retaliation case of an employee at the UN Development Program, the ethics office and the Office of Legal and Procurement Services concluded that the UN’s whistleblower Protection policy applies only to employees directly under the Secretary-General. The Government Accountability Project has criticized the effectiveness of the current UN whistleblower protectionpolicy. In his August 2007 report on the activities of the ethics. office, the secretary-general recommended that the General Assembly consider broadening. the scope of the office. The success of the UN’s whistleblower protection policy could be, in part, dependent on successful reform of the internal justice system. Some UN staff members might not trust the current system to be fair or impartial and, consequently, might not come forward with claims of retaliation. In its August 2007 annual activities report, the ethics office expressed a concern that it had not had an opportunity to provide input into its role in the proposed new internal Justice system. The Government Accountability Project is a non-profit public interest group.