The Army’s 90-day rotation policy has presented some challenges for the Army in quickly filling these gaps when a medical provider is not able to deploy. For example, the 9l5th Forward Surgical Team was authorized to deploy to Iraq in September 2009 with three general surgeons, according to theater medical officials. The Army Reserve identified a doctor to fill one of the two vacancies; however this individual could not deploy due to an inability to be credentialed as a general surgeon. By the time the Army Reserve was able to identify a surgeon who could deploy, the team had been in Iraq for a month. was evacuated out of theater. It was critical that this personnel requirement be filled in a timely manner. Theater officials requested a replacement from U.S. Army Forces Command. The individual identified as a replacement could not deploy for at least 30 days. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade identified an operating room nurse that it could borrow from another unit in theater until the replacement could be found. The nurse was able to be deployed to the Middle East in the next few days, the brigade said. The operation was a success.  personnel gaps that occur in theater cannot always be prevented. Theater commanders assess the risk associated with the gap and decide on an appropriate course of action. Cross-leveling in particular requires the assessment of risk associated. with the personnel gap and the gap that would be created by the relocation of a medical provider from another unit. According to theater commanders we spoke with, Cross-Leveling can be done in a variety of ways, depending on the needs of the theater and the situation at hand. capabilities in both locations as expected without three authorized general surgeons. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade temporarily relocated medical personnel already in theater from other medical units to the 9l5th Forward Surgical Team so it could meet its mission. Army data show the magnitude of these unfilled gaps or late arrivals for the reserve components ranged from about 3 percent to 7 percent from January 2008 to July 2010. Although we found examples of the 915th Forward surgical Team not having all of its medical personnel before the end of each 90-day rotation. About 4 percent of mobilized Army reserve component 90-day medical rotators did not deploy to theater or arrive in theater on time for 2008. In 2009, that figure reached 7 percent (38 medical providers out of 519) and through the first 6 months of 2010, this figure was over 3 percent. Unfilled reserve component personnel requirements can have serious consequences depending on the needed medical specialty. Therefore, medical commanders in theater typically cross-level to fill short-term temporary personnel gaps, although medical officials in theater will fill the gaps. another dentist not in Iraq who was eligible to deploy to fill this need. Cross-leveling involves the temporary relocation of personnel from one unit in theater to another. For example, an operating room nurse assigned to a forward surgical team in Iraq had an unexpected medical situation and needed to be replaced. DOD officials told us that selecting and deploying an active component medical provider to backfill a position typically takes about 45 days. It is often used as an interim measure to minimize risk when a gap in medical personnel coverage occurs. Cross-leveling can present risk to medical operations in theater, especially when conducted on a recurring basis. Army officials told us that they are willing to accept some risks in order to mitigate other risks they believe are higher. According to medical officials, when medical personnel gaps in an Army reserve component medical unit occur, it can be challenging to fill the gap before the start of the next 90-day rotation. It can take around 120 to 180 days to fill a gap in a medical unit. Gaps in medical capabilities can occur when medical providers do not deploy as expected for reasons such as resignation. Medical personnel gaps can also occur when individual medical personnel need to leave the unit. Army commanders have used two approaches to fill those gaps, according to medical officials in theater.or wounded does not lead to unnecessary staffing challenges. According to the U.S. Army, medical personnel gaps in Iraq and Afghanistan can lead to an increase in the number of wounded and sick soldiers in the military. Backfilling involves the identification and deployment of medical personnel into theater from the United States or elsewhere. Cross-leveling involves deploying medical personnel who were not originally scheduled to deploy overseas at that time. For example, a dentist assigned to a brigade combat team in southern Iraq was evacuated out of theater for medical reasons. Given the backlog of needed dental work, commanders expressed concern about losing a dentist. In response, Army Forces Command initiated an effort to identify and deploy medical personnel from the U.S. and elsewhere. Secretary of the Army direct the Army Medical Department to update its doctrine and the organization of medical units concerning their size, composition, and use. DOD concurred with our first recommendation that the department clarify the level of care that deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. DOD noted that there is an unquestionable need to formally update doctrinal publications. The department also noted that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from commanders. The Army is constantly reviewing and assessing medical capability, the use of those capabilities, and updating doctrine to evolving staffing requirements. to which the Army has adapted the composition and use of its medical units to provide advanced medical care in Iraq and Afghanistan. We reviewed reports from the medical task forces in theater, Army documentation of the composition of medical units. For the third objective, we reviewed the approaches used by Army theater medical commanders to meet medical personnel. We interviewed representatives from the Army Medical Department Center and School, Directorate of Combat and Doctrine Development about the relevance of doctrine and the organization ofmedical units. We also looked at how the Army fills medical personnel gaps that arise. GAO examined the Department of Defense’s efforts to identify and fill its military medical personnel requirements in support of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. We evaluated the extent to which the Army has adapted the composition and use of its medical units to provide advanced medical care. We analyzed DOD and service policies and processes that govern the determination of medical personnel requirement, including service doctrine, DOD doctrine, and DOD procedures. GAO staff who made major contributions to the report are listed in appendix IV.may be found on the last page of this report. played a role in their decisions in determining medical personnel requirements. Local base commanders can request additional medical personnel if they believe that the number of U.S. soldiers or civilians merits an increase. The official stated that an increase of about 800 to 1500 civilians would have to occur before they would consider revising military medical personnel requirement. An Army official agreed that if there is an inconsistency between departmental guidance and theater guidance, it should be examined. As long as there is no inconsistency, the Army will continue to provide medical personnel. deployment policy for reservists applicable to physicians, dentists, and nurse anesthetists. To determine the extent to which the Army’s reserve component medical units deployed their authorized medical personnel in 2008, 2009, and through the first 6 months of 2010 to Iraq and Afghanistan. We assessed the reliability of the data by interviewing the agency official responsible for manually collecting and summarizing the data. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. Additionally, to better understand how military medical personnel are deployed, we reviewed Army. deployment data on late deployments of medical providers. medical mission of the fixed military treatment facilities. In addition, the processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within and across medical specialties (e.g., orthopedic surgeons, critical care nurses, and psychiatrists) to comply with service guidelines. To maintain a healthy inventory of medical specialists, the military needs to keep an inventory of specialists in place, says the director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) The National Institute of Health is a private, nonprofit organization based in Washington, D.C. their size, composition and use, as applicable, to incorporate current practices of splitting and reconfiguring deployed medical units in theater. DOD also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense and appropriate DOD organizations. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604. The total number of U.S. forces allowed in Iraq and Afghanistan requires balancing medical personnel with other forces. For instance, officials in Afghanistan told us that when they initiate requests for additional personnel, the requesting unit is asked to offset the increase in forces on a one-to-one basis within the unit. If they are unable to do so, operational and medical officials determine if the request for additional medical forces takes precedence over the need for other types of personnel already in the theater. The force cap has limited the overall numbers of military personnel that can be in theater. Two Army sustainment brigades deployed to Afghanistan without enough medical personnel. Task Force 62nd Medical Command in Afghanistan requested additional forces for these two brigades. DOD met this requirement by deploying 22 Air Force medics to Afghanistan. Medical officials in Iraq and Afghanistan told us that they must consider two operational limitations which affect how many medical personnel they formally request. First, the cap on how many medics can be sent to Iraq or Afghanistan. Second, there is a cap on the number of medical personnel that can be deployed at any one time. The theater surgeon and medical task forces command mostly Army medical facilities. The other services maintain and operate additional medical facilities in theater that may be outside the direct command of the medical task force. For example, the Air Force operates a theater hospital in Balad, Iraq but coordinates closely with the task force medical brigade in Iraq. The positions of United States Forces-Afghanistan Surgeon and the commander of the task Force medical command in Afghanistan are filled by the same individual. According to a DOD official, the U.S. Forces-Iraq Surgeon collaborates with the Task Force medical brigade commander and staff in Iraq to coordinate medical policy and care. About 4,000 medical personnel were in Iraq and about 6,000 were in Afghanistan at the end of July 2010. The United States’ military presence in Iraq is scheduled to end no later than December 31, 2011. As of September 2010, about 104,000 U.S. military personnel were deployed in Afghanistan, according to administration estimates. Figure 1 shows the breakdown of all military medical personnel inIraq and Afghanistan by service at the start of July. The DOD has established a database of medical personnel by service. The U.S. command structure in Iraq and Afghanistan has evolved over time. For purposes of this report, we focused primarily on level 2 and level 3 facilities and their personnel. The commanding generals of United States Forces-Iraq and United States forces-Afghanistan both are advised by a lead surgeon on medical policy and procedures, according to theater medical officials. In 2009, the designation of U.s. troops in Afghanistan became United States Armed Forces-Afghistan. In 2010, the designated troops in Iraq became United US Forces- Iraq. of operations. U.S. Central Command requested additional medical personnel to provide medical care to the increased number of military personnel in theater. During the offensive in Bastion, Afghanistan, officials relocated some mental health providers in Afghanistan to Bastion so this type of care could be better provided in the area. In addition, officials with the Task Force 30th Medical Command told us that they relocated some mentally health providers to the Bastion area for the duration of the heightened operational tempo. For more on this story, visit CNN.com. while in theater. Care can be provided by the wounded soldiers, medics or corpsmen, or battalion aid stations. Level 2 – Forward resuscitative care. This level provides advanced emergency medical treatment as close to the point of injury as possible to attain stabilization of the patient. In addition, it can provide postsurgical inpatient services, such as critical care nursing and temporary holding. Examples of level 2 units include forward surgical teams, forward surgical team, and forward resuscitative teams, among others. shock trauma platoons, area support medical companies, and combat stress control units. Level 3 facilities provide significant preventative and curative health care. Examples include Army combat support hospitals, Air Force theater hospitals, and Navy expeditionary medical facilities. Level 4 – Overseas definitive care. This level provides the full range of preventative, curative, acute, convalescent, restorative and rehabilitative care. An example of a level 4 facility is Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany. five levels of medical care to treat injured or sick military personnel. Each level provides progressively more intensive treatment. Over the course of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, the military has integrated more advanced medical care into the first three levels of care, which are typically provided in theater. In order to provide the most comprehensive care possible closest to the point of injury, each level of care is designed to be progressively more expensive and intensive. In the U.S., each of the five levels of treatment costs about $1 million per person. Not all patients progress through all five levels of care. Patients being evacuated may skip one or more levels. Joint and service definitions for each level of care vary marginally due to service-specific support requirements. However, they essentially align for most patients in the U.S. military. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the United States, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Army Medical Department Center and School recently updated the forward surgical team field manual. The updated manual did not specifically suggest what those changes in the number and mix of medical specialists that make up aforward surgical team should be. The Army would benefit by fully updating the organization of medical units concerning forward surgical teams, the authors say. They say the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from the commanders, and we noted in our report that the Army medical department center and school has updated its forward surgicalteam field manual although updates to this field manual are not specifically noted. Army medical officials have been developing specialized personnel documents to staff these medical units. The goal is to identify the medical skill sets now needed to operate split medical units across multiple locations for counterinsurgency operations. However, the process is difficult and it came about because current doctrine and organizational design were not sufficient to address the capabilities needed for splitting. Officials with the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade noted to us that staffing of medical units is now done in a “very non-doctrinal fashion” reflect the current practice of splitting medical units such as combat support hospitals. Officials with the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade told us that they were concerned about outdated policies, guidance, doctrine, and field concerns about splitting area support medical companies. The U.S. Forces-Iraq Surgeon Office told us in a separate interview that medical doctrine, specifically the organizational design for both personnel and equipment, should be updated. The medical brigade’s report also went on to note that personnel with these smaller combatsupport hospitals are spread so thinly that when personnel take leave or are evacuated out of theater due to injury. Dispersed environment in the theater of operations have generated a requirement for additional medical structure. Updating doctrine and organizational design of these split medical units used in theater could help to assure that these units will be resourced with the needed number and mix of medical personnel. By leveraging lessons learned collected from this practice, the Army could benefit from integrating these lessons systematically into Army doctrine and the design ofThese medical units. The Army maintains a lessons learned program to, among other things, systematically update Army doctrine to enhance the Army’s preparedness. The splitting of combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams has gained acceptance over time but should be examined given how counterinsurgency doctrine is implemented in Iraq. Officials with the Surgeon Office in Iraq also said that flexibility in the doctrine is critical, but that doctrine needs to reflect the realities of operations on the ground and the degree to which current practice of splitting medical units has filtered into medical doctrine has been limited. Recognizing these lessons learned in an environment that is continuing to change is key. medical units such as combat support hospitals and area support medical companies. Army medical officials said that they believe splitting and reconfiguring units in theater is necessary and helps to increase survival rates. By being in more geographical areas, these critical life-saving medical units are better able to achieve their goal of providing advanced emergency medical care within 60 minutes of injury, the Army said in a response to a draft of this report. Acknowledging the current practice of splitting medical units, the medical brigade that provided oversight over medical units. Commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan have been splitting or reconfiguring medical units typically designed to operate in one location. Splitting medical units increases the opportunities to provide advanced emergency care quicker and could save more lives. According to documents from the 28th Combat Support Hospital, the number of surgical sites has increased due to increased access to advanced medical care in Iraq. The number and mix of skilled medical personnel these units should have, has not been updated to reflect current practice in theater, the authors say. to the emphasis on providing troops access to surgical care within 60 minutes of being injured. Studies show that for those severely injured or wounded, 90 percent do not survive if advanced medical care is not provided. Medical officials in Iraq acknowledged that Army doctrine and the organizational design of medical units were top issues that needed to be updated to better serve the troops in the war zone. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. to DOD officials, DOD meets theater medical personnel requirements through its Global Force Management process. Once the Secretary of Defense designates a service to meet a medical requirement, that service identifies and selects units and personnel to fill the requirement. Medical officials in theater continually assess the number and the types of military medical personnel they need to support ongoing contingency operations in requirements are met. More information on the Global Force management process and the services’ personnel filling processes can be found in appendix II. the U.S. Army Forces Command, U.N. Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, and the Air Force Personnel Center. The services use unique yet similar processes to identify and select medical units and personnel to fill requirements for Iraq and Afghanistan. Once the Secretary of Defense designates a service to meet an emergent or rotational requirement, the service’s force provider then begins the process of filling the requirement with personnel. In addition, each of the services maintains a list of specialties that are in high demand relative to available personnel. The services identified critical care nurse, physician assistant, psychiatry, and clinical psychology as high-demand specialties. select the appropriate medical personnel vary, the services’ processes for filling requirements all result in a unit and its personnel deploying to an operational theater to carry out a mission. Medical personnel across the services typically are assigned to fixed military treatment facilities caring for active duty personnel, their dependents, and retirees. In wartime, each service’s medical personnel processes allow for the deployment of medical personnel to support contingency operations, such as Iraq and Afghanistan, while considering potential impacts on the military. The identification of individual medical personnel is important because medical personnel are needed to fill the requirements. ongoing operations, this process periodically examines requirements for rotational forces as well as emerging requirements as they arise. For the rotational force management process, requirements are identified 2 years in advance. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, medical personnel and unit requirements are included in the Global Force Management Allocation Plan. This provides an approach for U.S. Central Command, the services, and the services’ force providers to manage the sourcing of rotational requirements, such as a combat support hospital in Afghanistan. relative priority of the request, as is done at the Global Force Management Boards for rotational requirements. Risk assessments include violations of the services’ rotation policies regarding the required time at home for servicemembers. The impact to current missions and operations, such as the staffing of U.S. military treatment facilities in the case of medical personnel, if a service is selected to meet a request. If a service does not, the request for forces can be denied. If the request is approved, the force provider must provide information on the availability and readiness of both active and reserve forces. generated by combatant commanders and submitted to the Joint Staff for validation, and then to the joint and service force providers to identify potential sourcing solutions. In sourcing requests through the emergent process, requirements are prioritized according to a force allocation decision model. While emergent requirements are considered within the model’s general framework, each request for forces is individually evaluated as it is received. Officials focus on whether or not forces are ready and available to fill the request rather than trying to determine the force allocation model. organizations and offices we contacted, see table 1. We conducted this performance audit from August 2009 through January 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Defense (DOD) uses its Global Force Management process to meet its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For more information, visit the Defense Department’s website at: http://www.dod.mil/. states that DOD civilians are eligible for emergency care but most routine care for them is subject to availability. This differs from the DOD directive that states care should be at the same level and scope provided to military personnel. In addition, we found that the theater guidance document for care in Afghanistan provided additional guidance that is inconsistent with both the DOD Directive and with guidance provided elsewhere in the document as to the level of care to be provided to DOD deployed civilians. Medical officials in Afghanistan told us that they provide routine medical care to U.S. federal civilians. It is unclear what level of care deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. A DOD directive governing medical care for DOD deployed civilians is inconsistent with in-theater guidance with regard to eligibility for routine medical care. Theater officials also analyze gaps in medical care and the associated risks given different potential scenarios. DOD relies on its own deployed civilians to carry out or support a range of essential missions, including logistics support, maintenance, intelligence collection, criminal investigations, and weapon systems acquisition. About 2,600 DOD civilian. employees were deployed to Iraq, and about 2,000 DOD. civilian employees were Deployed to Afghanistan. DOD deployed civilians and federal civilian employees that might be injured or wounded in support of contingency operations and reported to Congress on the results in April 2010. DOD noted in its report that with each new mission, the need for new civilian skills has resulted in an increase in the number of deployed civilians. These civilians are not immune to the dangers associated with contingency operations, since they too incur injuries or wounds in their efforts to support the missions in Iraq and Afghanistan. Although DOD guidance clearly provides that deployed DOD civilians will receive life-saving emergency care, DOD noted that these civilians will also need medical attention. a space-available basis, and that they would not turn away any person with injuries that presented a danger to life, limb, or eyesight, regardless of the employment status of an individual. This issue has received continuing congressional interest. In April 2008 the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations issued a report on deploying federal civilians and addressed the medical care provided to them when they are wounded, ill, or injured while in a war zone. Furthermore, DOD’s report to Congress on deployed DOD civilians stated that the department believes it is imperative that each federal civilian be provided with the same medical care. how many and the types of medical personnel needed to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan through an ongoing assessment. Army doctrine, which is the starting point for defining and planning a unit’s capabilities, has not been updated fully to reflect these changes in theater. Theater officials also analyze gaps in medical care given different potential scenarios and the associated risks. The military medical personnel requirements planning process may not be fully informed by department-level expectations, the authors say. The authors interviewed officials with the theater-level medical task forces and Surgeons’ offices. In determining the number of military medical personnel and the medical specialties needed, theater operational and medical officials told us that they begin by evaluating various mission planning factors. Officials said that this information allows them to determine the level and structure of medical care they expect to need to support missions throughout the theater. Including the limit on the total number of forces in theater and shortages of and high demand for certain medical personnel, officials said.including the limiton the totalNumber of Forces in Theater and shortages in certain medical. specialties. medical evacuations in theater. Officials also analyze gaps and risks in the medical care structure under different possible scenarios. Further, when confronted with a need for additional medical personnel, the theater commanding general can submit a request for forces through DOD’s Global Force Management process. For example, the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade in Iraq conducted an analysis that identified possible requirements for extra medical personnel with certain specialties, such as general surgeons, at locations in northern Iraq given the possibility of adverse weather conditions.  shortages of and high demand for medical personnel in certain specialties also plays a role in decisions about whether to request medical forces. For example, officials in Iraq determined that 16 additional veterinary food inspectors were needed for food safety inspections, but they did not formally initiate that request due to the current shortage of these specialists. Although DOD primarily provides both emergency life-saving medical care as well as routine medical care to U.S. military personnel in Iraq and Afghanistan, the need for medical forces is also a factor. DOD medical officials analyze data from the Joint Theater Trauma Registry, the Joint Medical Work Station, and service and joint data on disease and non-battle injuries to determine trends in medical workload. Officials use this information to increase or decrease the number of medical personnel in line with demand for medical services. For example, DOD medical officials conducted an analysis to determine the need for cardiovascular specialists in Iraq and Afghanistan based on, among other variables, the volume of cardiovascular-related injuries.experiencing hostilities. number of deployed civilians and that these civilians are not immune to the dangers associated with contingency operations. Inconsistent guidance could potentially impact the medical personnel requirements planning process if medical officials in theater are uncertain about deployed DOD civilian employees’ access to routine medical care. While we did not learn of any deployed DOD civilians being turned away for medical care in theater during the time of our audit, DOD could still benefit by assessing the implications the inconsistencies in guidance could have if there were a sizeable increase in the number of DOD deployed civilians in theater. DOD Directive 1404.10 states that the department’s civilian employees who become ill, are injured, or are wounded are eligible to receive health care treatment and services at the same level and scope provided to military personnel. Theater operational and medical officials determine care, it is unclear to what extent DOD civilians can expect routine medical care in theater. DOD mentioned to us that its operating units have sufficient organic medical support and the medical needs of deployed civilians are being met. DOD agreed that the Commander of U.S. Central Command should revise its guidance to clarify the level of care that deployed civilians should receive. Iraq we spoke with said cross-leveling is a less than ideal approach to fill these medical personnel gaps. DOD has noted that, increasingly, deployed civilians also face dangerous circumstances in ongoing contingency operations. To enhance medical units’ preparedness to conduct current and future operations, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the Combatant Commander of U.S. Central Command to clarify the level of care that deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater, including their eligibility for routine care, we say.