The IG Act created independent IG offices at 30 major departments and agencies. In 1988, the IG Act was amended to establish additional IG offices in 33 DFEs. The DFE IGs have the same authorities and responsibilities as those IGs originally established. But they are appointed and may be removed by their agency heads rather than by the President and are not subject to Senate confirmation. the IGs established under other statutes. Although not in the scope of our review, there are 10 IGs establish by other statutes with provisions similar to those in the IG act. IGs established by the IG Act of 1978, as amended, with appointment by the President and Senate confirmation. The Department of State IG provides oversight of the Broadcasting Board of Governors, which is a designed federal entity. The IG is a member of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board. In addition to the contact named above, Jackson W. Hufnagle, Assistant Director; Jacquelyn Hamilton; Werner F. Miranda Hernandez; Rebecca Shea; and Clarence A. Whitt made key contributions to this report. Act intended to enhance IG independence. IGs reported pay that was at specified levels required by the Reform Act for IGs appointed by the President. Reform Act also requires that each IG established by the IG Act have his or her own legal counsel or obtain necessary legal counsel from another IG office or from the IG Council. In a March 1995 report, we reported that the IG community expressed concerns that IGs with attorneys located organizationally in their agencies’ offices of general counsel would not always receive independent legal advice. All 32 DFE IGs who responded to our survey indicated that they obtain independent legal counsel, with 26 employing their own counsel, 5 using the legal counsels of other IGs’ offices, and 1. For the 30 IGs appointed by the President, 29 employ their own legal counsel while 1 IG uses the legal services of another IG. The results from our survey show that all the IGs established by the IG Act reported having access to a legal counsel that is organizationally independent. No IGs rely on the general counsel offices of their agencies. fiscal year 2011, and the IGs’ semiannual reports to the Congress. We asked all of the 62 IGs about the implementation of Reform Act provisions intended to keep IG pay and salaries at a specified level for IGs appointed by the President. We also received and incorporated as appropriate technical comments from several IG offices. We believe that the information and data obtained, and analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the IG Council. The IG Reform Act of 2008 (Reform Act) amended the IG Act by adding requirements related to IG independence and effectiveness. Among other provisions, the Reform Act requires the rate of basic pay of the IGs appointed by the President to be at a specified level. The Reform Act also requires an IG to obtain legal advice from his or her own counsel ability in accounting, auditing, financial analysis, law, management analysis, public administration, or investigation. The fields in which an IG can have experience are intended to be sufficiently diverse so that many qualified people could be considered. IGs’ survey information provided on the background of each IG, including professional experience, academic degrees, and professional certifications obtained prior to being appointed to an IG position. We compared this information to the areas of demonstrated ability specified by the IG Act and summarized the number of IGs in each area. We conducted our work from November 2010 to September 2011 in accordance with all sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework that are relevant to our objectives. The framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives. contained recommendations for corrective actions. For example, the Farm Credit Administration IG assessed the agency’s readiness to take enforcement actions related to its mission. The 62 federal IGs responding to our survey reported information on their expertise and qualifications. The IGs’ information showed a wide range of backgrounds, skills, and professional certifications relevant to their work consistent with the areas of demonstrated experience specified by the IG Act. The Postal Service IG provided recommendations to improve the efficiency of postal operations related to performance management in sorting the mail. systems auditors, and 7 with other certifications such as a certified government auditing professional. We received comments from the IG Council (reprinted in app. V), on September 13, 2011. The council commented that the draft provided useful information on the independence, activities, and accomplishments of the federal inspectors general. We also received, and incorporated as appropriate, technical comments from several IG staff members, including a certified information officer and a certified inspector general. (See fig. 5.) appointed by the President have their pay adjusted from Executive Schedule IV to Executive Schedule III plus 3 percent. The Reform Act requires that the grade, level, or rank designation for the DFE IGs be set at or above that of a majority of the senior-level executives of the agency. Of the 32 D FE IGs who responded to our survey, 29 reported that their pay and salaries were consistent with those of theSenior-level Executives of their agencies. of the remaining 3 IGs, 1 was newly established in fiscal year 2011 and had not yet determined an amount of pay consistent with senior- level executives. Figure 3 summarizes the background experiences of the 62 IGs who responded to our survey. Most of the IGs reported having degrees in areas that are relevant to performing in an IG position. Additional degrees were reported by both presidential and DFE IGs in areas of criminal justice, investigations, law enforcement; management analysis; and public administration. Other academic degrees reported by presidential and IGs included mathematics, science, sociology, education, psychology, and English. With respect to academic degrees, we also obtained information on the academic degrees obtained by the62 IGs. professional certifications, 6 IGs appointed by the President reported having professional certifications. 28 DFE IGs reported they possessed at least one professional certification related to their IG responsibilities. For the presidential IGs, 2 were certified fraud examiners, 1 reported being a certified internal auditor. 6 reported they are certified public accountants and 6 reported that they were certified internal auditors. Additional certifications reported by the D FE IGs include 6 certified government financial managers, 4 fraud examiner, 3 certified information managers and 2 had certifications in additional separate areas. The IG Act requires the agency head to transmit the IG report to the appropriate committees or subcommittees of the Congress within 7 calendar days. We asked whether any of the 62 IGs we surveyed had used the 7-day letter at any time during fiscal years 2008, 2009, and 2010. Only one, a presidentially appointed IG, had used it during this time frame. Provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act amending the IG Act are intended to provide an additional degree of independence to IGs. The Dodd-Frank Act requires the written concurrence of a two-thirds majority of the board or commission to remove an IG. Prior to this protection, most DFE IGs reported to, and were subject to removal by, the individual serving as head of the DFE. The Reform Act also independence to those IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. Of these 26 IGs, 14 reported that the act’s provision was a factor in their decision to resign. The Dodd-Frank Act amended the IG Act with provisions to enhance the independence of IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. The IG Act also provides protections to the independent of the IGs while keeping both their agency heads and the Congress fully and currently informed about particularly flagrant problems and deficiencies within their agencies. Just over half of these IGs responded that the change of agency head to the full board or commission increased their independence. Most responded that requirements for a two- thirds concurrence among the board orCommissions increased independence. designating the boards and commissions as the DFE heads enhances their independence, and 20 responded that their independence is enhanced by requiring a two-thirds majority for their removal. A smaller number of affected IGs stated that these provisions had no effect on their independence. One DFE IG affected by the provisions did not respond to these survey questions. Also, a former D FE IG stated that reporting to his commission would reduce his independence, according to the survey. The survey was carried out by the European Commission. The fiscal year 2011 budget included amounts for 28 of the 30 presidentially appointed IGs. Of the 28 presidential IGs with budget amounts separately disclosed in the President's budget, 1 included comments indicating that the IG’s fiscal year2011 budget would substantially inhibit the IG from performing the duties of the office. There were four newly established DFE IGs that were not part of the full fiscalyear 2011 budget process. The President’S budget had specific budget amounts for only 7 of the 33 DFEIGs. same provisions for both the DFE IGs and the IGs appointed by the President. The IGs’ effectiveness was reflected in a range of reported accomplishments, such as potential dollars to be saved by the government through the results of federal IG audits, investigations, and other reports. We notified the IG Council that most of the D FE IGs did not have separate budget amounts included in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. The IG Council has responded that it will review and assess this matter and, if necessary, work with congressional and administration officials. their IGs have correspondingly smaller budgets and fewer staff. The presidentially appointed IGs and the DFE IGs reported to us total budget authority for fiscal year 2010 of about $2.2 billion with approximately 13,652 authorized full-time equivalent staff. They had about 86 percent (11,564) of the total staff on board. The budgets of the D FE IGs made up about 16 percent (about $352 million) for IGs, the report said. fiscal year 2009, these IGs identified $43.3 billion in potential savings from audits and investigations. Over 5,900 criminal actions, 1,100 civil actions, 4,460 suspensions or debarments, and over 6,100 indictments resulted from their work. Based on this information, the potential dollar savings reported by these IGS represent a return on investment of approximately $18 for every IG dollar spent. In addition to measurable accomplishments, IGs also reported actions taken to prevent problems within their agencies. concurrence of a two-thirds majority of the board or commission for removal of an IG. We obtained information on the accomplishments of the IGs as reported to the IG Council for fiscal year 2009. We also obtained information reported by the Recovery Board on its members prior to an IG’s removal. In addition, based on our review of the President's fiscal year 2011 budget submission to the Congress, the IGS’ budget amounts were not always separately identified as required by the Reform Act. because the commission has both federal and state members. The current IG who took office during our review stated that the primary concern is how nonfederal members would exercise their authority over a federal IG. The Reform Act amended the IG Act to require that IG budget requests include certain information and be separately identified in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. In addition, along with the separately identified IG budgets, the IGs may include comments with respect to the budget if the amount of the IG budget submitted by the agency or the President would substantially inhibit. We will send copies of this report to members of the IG Council. We will also send copies to the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Finance. If you have any questions or would like to discuss this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8486 or raglands@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of the report. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/congress/gfo-survey. mission and accomplishments in providing oversight of Recovery Act funds. In their annual report to the President, the IGs identified billions of dollars in savings and cost recoveries. The IGs’ effectiveness was demonstrated by their reporting on oversight of management challenges identified at their agencies. For example, IGs in agencies receiving Recovery Act. funds have reported providing oversight in the areas of establishing and maintaining controls to help. ensure the funds are used properly. The IG Act was passed in 2000 to help prevent fraud, waste, and abuse. included a provision intended to provide additional IG independence through the transparent reporting of their budgets. The Reform Act requires the President’s budget submission to the Congress to have the IGs’ requested budget amounts identified separately. The Recovery Act provided for IG oversight of the funds. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery Act) is one of the federal government”s key efforts to stimulate the economy in response to the most serious economic crisis since the Great Depression. by creating the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Recovery Board), which has an IG Chairman and 12 additional IG board members. Altogether, there are 30 IGs involved with the oversight of Recovery Act funds. The Recovery Act requires IG reviews of concerns raised by the public about investments of stimulus funds and provides IGs the authority to examine records and interview Recovery Act fund contractors and grantees. Each IG appointment is to be without regard to political affiliation and solely on the basis of integrity and expertise. The Recovery Board is charged under the act with establishing and maintaining a user friendly website to foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of Recovery Act funds. To help prevent fraud and other potential wrongdoing, the IGs offered training to federal, state, and local employees, as well as contractors, private entities, and award recipients. The IGs’ training was intended to improve awareness of the legal and administrative requirements of the Recovery Act programs. The management challenges reported annually by federal agencies in their performance and accountability reports are key to focusing on effective IG oversight. management challenges by the IGs began in 1997. Congressional leaders asked IGs to identify the 10 most serious management problems in their respective agencies. This request began a yearly process that continues as a result of the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000. Most of the 203 management challenges they reported for fiscal year 2010 focused on issues specific to their agencies’ missions and performance management. For example, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s IG reported that major changes to the direction of the agency were needed. was often identified as a management challenge. The performance management issues the DFE IGs identified as management challenges included timely implementation of IG recommendations by the Peace Corps. Concerns over internal controls, improper payments, and the security of federal property were also included in the “other’s” category. In addition, the D FE IGs issued reports that addressed almost 90 percent of the management challenges identified and addressed. The report was released on Tuesday. It was compiled by the Federal Maritime Commission, the National Labor Relations Board and the National Archives and Records Administration. Department of Health and Human Services IG cited the management challenges associated with delivery of the nation’s health care. The other management challenges addressed by the IGs relate to information technology, procurement, financial management, and human resources. In addition to providing oversight coverage of management challenges, the presidential IGs issued reports that addressed about 93 percent of themanagement challenges identified. These reports contained recommendations for improving the weaknesses specified by theManagement challenges. For example, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation IG recommended strengthening specific controls over managing the space program. closing process for failed financial institutions which is a key aspect of FDIC’s mission regarding insured depository institutions. Also, the Social Security Administration IG identified transparency and accountability issues as an agency management challenge. The DFE IGs reported 124 management challenges for fiscal year 2010, with a focus on their agencies’ missions, information technology, and performance management. For example, the Farm Credit Administration's IG reported management challenges related to the safety, soundness, and mission accomplishment of the Farm credit System.