U.S. General Accounting Office. 2000 Census: Coverage Evaluation Matching Implemented As Planned, but Census Bureau Should Evaluate Lessons Learned. 2000 census: Better Productivity Data Needed for Future Planning and Budgeting. 2000ensus: Analysis of Fiscal Year 2000 Budget and Internal Control Weaknesses at the U.S Census Bureau.2000 census: Significant Increase in Cost Per Housing Unit Compared to 1990 Census.2000 Census: Review of Partnership Program Highlights Best Practices for Future Operations.2000ensus: Historical Data on Enumerator Productivity Are Limited. 2001. U.S. General Accounting Office. 2000 Census: Information on Short- and Long-Form Response Rates. GAO/GGD-00-127R. Washington, D.C.: June 7, 2000. The Census was conducted between July 1, 1999, and July 31, 2001. The results of the 2000 Census were released on June 6, 2001, and on June 9, 2002, respectively, by the Census Bureau. The data was released to the public by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) Our work was done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Accurate census results are critical because the data are used to reapportion seats in the House of Representatives and for congressional redistricting. Census data remain an important element in allocating federal aid to state and local governments. With billions of dollars at stake, we need accurate census results. We address them in the “Agency Comments and Evaluation” section of this report. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about the report. also provided minor technical corrections that we incorporated in our report as appropriate. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send copies to other interested congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the Bureau of the Census. Copies will be made available to others upon request. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. was processing a key geographic data file and was thus able to incorporate the corrections before the data were finalized. Second, the FSCPE analysts had thoroughly documented the issues and recommended how the bureau should correct the errors. The five errors did not require additional research or field verification. Bureau officials told us that they lacked the time to research the remaining issues, as well as field staff to inspect purported discrepancies. As a result, the bureau missed an important opportunity to verify and possibly improve the quality of the data. a larger number of issues was that the bureau’s requirements for documenting data issues were not clearly defined. For example, the training materials did not provide any specific guidance on the type of evidence analysts needed to support data issues. This could help explain the variation that we observed in the quality of the documentation analysts provided. In some cases, the bureau provided only minimal data, while others supported issues with state and local administrative records, historical data, photographs, and maps. The training materials told analysts to supply as much supporting information as necessary. Bureau data show that after reviewing census data for 39 states and Puerto Rico, FSCPE members identified a total of 1,402 issues. Since the bureau has yet to resolve most of these issues, it is not known whether they are necessarily errors. Group quarters issues were those most frequently identified by the bureau, accounting for 1,599 of the 4,809 issues identified (33 percent) Group quarters issue: The bureau was unable to classify 2,060 issues (43 percent). Bureau officials said that in these cases, analysts did not provide sufficient documentation for the bureau to determine the nature of the issue. Bureau and FSCPE analysts were to ensure that group quarters were correctly placed or “geocoded” on census maps. They were to describe each issue flagged and provide supporting documentation derived from bureau resources and/or resources of the respective state government. Staff from the regional offices reviewed demographic data from the 50 states, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia. They focused on identifying inconsistent demographic characteristics and did not necessarily concentrate on individual states. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates the population of the United States at more than 100 million people. not indicate their nature. FSCPE members compared census data to administrative records and other data, and were better able to document specific issues. Examples of the three issue categories and how they were found include: Group quarters issues: Analysts noticed that the group quarters population count in a particular census tract of a large midwestern city appeared to be too high. By comparing state administrative records to information obtained from bureau resources, analysts determined that bureau data had placed college dormitories in the wrong tract. on any one particular state or locality. The bureau reimbursed state governments for wages and expenses FSCPE members incurred. A separate set of employees from the bureau’s Population Division assessed issues identified by Full Count Review analysts. Those issues deemed to have adequate documentation were classified as a “group quarters,” “housing unit,’ or “household” or ‘other’ issue. Bureau officials told us that the remaining issues could not be categorized because the issues were too complex. FSCPE members identified the five issues, all of which involved group quarters that were placed in the wrong locations. They included (1) a military base in Nevada, (2) 10 facilities at a college in Wisconsin, (3) 9 facilities in New York City and (4) 14 at a Washington prison. Bureau officials said that the bureau was able to correct these issues for two reasons. First, FSCPE analysts found them early in the Full Count Review program, while the bureau found them later. to suspected discrepancies in the population counts and locations of prisons, dormitories, nursing homes, and similar group living arrangements. Analysts also identified 479 housing unit issues (10 percent of the total), and 288 household issues (6 percent) There were also 383 issues (8 percent) that the bureau classified as “other” They contained questions concerning the demographic characteristics of the data such as age, race, and gender. The count of occupied housing units differed from what analysts expected while household issues had population data for occupied residences that differed. An analyst compared population data from the 1990 Census and 2000 Census. Data from the 2000 Census appeared to accurately reflect the large amount of new house construction that had taken place within a specific census tract. However, because the population count differed, it was flagged as not reflecting the increase in housing units in the area. The analyst then compared the data from both censuses and found that the 2000 census did not appear to reflect the increase. It was then flagged as 'not accurate' and the data was re-examined. The apportionment and redistricting data were released with more than 4,800 unresolved issues. Until these issues are resolved, uncertainties will surround the accuracy of the census data for the affected localities. Some of the issues might be resolved under the CQR program, which the bureau designed to respond to challenges to housing unit and group quarters population counts received from state, local, or tribal governments. Of the 4,804 issues remaining after Full Count Review, 1,994 (42 percent) were referred to CQr, and of these, 537 were accepted for further investigation. had difficulty determining the precise nature of an issue or if in fact an issue even existed. In contrast, the CQR program provides comprehensive guidelines on the documentation required for making submissions. A third, and related factor that affected the bureau’s ability to resolve a larger number of issues stemmed from the lack of information from government and tribal officials. The guidance then details the information needed to support boundary corrections, geocoding and coverage corrections, and group quarters population corrections. The bureau will investigate concerns raised by government and Tribal officials, such officials must first supply specific information. members’ local demographic knowledge. According to bureau officials, the bureau plans to include a Full Count Review program in census tests it expects to conduct later in the decade. Foremost among the areas in need of improvement is resolving a larger number of data issues prior to the release of apportionment testing procedures under conditions as close to the actual census as possible. The bureau is exploring the feasibility of using staff from the bureau’s regional offices to help investigate issues, the authors say. The Full Count Review program was designed to rapidly examine, rectify if possible, and clear census data files and products for subsequent processing or public release. The program was poorly integrated with other census operations and units that could have investigated the issues and corrected the data if warranted. The fact that the apportionment and redistricting data were released with around 4,800 unresolved data issues of unknown validity, magnitude, and impact is cause for concern. It will be important for the bureau to explore how to make better use of the program for correcting potential errors in census data. the bureau would only check for systemic errors. Because of the inconsistent message on the purpose of the Full Count Review program, the bureau may have set up the expectation that a larger number of issues would be resolved. For example, one FSCPE member told us that he expected FSC PE members to identify any geographic discrepancies that contrasted with preliminary census data. He noted that both he and his staff were very “dismayed” to find out that certain discrepancies involving group quarters were not resolved prior. from that indicated by other data sources, the analyst flagged it as an issue to avoid undercounting the population. According to bureau officials, the bureau corrected data for 5 of the 4,809 issues prior to the December 31, 2000, release of reapportionment data and the April 1, 2001,release of redistricting data. The officials noted that the bureau generally did not use the Full Count Review program to resolve individual issues. None of the issues were found to be software problems. the bureau’s decision came after the 1998 dress rehearsal for the 2000 Census, which meant that the bureau had no opportunity to test the Full Count Review program in an operational environment. The effort would require close coordination with several bureau units. A second factor that affected the bureau's ability to correct the issues was the lack of time or staff to correct them. If more time was available in the future, it would be possible to correct a larger number of individual issues prior to the release of the public law data, officials said. just 14 months before Census Day, April 1, 2000. The timing of the decision stemmed from the Supreme Court’s January 1999 ruling that prohibited the bureau from using statistical sampling for purposes of congressional apportionment. The bureau originally planned a ‘one-number’ census that would have integrated the results of a sample survey with the traditional census to provide one adjusted set of census numbers. Faced with the larger workload of reviewing two sets of data— adjusted and unadjusted—the bureau decided to enlist the help of FSCPE members. The overall results of the Full Count Review program and FSCPE members’ participation appear to be mixed. Unlike the CQR program, where the bureau required local governments to provide specific documentation before it would commit resources to investigate local data issues, the Fullcount review program had no filter for screening submissions based on the quality of the documentation. Better guidance on documenting issues for the Full count review program could make the bureau’s follow-up investigations more efficient. Another area where there is room for improvement concerns the consistency and clarity in which the bureau communicated the objectives of the program. We analyzed the work papers submitted by FSCPE members and other participants in the Full Count Review program. We also analyzed data from the bureau’s Count Review Information System. To identify lessons learned for future improvements, we examined bureau training manuals, statements of work, process models. We performed our audit in Washington, D.C., and the bureau's headquarters in Suitland, Maryland, between May 2001 and April 2002. program was created to help the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services identify and fix problems in the health care system. The Full Count Review program ran from June 2000 through March 2001. Some of the analysts’ work was contracted to members of the FSCPE, an organization composed of state demographers. The bureau surveyed the 40 entities that participated in the program and found that most were satisfied with their experience. We recommend that the Secretary of Commerce direct the bureau to develop ways to resolve a larger number of data issues prior to the release of the public law data. The full report can be found at: http://www.census.gov/. data issues in the field prior to the release of public law data. The Secretary of Commerce should also ensure that the bureau clarifies and consistently communicates to participants the objectives of the Full Count Review program. The Bureau of the Census concurred with all of our recommendations and had no comments on them. The bureau has not responded to our request for comment on this report. The full report is available online at: http://www.fscpe.org/full-count-review-report.