GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can also go to www.people.com/gao for more information. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site daily. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/Fraudnet.htm, E-mails: fraudnet@gao, or 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) We are sending copies of this report to the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) and interested congressional committees. The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American. Please contact me at (202) 512-9505 if you have any questions. Major contributors to this report were David Childress, Mary Jo Lewnard, and Edda Emmanuelli-Perez. fee schedules that are consistent with the updated fee schedules unless a determination is made that a different fee schedule is justified; and undertake a notification, training, and follow-up effort. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD concurred with the recommendations and commented on actions that have been or are to be taken. Because archive officials were unaware of the FMR fee schedule, we continue to believe that the more substantive actions that we recommended are warranted. It added that DOD audit organizations will be requested to include user fee schedule compliance as a part of their standard reviews, where applicable. request total $15 or less. Documents shall be provided without charge or at reduced charge when a DOD component determines that a waiver or reduction of fees is in the public interest. DOD last revised its User Charge Statute fee schedule for copying, certifying, and searching records in March 1986. At that time, DOD revised its user fees instruction and added a schedule of fees and rates for services related to copying, certification, and search records. The instruction stated that this schedule was to be. used for such services throughout DOD. The same fees were included in the DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4, Appendix 2, issued in March 1997. Although the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 and OMB Circular A-25 require a biennial review of charges for services, DOD Comptroller officials were not aware of any reviews having been done. Fees being developed by the Army Military History Institute indicate that the fees mandated in Appendix 2 might be significantly understated. For example, the Institute’s early proposal,  archives do not impose a minimum charge for providing information. This could result in requesters receiving copies of documents free or for less than a dollar as opposed to the $3.50 minimum specified in the DOD’s User Charge fee schedule. The Marine Corps fees, which are based on FOIA, resulted in any requester receiving up to 2 hours of search time and 100 pages without a charge. Archives officials told us that, in many cases, fees are not charged when the request is from military personnel, veterans, or government employees. Military archive officials reported collecting about $81,000 during fiscal year 2000. Air Force reported the most collections (about $46,000) and the Marine Corps reporting the least ( about $2,000). However, these amounts are probably much less than amounts that should be collected if updated fee schedules are established and effectively implemented. Fees charged by the archives are generally less than those in DOD fee schedules even though the fees in the DOD schedules are outdated and could be understated by a factor of three or four. accruing to the public at large, a reasonable charge shall be made to each identifiable recipient. The policy provides that a charge will be imposed to recover the full cost to the federal government of rendering a service or the fair market value of such service, whichever is higher. Appendix 1 of Chapter 4 lists benefits for which no charge is to be made such as services requested by members of the U.S. Armed Forces in their capacity as service members. Appendix 2, “Schedule of Fees and Rates for Copying, Certifying, and Searching Records Rendered to the Public,” is mandated. Fees for search, review, and duplication of documents are to be based on direct costs. The first 2 hours of search time and the first 100 pages of duplication shall be provided without charge unless requesters are seeking documents for commercial use. Fees will be waived or reduced when the information is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of DOD, and fees shall be automatically waived when assessable fees total $15 or less. FOIA requests are specifically excluded under Section 1085. The Directorate for Freedom of Information and Security Review is responsible for the FOIA regulation. Fee schedule for general information has not been updated since 1986. FOIA fee schedule for technical information was last issued in 1998. DOD reported that about $670,000 was recovered through assessed fees in fiscal year 2000, less than 2 percent of the reported $36.5 million in costs associated with providing information under FOIA. If FOIA fees are understated by a significant amount, as appears possible, increases in increases in FOIA fees could be significant. The collections reported by the four primary military archives are not indicative of potential Comptroller collections. Collections from updated FOIA fee schedules could be significant, authors say. DOD has not revised its fee schedules under the User Charge Statute and FOIA since 1986, they say. The primary military archives are not using the mandated fee schedules, they write. The fees being charged to public requesters vary significantly across these archives, the authors say, and they need to be consistent across the DOD system. They recommend that the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) and the Director, Freedom of Information and Security Review review and update fee schedules. All of the four primary archives charge fees for providing historical information to requesters. None of the fees were in accordance with the mandated DOD user fee schedule specified in Appendix 2 of DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4. If a request is not identified as a FOIA request, the fees should be determined under the User Charge Statute. Neither of these statutes authorizes the military archives to retain fees collected in providing general Receipts. These arrangements, by reducing budgetary pressures, have lessened the benefits that an archive could achieve from implementing Section 1085. Section 1085 does not apply to the DOD offices, organizations, museums, and archives other than the four designated archives. The User Charge Statute and FOIA will continue to be the basic authority for these activities to charge fees for providing information. DOD’s policy, as stated in Chapter 4, is that when a service is provided that conveys special benefits to recipients, above and beyond those provided by DOD, the fee should be charged for that service. The user charge Statute is implemented by Office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-25, and DOD Financial Management Regulation (FMR), Volume 11A, Chapter 4. Section 1085 does not specify a fee structure or the fees that are to be charged. Prior to the authority granted under Section 1085, DOD, including the military archives, was authorized to charge fees for responding to requests for information. The Section also states that fees are not to be charges for information that is requested (1) to carry out a duty as a member of the armed forces or employee of the United States or (2) under FOIA, which has a separate fee structure. Fees collected under both the User Charge Statute and FOIA for general information must be deposited in the Treasury as Miscellaneous Receipts. The Army Military History Institute identified the ability to use collected fees to improve service to the public as the primary reason it developed the legislative proposals that led to Section 1085. Increasing numbers of public requests at a time when budgetary resources were decreasing resulted in the increase in the authority to retain collected fees for the purpose of defraying costs, the institute says. in Appendix 2 establishes a minimum fee of $3.50 for any chargeable case and additional fees for searching and providing copies of various records, photographs, forms, etc. For photography, the Appendix’s schedule of prices per print is based on the size, type, and quantity ordered. In this case, the fee under Appendix 2 appears to be about one-third of the Institute's proposal. Comptroller officials noted that Appendix 2 provided for a minimum clerical search and processing charge of $8.30. to 33. As a result, backlogs and waiting times increased. Congress enacted Section 1085 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001. The Act authorizes the charging and retaining of fees by one designated primary archive in each of the four military departments. The four designated archives are the Air Force Historical Research Agency at Maxwell AFB, Alabama; Army Military History Institute at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania; Marine Corps Historical Center at Washington Navy Yard, D.C.; and Naval Historical Center in Washington. Section 1085 permits each of the four archives to develop its own fee schedule. Officials at the Air Force Historical Research Agency had tasked key stakeholders with determining a fee structure. However, they have not established a target date for implementing the Section.Section by October 2001. The Naval Historical Center and the Marine Corps Historical Center have not decided whether to implement a fee system based on Section 1085 provisions. They have taken no specific actions toward implementation and have received no implementation guidance from the Air force. The specified charge for clerical search and processing is $13.25 per hour with a minimum charge of $8.30. Existing fees vary significantly among the archives. The Institute’s proposal for five copies of an 8- x 10-inch photograph shows a total fee of $105 (pull fee per item of $5 and $20 for each copy). The total fee under Appendix 2. is $105. The proposal includes a $25 hourly research charge. If a search charge is appropriate, the Institute”s proposal includes an $18.25 hourly charge. In the mid-1990s, the Army Military History Institute began developing proposed legislation for charging and retaining fees to defray costs of providing historical information to the public. The Institute, whose mission is to preserve the Army’s history, was experiencing a significant increase in requests from the public while resources available to respond were decreasing. For example, the annual number of requests increased from about 13,000 in 1987 to 20,600 in 1995 and to 35,800 in 2000. During the same period, the number of staff members decreased from over 40 to over 30.  Archives are developing arrangements to minimize the cost impact of public requests on the archives’ budgets. For example, the Army Military History Institute arranged for a contract, through a nonappropriated fund account, to reproduce requested photographs with fees collected for the photographs reimbursing the fund. The Naval Historical Center refers those requesting its photographs to the Naval Historical Foundation, a nonprofit foundation, which reproduces the photographs and charges the customer. Without such arrangements, the costs of reproducing photographs and responding to requesters would come from the archive’s budget.