The military services’ ROTC programs each came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding the annual officer production goals that they established to meet their respective authorized end strengths. Most states have a unit from each service located within the state and and the all-volunteer force with its potential to provide officers from a variety of backgrounds and experiences available within the student population on a college or university campus. By statute, at least one ROTc unit must be established and maintained in each state if certain conditions are met. All states have at least one unit located within the state. Each unit may support students at more than one school. Students travel from their affiliate school to the host unit for their ROTC activities. The Navy maintains 12 ROTc units in which the command structure and RotC activities are divided between more thanOne host school. This typically happens no later than the junior year, prior to the service’s advanced training. The unit's command staff is assigned to the school that has been designated as the host. year 2012, the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) program produced over 9,000 active duty, guard, and reserve officers. Table 6 provides a listing of the number of officers produced in fiscal year 2012 by unit, school location, and service. Table 7 presents the Army’s enrollment information as of November 2012, table 8 presents the Navy’S enrollment information. table 9 presents the ROTC enrollment information for each of the military services’ military services. enrollment data, we identified that the services’ ROTC programs had about 53,000 students enrolled across all years of study in 2012. The Army had over 33,000Students enrolled, the Navy had over 6,000 enrolled, and the Air Force had over 14,000 Students enrolled. The enrollment information is alphabetized by state or U.S. territory and then by unit and thenby school within the unit. In addition to the contact named above, Margaret Best (Assistant Director), Emily Biskup, Rebekah J. Boone, Richard Burkard, Timothy Carr, Susan Ditto, Cynthia Grant, Kimberly Mayo, Michael S. Each service adjusts the number of people they plan to admit into future classes at their respective Officer Candidate School or, in the case of the Air Force, Officer Training School. Neither OSD nor the services have established performance measures that provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall effectiveness and efficiency of ROTC programs. Until the military services establish a formal strategy to communicate with key stakeholders, it will find it difficult to obtain the support that is needed to make the necessary changes, the authors say. The military services will findit difficult to get the support they need to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of RotC programs, they say. ROTC’s relevance extends beyond its quantitative production capability. ROTC supports the concept of a citizen-soldier military coursework. DOD Instruction 1215.08 requires the military services to advise schools whose ROTc units are not producing enough officers to justify investment. The military services do not consistently adhere to this requirement, and thus may be missing important opportunities to build awareness about the RotC program. For example, Army and Navy officials told us that they currently do not. Currently do not communicate with schools. regarding ROTT. ROTC is the largest of the three major officer commissioning programs for DOD. The other two major commissioning officer sources include the military service academies and Officer Candidate Schools/Officer Training School. ROTC programs prepare college and university students to serve as officers in the military services. The program was established by the National Defense Act of 1916 to supplement the military academies in preparing selected students for commissioned military service and officer training. In fiscal year 2012, nearly half of all the newly commissioned active duty officers came from the ROTc program. ROTC units are subject to the same numerical production requirement regardless of the actual cost each service incurs at a particular college or university. Because such cost data are not consistently accounted for, it is not clear how the production requirement can be used to justify DOD’s investment. The absence of clearly defined measures also could lead the services to under- or over-emphasize the relative importance of an ROTC unit to a particular area, the authors say. The authors conclude that DOD's instruction requires officer production from each unit to be adequate to justify its investment. In fiscal years 2008 through 2012, each service came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding its overall ROTC officer production goals for newly commissioned officers. The Army met at least 95 percent of its goal. The Navy and Air Force each exceeded their production goals in 3 of the 5 years we studied. Half of all RotC units did not produce the minimum average annual production of officers over a 5-year period required by DOD to justify investment in an ROTc unit. 2008 through 2012 and fiscal year 2012 enrollment data. We chose to assess the officer production from each service’s ROTC program for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 because it is the most recently completed 5-year period at the time of our review. We compared overall officer production with other major commissioning sources. We also analyzed the data provided to determine the degree to which the units are not meeting minimum production requirements and to determine whether the units met minimum production requirement for ROTc officer production. each unit provided to us by the military services and DOD’s fiscal year 2012 composite rates to determine the cost of military personnel per each ROTC unit in fiscal year2012. We reviewed the fiscal year 2014 budget documentation to identify the average operation and maintenance cost (excluding scholarships) per ROTCs in fiscal 2012. We used these data to determine cost of units that met and did not meet DOD minimum production requirements for fiscal years 2008 through 2012. To assess the reliability of the production and cost data, we discussed. routine and systematic and have not yielded closures that service officials believe are needed. The military services’ ROTC programs have, over the past decade, conducted a total of 11 evaluations. These practices indicate that a body of evidence is more valuable to decision makers than a single study. Multiple studies with similar results strengthen confidence in their conclusions, the authors say. The study was conducted by the Defense Department’s Office of the Inspector General, which is based in Washington, D.C. of officers by individual ROTC units. These evaluations provided information about individual RotC unit performance, with a focus on officer production. However, the evaluations did not assess the overall ROTc program against strategic goals and objectives. Leading organizations that have progressed toward results-oriented management use performance information to identify gaps in performance, to improve organizational processes, and to improve their performance by aligning measures with the goals and objective at each level of the organization. The commitment of managers to results- oriented management is critical to the increased use of performance information that could be used to improve performance. be measured against ROTC program goals and objectives to influence policy and program decisions. This commitment could be demonstrated by their willingness and ability to make decisions and manage programs on the basis of results. We reviewed relevant legislation, specifically sections 2101- 2111b of Title 10 of the U.S. Code. We also obtained and analyzed information from each of the services to determine the frequency with which the services evaluated unit unit performance. In addition, we reviewed prior GAO reports on ROTc and officer accessions programs to determine what recommendations and actions have previously been taken in regard to improving the efficiency and effectiveness. The services have conducted a total of 11 evaluations to identify units for consolidation or closure. The evaluations have largely occurred on an ad hoc basis and are narrowly focused on assessing the productivity of individual ROTC units, rather than the overall performance of the program. The variability of the factors used in considering ROTc units for closure hinders the services’ efforts to compare evaluation results over time, even within a single service. Until clearly defined and comprehensive performance measures are established to evaluate overall program performance, the services will have limited information available. The military services have been unsuccessful in completing any of these politically sensitive consolidations or closures in part because and prior the services do not proactively and periodically engage congressional stakeholders on ROTC program performance. DOD instruction gives service Secretaries discretion on which units to close. The services collectively have conducted 11 assessments of unit productivity in the past 10 years. All of which have produced proposals recommending selected RotC units for consolidation or closure. However, no closures have occurred as a result. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/military/top-secretaries-rOTC-closings. DOD Instruction 1215.08 tasks the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness with establishing policy and providing implementing guidance. DOD’s the program. In addition, communication with key stakeholders, such as Congress and school administrators, about ROTC performance is important to raising awareness about the program and ensuring that program-related decisions can be implemented effectively. To help improve the oversight and accountability of the military services’ ROTc programs, we recommend that the Secretary of defense direct the Under secretary of Defense to take the following three actions. programs risk having more units than needed or units that are not most effectively located. OSD and the military services are generally assigned responsibility for conducting oversight of ROTC programs. DOD’s Instruction 1215.08 does not specify department-level review of performance measures. Services do not consistently communicate with key stakeholders, such as members of Congress and schools, about performance of RotC programs, except when closure decisions are being considered. This has contributed to difficulty gaining political support for such closures. that do not provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall cost-effectiveness and efficiency of ROTC programs. The military services have had difficulty gaining buy-in for recommendations to close dozens of underproductive units collectively across the services. Clear lines of responsibility when combined with performance measures provide leadership and decision makers with the transparency and authority required to make difficult decisions, the authors say. It is unclear how OSD and the services will each conduct effective oversight of RotC programs, they say. Stakeholder involvement is an important strategy that we have identified in our past work to facilitate agencies’ use of evaluations in program management and policy making. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD concurred with our six recommendations to make management, oversight, and accountability improvements to ROTC programs. DOD also described steps that it planned to take in response to our recommendations. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix IV. program performance and costs, procedures for the establishment and disestablishment of RotC units, assessments of R OTC unit productivity, and program oversight. to communication with schools. We also interviewed knowledgeable officials from OSD and the military services on the activities and mechanisms used to conduct oversight of, and to communicate with stakeholders on, ROTC programs. We visited or contacted the following organizations during our review: Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy, Directorate of Accession Policy, Arlington, Virginia Army Cadet Command, Fort Knox, Kentucky Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Manpower Personnel Education and Training, Arlington,. Virginia Naval Service Training Command, Great Lakes, Illinois Department of the Air Force as 1 of 12 factors in its closure considerations, and the Air Force included “strategic partnerships’ as an important consideration. Neither service identified specifically how these factors correlate to the factors in DOD’s instruction, defined how they contribute to a service-specific need, or explained why these factors were added to the 2012 analysis. In comments on a draft of this report, Navy officials pointed out that the U.S. News and World report ranking correlates to the quality of applicants to the Navy Nuclear Propulsion Program, a specific Navy officer accession requirement. DOD’s instruction specifies five factors for the military services to consider before closing a unit. These include the quality of the officers produced by the unit, operations and maintenance cost of maintaining the unit. However, several commissioned officers for DOD, they do so with a structure where half of the units do not meet DOD's production requirements. Service efforts to revise this inefficient structure are hampered by performance measures that are not clearly defined, allow for inconsistent application of factors for closure, and do not provide a comprehensive understanding of programs’ efficiency or cost- effectiveness. DOD’s unit closure consideration factors require the services to subjectively determine how each factor should be defined and applied. These determinations can change over time without explanation. We recognize that the services need some flexibility to prioritize factors on the basis of their individual needs for newly commissioned officers. But inconsistent measurements limit the services’ ability to compare program progress, results, and efficiency over time, the authors say. The authors found no additional guidance on how to define or apply theclosure consideration factors in DOD’S instruction. DOD also provided technical comments on the draft report, which we incorporated as appropriate. DOD concurred with our recommendation to establish performance measures that are clearly defined and include cost components. DOD stated that our report contained a ‘minor discrepancy’ because it did not include the Navy’s explanation of how a particular unit closure consideration factor contributed to a service-specific need. In fiscal year 2012, the Navy included the U.S. News and World Report ranking of the schools affiliated with a Naval ROTC unit. example, in our 1973 and 1977 reports we found that the services’ reporting to DOD and Congress were inadequate to make necessary judgments on ROTC program effectiveness. established at a college or university, school administrators have to agree to various requirements, to include granting the academic rank of professor to the senior commissioned officer assigned to the program at that institution. In 1991 and 1993, DOD and the services had not made any significant progress in improving their ability to report RotC program performance.. on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. To assess the extent to which the military services’ ROTC programs met goals and minimum requirements for producing officers over a 5-year period, we obtained and analyzed ROTc unit production data from each of the military service for fiscal years. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao,gov. Report: DMDC data on Officers’ Commissioning Programs is Insufficiently Reliable and Needs to be Corrected. Report: Strategic Plan Needed to Address Army’s Emerging Officer Accession and Retention Challenges. Reserve Officers�’ Training Corps: Less Need for Officers Provides Opportunity for Significant Savings. GAO/NSIAD-91-102. Washington, D.C.: February 6, 1996. Officer Commissioning programs: More Oversight and Coordination Needed. We conducted this performance audit from February 2013 to November 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In fiscal year 2013, the Marine Corps Recruiting Command had a budget of $1.2 billion. The budget for fiscal year 2014 was $2.1 billion, with a budget goal of $3.4 billion. In Fiscal Year 2015, the budget was $3 billion, and the budget goal was $4.5 billion. DOD stopped enforcing a requirement for annual reports from the services identifying the cost and budget for their respective ROTC programs. The department’s efficiency initiatives removed reporting requirements related to internally generated oversight reports. To regain some of the information on program visibility that it no longer obtains through the reports, OSD officials told us that they instead use data from service budget submissions to estimate cost data that is less specific than the data that were previously obtained through the services' automatic submission of these reports. of these factors, which officials told us are the measures they currently use to assess the programs, are not clearly defined. DOD’s instruction directs the services to consider the quality of officers produced by a unit that is being evaluated for closure. However, the instruction does not include guidance on how the services should define and assess quality, which could lead to the inconsistent application of the measure by the services. Another example is that DOD's instruction directsThe services to considers the geographic representation of ROTC units. these data with officials from the military services to gain an understanding of the processes and databases used to collect and record data. To assess the extent to which the services have established performance goals and unit level requirements as well as the cost per unit. When we found inconsistencies in the data, we followed up with service officials to attempt to reconcile these differences. We determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for determining the extent of the military's ROTC production goals and units' cost per units. The data were used to determine whether the services are meeting ROTc production goals. as encroaching on the services’ authority to man, train, and equip their respective forces. Given that DOD Instruction 1215.08 requires this approval, which is to occur when a military department proposes closure of a particular unit it is difficult to understand how this methodology approval function could be viewed as an encroachment. DOD officials did not further elaborate on or provide additional support for their position that approving a methodology, as set forth in the DOD instruction, is not an appropriate oversight function to be performed at the department. inconsistent measurements limit the services’ ability to compare program progress, results and efficiencies over time. For our other five recommendations, DOD concurred with each of them and estimated actions would be completed by July 2015. We encourage DOD to begin taking actions now to facilitate implementation of these recommendations as soon as possible. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the Under Secretary for Personnel and Readiness, the Secretaries of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and appropriate congressional committees. 6, 1991. 6.6.6,1991. 6:30 p.m. EST. 6/6/1991. 2:30 a.m.-6:40 a.M. EST 6/7/1991: 2:00 a.k.a. 2.5 a.c. ET. 1:30am-1:30pm ET 6/8/91. 3:30 am-2:30 pm ET 6:00am-3:00pm ET 7:30-4:00 am 7:50am ET.