require agencies to tailor their regulations to impose the least burden on society and to select approaches that maximize net benefits. Researchers have projected that more than half of Americans will be obese by 2030. Increases in weight are linked to increased risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, osteoarthritis, and several forms of cancer. It has been documented that obesity leads to decreased productivity, in terms of increased absenteeism as well as what researchers deem "presenteeism" (decreased outputs while at work) Obesity accounts for approximately 1% to 10% of a country's total health care costs. Obese individuals have medical costs that are 30% higher than individuals of normal weight. A recent study estimated that the annual medical cost of obesity was as high as $78.5 billion in 1998. Of that amount, about 10% was spent on medical care for the obese, according to the study. The study was conducted by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. roughly half of the cost was financed by Medicare and Medicaid. The authors estimated that cost may have risen to as much as $147 billion in 2008. The true cost and savings from any obesity prevention policy is challenging to determine. Researchers cannot isolate the effect of one specific policy relative to other interventions. In order to determine the effectiveness of an intervention such as menu labeling, researchers and policy makers may review the impact of these policies on individuals' behavior and monitor changes in the obesity rate over time. the proposed rule implementing this provision. The report also identifies issues that have generated industry and congressional interest regarding the FDA's interpretation of this provision in the proposed rule. Obesity rates have risen substantially in recent decades, from 13% of the adult population in the 1960s to 36% in 2009-2010. The basic cause of weight gain is an excess of energy intake over energy expenditure. At the population level, this has been reflected in indicators of decreased physical activity and increased calorie consumption. In adults, obesity is associated with a number of health problems. taking into account other factors that may also account for those changes, including the time needed for weight loss and obesity prevention programs to yield an effect, particularly on chronic disease costs. Taking into account the time it takes for weight-loss and obesity-prevention programs to pay off, such as the cost of those programs to start and maintain a healthy body mass index (BMI) and the amount of time needed to get to a healthy weight. The cost of obesity-related illnesses can also be influenced by a number of factors, including age, race and gender. The FDA's final determination on these definitions and the timeline for compliance and enforcement activities will affect the regulation's scope and cost. Faced with the possibility of budget cuts, it is unclear if the FDA will have the funding to enforce a strict interpretation of the accuracy of calorie and other nutrition information. However, the eventual public health benefit to fully comply is likely to outweigh the cost of implementing this rule. The cost and burden imposed on businesses implementing the rule is also likely to be a concern. FDA estimates initial cost of compliance at $315 million and ongoing annual cost of the provision at $44 million. Industry estimates the cost will exceed $1 billion in the first year. FDA also notes that the.society may also be weighed; quantification of this benefit can be challenging. The FDA's PRIA points to three elements of cost for this rule: (1) collecting and managing nutritional analysis records; (2) revising or replacing existing menus and menu boards; and (3) employee training. In the proposed rule, the FDA provides a six-month window for restaurants and SRFE to comply. Industry representatives have requested a longer timeline of one year for full compliance. Failure to comply with the regulations, once finalized, will render the food misbranded. If the language regarding the 80-120 rule is included in the finalrule, the accuracy of restaurant calorie information would be determined using the same standards as packaged foods. The restaurant industry has argued that the six- months window for compliance is not enough time for their constituents. FDA estimated that 27% of chain restaurants have already obtained nutrition information to comply with those state and local regulations. The Office of Management (OMB) is to review the regulations promulgated under the law to ensure, among other considerations, that they are consistent with Executive Orders 12866 and 13563, which require agencies to promulgate rules only after determining that the benefits of a regulation justify its costs, according to a report by the Center for Restaurant and Hospitality Innovation (CRH) elect to be subject to the requirements of the law, set an effective date, and outlined enforcement mechanisms for establishments that fail to comply. The proposed rule was available for public comment through July 5, 2011, and a final rule is expected by the end of 2012. The following sections describe the components of the proposed rule that have invoked concern or debate, and the policy implications of the rulemaking process. The report also provides a discussion of the issues that have been raised in the public comment period. At issue is the scope of covered establishments. Some have argued that Option 1 is too broad and that grocery and convenience stores should not be covered by the rule. The state and local menu labeling regulations that have been enacted in the United States generally do not apply to grocery stores. Some Members of Congress have proposed legislation directing the FDA to narrowly interpret the law by excluding primarily retail entities, because the perceived burden of including those entities outweighs the perceived potential benefits. The original sponsors of the bill disagree. of floor space devoted to food and regardless of whether food sales constitute a large or small portion of the establishments' total business. This would include food outlets such as movie theaters, bowling alleys, and other entertainment venues, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Those who argue for the narrower version, including industry groups such as the Food Marketing Institute, feel that the FDA has overstepped its statutory authority. They feel that grocery stores should not be included in the rule for a number of reasons, including disproportionate burden on grocery stores. exempt movie theaters, amusement parks, general merchandise stores with in-house concession stands, hotels, and transportation carriers such as trains and airplanes. The alternate definition (see Option 2 in Table 1 ) would also generally exempt these entities, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Other restaurants and SRFE that are not regulated under the proposed definitions may voluntarily register with an "authorized official" to be subject to the requirements of this regulation and would also be considered "covered establishments," according to the proposed rule. as movie theaters, bowling alleys, bookstore cafes, and all establishments that sell restaurant-like food to consumers. Some Members of Congress, with support from the grocery industry, have expressed concern over Option 1. Some have introduced legislation that would define SRFE as establishments that derive more than 50% of their revenue from restaurant-type food, similar to the proposed Option 2 in Table 1. Members ofCongress who advocate for a broader definition of SRFE note that Congress intended the law to apply to "restaurants as well as other retail food establishments" proposed rule on nutrition labeling in restaurants and similar retail food establishments provided background information on food consumption outside the home. It also listed the requirements of Section 4205 of the ACA, and the proposed rule included definitions for a number of terms that were not defined in the law. While some definitions are clear and straightforward, others have generated debate, including the FDA's determination of the scope of covered establishments and variation among establishments. All of these factors could influence the impact on affected restaurants and SRFE. Under the ACA, covered establishments are required to provide calorie and nutrition information for "food that is a standard menu item" These items include combination meals, variable menu items, self-service food, and food on display. Under the amended law, restaurants and SRFE on all restaurant and drive-thru menu boards. Under ACA Section 4205, now FFDCA Section 403(q)(5)(H), foods that do not require labeling are custom orders, which are prepared in a specific manner at the customer's request. of the FFDCA (to provide the FDA with the authority to require and regulate nutrition labeling), and added a new Section 403A (to preempt state and local nutrition labeling regulations) This section provides an overview of the statutory authorities of the FDA that are relevant to this issue, and how those authorities were amended by the ACA. The FDA is authorized to create nutrition is ready for human consumption, which is the type described in (1) and "which is offered for sale to consumers" The 1938 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) granted FDA the authority to regulate food products and their ingredients. FDA's authority over nutrition labeling of those products was created by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA), which amended Section 403 upon regulators' request. The FFDCA requires all food regulated by the FDA to bear labeling with the serving size, total calories per serving, and the amount of various nutrients. It also provides the Secretary the Authority to remove or otherwise change nutrient information requirements by regulation. the layout and design of the label to assist consumers. The FFDCA has provisions regarding its preemption of state and local nutrition labeling laws. Infant formula and medical foods, which are subject to other labeling requirements, are exempt from the nutrition labeling requirements. Foods in packaging that is too small to comply with the required information, food that contains insignificant amounts of all the nutrients required to be listed, and foods offered by an individual who has grossed less than $500,000 from food sales are exempt. labeling requirements for most foods, and to regulate nutrient content claims and health claims on food labels. There are a number of conditions under which a food would be deemed misbranded, including if its label is "false or misleading" The FDA generally does not have the authority to order a recall of a misbranded food. Rather, the agency relies on food companies to voluntarily recall adulterated, misbranded or otherwise unsafe products, either on their own or on the FDA's behalf. The FDA has proposed to refrain from enforcement until it has completed rulemaking. not always pre-portioned (e.g., deli items), which means that these items will not be served in standardized portions. Some feel that these should be labeled as per portion, rather than whole item. Pizza companies have argued against "whole pie" labeling, because they feel it is not an accurate representation of what an individual would typically eat in one sitting. FDA does not have mandatory recall authority for food that is deemed misbranded due to nutrition labeling. Although the FDA does. other health problems, including diabetes and high blood pressure. These health issues disproportionately affect low-income individuals and certain minorities. The federal government has sought to address these health concerns using a variety of approaches, including programs (e.g., the "Let's Move" campaign) and legislation. At the state and local level, lawmakers have also proposed a variety. of approaches,. including taxation and prohibition of high-calorie items, and requiring calorie labeling of restaurant food. The number of calories consumed by individuals in the United. The number of overall calories consumed has increased from a daily average of 1,875 calories during 1977-1978 to 2,067 calories during 2005-2008. 32% of Americans' calorie intake from 2005- 2008 came from foods consumed outside the home, including foods consumed in restaurants and school cafeterias. Consumers tend to underestimate the number of calories in restaurant meals. In one study, lunchtime customers at a fast food restaurant underestimated the calorie content of their meal. In another study, fast food customers underestimated the calories in their lunchtime meal. Public health stakeholders have successfully advocated for policies on restaurant menu nutrition labeling at the state and local level. Section 4205 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) amended the FDA's nutrition labeling requirements in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) The ACA provision required nutrition labeling for foods sold in chain restaurants and vending machines. Both were previously exempt from the FDA’s nutrition labeling authority. This report provides a discussion of the role of nutrition labeling in combating obesity. The FDA published the preliminary regulatory impact analyses (PRIA) for restaurant nutrition labeling and vending machine calorie labeling in March 2011. The PRIA for restaurant menu labeling analyzed the possible regulatory and economic impact of Section 4205 and proposed options for approaches to the regulations. The proposed rules generated hundreds of comments from industry, Members of Congress, and the public. Introductory material for the proposed rules can be found on the FDA's website at: http://www.fda.gov/menulabeling. Association, the American Medical Association, and others. Menu labeling laws have been enacted in New York City, California, and several other jurisdictions. For the restaurant industry, state and local regulations have resulted in variable and sometimes conflicting requirements. The restaurant industry has made it clear that complying with varying local laws and regulations is more burdensome than complying with uniform national standards would be. New research on nutrition labeling of menus and menu boards suggests this approach may be successful. The research was conducted by the University of California, San Francisco. Long-term impact of state and local menu labeling regulations on population level obesity rates has not been widely studied. One question for policymakers is whether the inclusion of supermarkets and convenience stores is instrumental to the effectiveness of the menu labeling law. In anticipation of the final rule, some establishments have moved forward with menu labeling. McDonald's, the largest fast food company in the United States, announced in September 2012 that it would list calorie information on its menu. The National Restaurant Association supported inclusion of a restaurant menu labeling provision in the ACA. their lunch by 23%. Calorie labeling on menus has been adopted as one approach to making consumers aware of the amount of calories they are consuming. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have deemed menu labeling a "winnable battle," and the approach is supported by the American Heart Association. In one study, consumers were less likely to choose higher-calorie items when provided with calorie information on the restaurant menu. Restaurant menu labeling as a policy option for obesity prevention has garnered broad support from the public health community. In one study in New York City, one in six fast food consumers reported using the posted calorie information. In King County, Washington, researchers found that the nutrition labeling law affected restaurants' behavior as well. However, because these laws and regulations are fairly recent, the results may not be as clear-cut as they could have been, experts say. The study was published in the journal Food Marketing Research and Education, which is published by the Association for Food Marketing and Education (AFCE). are required to disclose the number of calories in each item "as usually prepared and offered for sale," and provide a statement on suggested total daily caloric intake "in a clear and conspicuous manner" According to the proposed rule, calorie information must be provided adjacent to the name of the menu item so that it is clearly associated with that item. Establishments can choose to implement this requirement by including a column on the menu or menu board (including drive-through menu boards) with the heading "Calories" or "Cal" The restaurant or SRFE must also provide a statement concerning daily recommended caloric intake, presented in a manner that enables the public to understand the significance of each item in the context of a total daily diet. A 2,000 calorie diet daily diet is used as the basis for general nutrition advice; however, individual calorie needs may vary. The proposed rule would require covered entities to post a succinct statement about daily recommended calorie intake on menus and menu boards. The proposal would also require that additional nutrition information is available upon request. require that covered establishments declare calories on menus and menu boards to the nearest 5-calorie increment up to and including 50 calories. The FDA estimates a cost of $269 per item to determine this information, while some industry groups have determined it will cost as much as $500 to $1,000 per item. In the proposed rule, the FDA proposes use of the "80-120 rule," which permits a narrow deviation between the posted calorie value for a particular item and the actual calorie content of the item. allowing flexibility based on the context. The FDA estimates the cost of a menu board at $550. Industry estimates range as high as $1,500 per menu board. Calorie information must have a "reasonable basis" and be displayed adjacent to the name of the standard menu item on all menus and menu boards. The ACA required covered establishments to disclose the number of calories contained in standard menu items as usually prepared and offered for sale. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. must include the same nutrition information that is currently required by law on food package labeling. FDA further proposes that the term "primary writing" be interpreted from a customer's vantage point. This would include drive-through menus, take-out and delivery menus, and information posted on the Internet by the covered establishment. Advertisements would not be considered primary writing, but a menu sent through the mail might be, if customers routinely order from it. The nature and use of primary writing may vary depending on the type of restaurant or SRFE. Section 4205 required that nutrient content disclosures have a "reasonable basis," such as nutrient databases, cookbooks, or laboratory analyses. The law requires HHS to establish standards for determining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations. Foods exempted from the law include items not listed on a menu or menu board (such as condiments and items for general use) and food items that are being market-tested. The FDA was further instructed to consider certain factors in rulemaking, including the standardization of recipes and preparation methods. per calendar year; part of a customary market test; and condiments available for general use, such as salt, pepper, and ketchup. The FDA tentatively concluded that the new menu labeling requirements do not apply menu items that a restaurant has that would be covered by the proposed rule. The grocery industry argues that this estimate is inaccurate, and that many more items at grocery stores would be affected by the adoption of Option 1 in the final rule, due to the inclusion of self-service food and food on display. preparation, making it more challenging to adhere to the 80-120 rule. Critics note that wide variation due to individual order preparation was one of the reasons the FDA exempted restaurant food from the NLEA regulations in 1993. The restaurant industry has argued that adhering to a stricter standard of "reasonable basis" may discourage smaller independent operators from participating voluntarily. Calorie counts may also be difficult to determine due to varying portion sizes. In grocery stores, foods that are "packaged and prepared for immediate consumption" are exempt. in food sales) unless the individual makes a health or nutrition claim for that food are also exempt. Foods with insignificant amounts of more than one-half the required nutrients may use a simplified labeling format. Prior to passage of the ACA, two other categories of food were also exempt from nutrition labeling requirements. These categories were (1) food "which is served in restaurants or other establishments in which food is served for immediate human consumption or which is sold for sale or used in such establishments," and (2) food which is processed and prepared primarily in a retail establishment. to restaurant food; however, if it applies to restaurant-type food, which would include many self-serve and deli items, then the affected number of items would be closer to 500 to 15,000 items. The proposed rule includes clarification of several concepts that were noted but not defined in the ACA, including the medium (i.e., menu, table tent, place mat), placement, and layout of the information provided to consumers. Under the law, covered establishments must provide calorie information on menus and menu boards. Proposed definition of restaurant-type food would mean grab-and-go items, such as sandwiches or meals prepared in a restaurant or SRFE, would also be regulated. The grocery industry disagrees with this definition. The interpretation of "variable menu items" has raised grocers' concern because certain prepared items vary in composition according to seasonality, altering the calorie and nutrient content. Composition of other products may also vary according to brand and ingredient availability. The FDA has estimated that grocery stores and supermarkets have approximately one-half of the number of restaurants in the United States.