Climaticevents influencing prices include cold weather, which increased energy usage, anddry conditions, which decreased the availability of hydroelectric power. During 2005, Point Carbon analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance prices was explained by changes in fuel prices (particularly for electricpower), with 23% ofthe variance explained by the weather. This linkage betweenallowedance prices and the power market is not a linkage between power market and CO2 prices, according to Point Carbon. surprising, as the power sectorconducted the majority of trades in 2005 and therefore significantly influencedprice development. Kaasik argues that the evidence from the past year indicates that fuelprices influence carbon prices, but not the reverse. He sees allowance prices as a derivative of natural gas and coal pricing, at least in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the marginalcost suppliers of power, allowance prices will respond positively to increasingnatural gas prices or decreasing coal prices. electricity price byinfluencing the marginal price of electricity. The EU-ETS has provisions for linking its trading scheme to the JointImplementation (JI) and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) components of the Kyoto Protocol. How this has evolved during the firsttrading period is illustrated by Figure 3 . Figure 3. There is a Very Long-Term Correlation Between CO2 and Electricity Price: Link Via Marginal Producer Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006) p.11. The EU-ETS traded 362million metric tons of CO 2 in 2005, valued at 7.218 billion euro. Brokers wereresponsible for 57% of the volume, exchange markets did 15%, and bilateraltransactions accounted for 28%. Of the exchange market volume, the EuropeanClimate Exchange (ECX) had the largest share at 63%. The average price for an allowance traded in 2005 was 19.9 euro, withbrokered and exchanged allowances averaging 20.6 euro and bilateral transactionsaveraging 18.2 euro. in 2005, as indicated in Figure 1 below. Inparticular, allowance prices dropped from almost 30 euro to about 9-11 euro inApril and May, sparked by a series of reported over-allocation of allowances inseveral Member States. The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow market. Monthly volumes areincreasing, but have never exceeded a 1.6% monthly average. By July 2006, allowance Prices had recovered to about 17euro in July. Figure 1. CO2 Market: Even If No "Big" News Highly Volatile Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006),p. 14. Germany's 2005 emissions were only 474 million metric tons; thus the reduction isonly 0.6% from last year's emissions. In addition, Germany is proposing to permitevery new power station built between 2008 and 2012 to opt out from CO 2 caps andthe ETS for 14 years. These emissions increases will be in addition to the planned cuts to CO 2 emissions. Germany's proposed ETS allocation for the second trading period would be 5.6%. This would be a decrease of 5.8% from the previous allocation. Small installations (between 20MW and50MW) account for 30% (about 3,000) of the total facilities covered under the ETS. 36% of the covered installations produced less than 10,000 metrictons of CO 2 annually. Germany is attempting to have some planned coal-fired powerplants, which will be large producers ofCO 2, able to opt-out of the Ets for 14 years. The somewhat weak emissions data available at the time of the EU questionnaire suggest this is unlikely to happen. non-CO 2 greenhouse gases, which account forabout 20% of the EU's total greenhouse gas emissions. The first trading period began January 1,2005. A second trading period is scheduled to begin in 2008, covering the period of the KyotoProtocol, with a third one planned for 2013. Under the Kyoto Protocol, the then-existing 15 nations of theEU agreed to reduce theiremissions by 8% from 1990 levels under a collective arrangement called a "bubble" By 2001,collective greenhousegas emissions in the EU were 2.3% below 1990 levels. Kingdom and the incorporation of EastGermany into West Germany. Several countries, including Ireland, Spain, and Portugal, experiencedemissions growth of over 30% during this period. In light of the Kyoto Protocol targets, the EU adopted a directiveestablishing the EU-ETS that entered into force October 13, 2003. The importance of emissionstrading was elevated by the accession of 10 additional central and eastern Europe countries to EUmembership in May 2004. Collectively, these 10 countries' greenhouse gas emissions dropped 22.6%from 1990-2001. of Environmental Ministers and European Parliament was to achievea new car fleet average CO 2 emissions rate of 120 grams per kilometer by 2005. This objective was not met in 2005 and is unlikely to be met by 2010. Voluntary commitments by the European, Japanese, and Korean AutomobileManufacturers Associations in 1998 and subsequently endorsed by the EC set targetsof 140 g CO 2 /km by 2008/2009. At the end of 2005, the average new car emissionsrate is about 160 g CO2 /km. the appropriate direction. Germany is attempting to direct its second NAP toward carbon-intensive, coal-fired electric generating facilities rather than low-carbon alternatives. Reluctance by countries to redirecttheir NAPs and an inconsistent price from the ETS make the long-term effect of theETS uncertain. Norway, a non-EU country, also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on January 1, 2005. Norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing. likely to influence the future direction of Norway's trading system. The government had indicated earlierthat it would consider expanding the [trading] system from 2008 to include as manysources of emissions as practical through an upstream system. With the adoption of the EU ETS designfeatures, Norway seems to move away from this option. The IEA states: The government has indicated that it will not expand the trading system to include all sources of emissions from 2008. The ETS is expected to be in place by 2015. The carbon tax is levied on about 64% of the country's CO 2 emissions. Other parts of Norway's industry, particularly its offshore oiland gas sector, are covered by the carbon tax of almost 40 euro per metrictonne of CO 2. The firstphase of the trading program covers the period 2005-2007, with a second, expandedphase to begin in 2008. Developing its initial trading scheme independently of the EU, Norway's"Quota Quota" scheme is expected to be completed by the end of 2009. The transportation area has become a major source of concern. The sector is not a part of the ETS and is not likely to be included before the third trading period. Instead, transport controls are based on voluntaryagreements with automobile manufacturers to improve fuel economy, fuel-economylabelling of cars, and promoting fuel efficiency by fiscal measures. As announced in 1996, the objective of the EU Council is to achieve improvenew car fleet average CO 2 emissions rates. Thecornerstone is the agreements with automobiles manufacturers to achieve Improvenew Car Fleet average CO2 emissions Rates. CO 2 emissions in the EU continue to rise because of increased miles driven,increased size and weight of cars, and falling car occupancy rates. Attempts to balance the burden between ETS and non-ETS sectors have already created tension in the industry. The EC 2005progress report also notes that despite EU's effort to increase information on fuelefficiency and CO 2 emissions for consumers, the effectiveness of the effort seemslow. "A significant impact on consumer's decisions could not yet be noticed" have to be covered by the non-ETS sectors --commercial, residential, and transportation. An assessment done for GreenpeaceInternational states that the German NAP II places "a disproportionate burden foremissions reductions on the non theETS sectors" in terms of meeting its commitmentsunder the EU Burden Sharing agreement. Policies to fill in the gap reportedly include oneplan to reduce emissions by 3 million tons by training German drivers to drive moreeconomically. The EU-ETS system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide. that while three-quarters of all emissionsare produced by the largest 7.5% of installations, the small installations are responsible for less than 1%. Whether the ETS shouldcontinue to cover the roughly 3,500 facilities under 10,000 metric tons annuallyremains a hotly debated issue. In choosing a gradual, incremental approach to emissions trading, the EU isrelying on other programs to control greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors, suchas transportation. Some sectors not covered by theETS may grow faster than sectors covered by ETS, creating difficulties forcompliance. The EU's Emissions Trading System (ETS) is a cornerstone of the EU's efforts to meet itsobligation under the Kyoto Protocol. It covers more than 11,500 energy intensive facilities acrossthe 25 EU Member countries. Covered entities emit about 45% of the European Union's carbon dioxide emissions. The trading program does not cover emissions of sulfur dioxide. The U.S. has a sulfur dioxide (acid rain) control programcontained in Title IV of the 1990 Clean Act Amendments. The EC looked at five criteria: (1)environmental effectiveness, (2) economic efficiency, (3) the potential effects on competition, (4)feasibility, and (5) existence of alternative policies and measures. It felt that starting with a relativelysmall number of economic sectors and sources that contribute significantly to total emissions would "substantially" satisfy these criteria. As noted, the six sectors chosen emit about 45% of the EU15's CO 2 emissions. The coverage for individual countries varies widely; and those that are nationwide. The groundwork for the system is theKyoto Protocol, which (1) defines the pollutants and sets the countries' emissionstargets. Within this framework, the EU defines the elementsthat make the EU-ETS work, including industry participants, the unit of trade, trading periods, settling upprocedures, and linkages within and beyond the EU. With respect to emissions years and sinks, EU defines baseline emissions years, sinks, and national inventoryand compliance requirements. companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) asked which of 12 topics they felt were most important to them. Table 3 indicates thetop five topics according to governments surveyed, along with their correspondingranking by other stakeholders. The five issues are discussed below. Source: European Commission, Review of EU Emissions Trading Scheme (November 2005), p. p. 1. The European Commission's review of the ETS was published in November 2005. TheEC's linking directive allows operators to fulfil their allowance obligations under the EU-ETS using credits derived from JI and CDM projects. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under the CDM must be issued by the Clean Development Mechanism Executive Board. Emissions Reduction Units (ERUs) under JI are transferred from one country toanother -- an exchange that cannot begin until the second trading period. Several EU countries have established carbon funds topursue JI or CDM opportunities. of non-delivery, such as an emissions reduction purchaseagreement (ERPA), prices are in the range of 8-12 euro. In contrast, for CERsalready issued, or where the sellers take the risk, prices are  13-15euro. The real impact of CDM and JI on theEU-ETS system will not be fully known until the second trading period, when EUdemand for credits will increase substantially and other non-EU countries wouldbe implementing their own Kyoto compliance strategies. Table 5 illustrates the scope of potentialharmonization issues facing the EU-ETS. One issue of particular interest is the effort to increase the use of "benchmarking" standards in setting allocations. Table 5: NAP HarmonizationIssues Source : Adapted from Fiona Mullins, EU ETS Implementation: Room forHarmonisation (The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2005). Click here for more information on the European Union's ETS harmonization program. Click here to read more about the European Commission's harmonization programme. aspects of the EU ETS, and the Commission can and does seek to increase the degree of harmonization through guidance notes. The economic value of allowances is nowhere more evident than indiscussions of new entrants. Germany is proposing to permit new coal-fired powerplants built between 2008-2012 to opt-out of the ETS for thefirst 14 years of operation. In its survey of ETSstakeholders, the EC found that 85% of all respondents favor a harmonized approach to new entrants and closures. Nearly 75% believed that those allowances should beprovided free. to the ETSis inevitable. As stated by Grubb and Neuhoff with respect to allocation: The final way in which the EU ETSdiffers from many other trading systems is in the devolution of allocationresponsibilities, in this case to its 25 Member States. This was an essential part of thedeal that enabled the adoption of the Directive. Member States would have neverceded to the European Commission the power to distribute valuable assets to theirindustries. Nor is theEU ETS unique in devolving powers of allocation: it is typicalin a number of US systems. based on best available technology and practices, rather than on historical emissions. The EC does not have the authority to scrutinizeallocations at the facility level, so any allocation harmonization would be on avoluntary basis ("soft harmonization") Also, allocation schemes, such asbenchmarking, may not be suitable for some industries. In many ways, diversity between Member countries with respect to respect to emissions is a major obstacle to a harmonized ETS. The ETS is expected to be implemented by the end of 2015. aredirection with respect to new entrants and long-term investment. Another area in which several Member States would like more harmonizationacross the EU is the definition of a combustion installation. Concernsrevolve around ambiguity in the current definition. The ETS applies to energyactivities for all sectors with combustion installations above 20 MW of thermal rated input, oil refineries, coke ovens, and, subject to size criteria, iron and steel, cement,lime, glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. The figures in this column indicate the number of installations with active registry accounts on 30 April 2006. They differ from figurescommunicated in earlier press releases because they are updated for installations that opted-out for the first trading period, opted-in, andinstallations without open accounts. As all data are held in the CITL and national registries, no data are available for those Member States without an active registry. a. The figures are allowances allocated to existing installations at the start of the scheme. installations at the start of the scheme but put aside mainly for new entrants andauctioning (in the cases of Denmark, Hungary, Ireland, and Lithuania). d. Due to technical problems in the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Spain, the CITL did not receivewholly reliable information on the installation level surrenders from these Member States. Some commentators have suggested that annual average 2005-2007 allocations that are actually 44.1. Commission" (created in 1998) stressed that the 2008 program be ascomprehensive as possible, suggesting that the system could include close to 90% ofthe country's greenhouse gas emissions. To achieve this coverage, the Commissionenvisioned a hybrid system of quotas, depending on cost-effectiveness andpracticality considerations. Arguing in favor of regulating CO 2 emissions at theproducer (upstream) level from mobile sources and some stationary sources, theQuota Commission states: For these emissions, regulation at the producer level will not create weaker incentives for reducing emissions thanregulation at the consumer level. those process emissions which arerecommended for inclusion in the system. Regulation by quotas should be imposed at the end-user level in cases where the processes originate with major industrial companies. For process emissions stemming from a series of small sources, e.g.emissions of N 2 O from commercial fertilizers, regulation should beimposed on retailers, or importers in order to avoid unacceptably high systemcosts. The Commission's recommendation that "regulation by quotas be imposed inpart on the producer" may be overtaken by development of the EU ETS. opportunities forcost-effective allowance trades. In deciding on its trading program, the European Commission (EC) adopted a"learning-by-doing" approach to prepare the EU for the Kyoto Protocol's emissions limitations. The wider the scope of the system, the greater will bethe variation in the costs of compliance of individual companies. This argues in favour of a comprehensive trading scheme across differentMember States covering all 6 greenhouse gases and sinks, and encompassing all emissionssources. A comprehensive trading program is estimated by the EC to reduce Kyoto compliance costs to EU countries by 3billion euro. The 1997 Kyoto Protocol now in force. Countries that ratified the protocol are developing appropriate implementation strategies to begin reducing theiremissions of greenhouse gases. The European Union (EU) has decided to use anemissions trading scheme (called a "cap-and-trade" program) to help it achieve compliance at least cost. The decision to use emissiontrading to implement the Kyoto Protocol is at least partly based on the successful emissions tradingprogram used by the U.S. The EU has also used other market-orientedmechanisms permitted under the Protocol. of Reaching Kyoto Target to EU Member States in 2010 (in billions of 1999 euro) Source: EC Green Paper (Mar. 8, 2000), p. 27. For a variety of reasons, the EC chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive system covering all sources and gases. Some European analysts have noted that EUpolitics played an important role in preventing serious consideration of a comprehensive program. A significantly wider coverage could have beenprovided only by an upstream system, which had been excluded by the [European] Commission at the beginning of the process. political: an upstream scheme would have toomuch looked like a tax. There areconsiderable uncertainties surrounding the emissions of the fluorinated gases [HFC, PFC, SF 6 ] andthe absorption of carbon dioxide by sinks. Allocating allowances, monitoring emissions andenforcing compliance of small mobile emitters, such as private cars, raise complex technical technical issues. (8) Not surprisingly, this reason was not employed by the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive trading scheme at this time. 13. With the over-allocation issue in the first trading period, it is likely that theEC will take a harder stance in reviewing NAPs for the second trading period. In general, the originalEU-15 countries have to reduce their emissions caps the most to meet their share of the EU's requirements under the Kyoto Protocol. Several countries facingdouble-digit percentage reductions. As indicated, EU-15 states, on average, have toreduce their emissions on an annual basis. caps 6.8% (119 million metric tons) from their current levelsto meet their requirements under the Kyoto Protocol-based second trading period. In contrast, as a group, the newer countries and the EU as a whole are in substantiallybetter shape. (28) Table 4: Comparison of 1st and 2nd TradingPeriod ETS Caps (in millions of metric tons of CO 2 Equivalent unlessotherwise noted) Source: Based on data provided in Annex 1, European Commission, "FurtherGuidance on Allocation Plans for the 2008 to 2012 trading period" (Brussels, Dec. 12, 2005) p. 11. absolute reductions for the phase 2008-2012. In general, the EC has seen the over-allocation issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process that should help the EU in implementing the secondtrading period beginning in 2008. The new 2005 emissions data givesindependently assessed installation-level figures for the first time and so providesMember States with an excellent factual basis for deciding upon the caps in their national allocations plans. The plans are subject to approval by theCommission, which will also be making extensive use of the new data. to the number of installationssubsequent to the respective Commission decision (e.g., opt-ins or opt-outsof installations) At first glance, it would appear that the EU would have little difficulty meeting its Kyoto Protocol requirements during the second trading period. However, there are other considerations. First, countries with potentialsurpluses may want to retain at least some of that surplus to help fuel their countries' economic growth. Second, possibly at the expense of a Member State that needs allowances. the extent to which surplus credits would be created via JI, the EC linking directive, requires that such credits (including from CDM) be "supplemental" to acountry's domestic efforts. A third consideration is the overall commitment of the Kyoto Protocol. Some sectors period for the original 15 Member States can becovered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate a surplus. Inaddition, potential CERs and ERUs from the CDM and JI respectively may helpmaintain limits on allowance costs. some modest emissions targets (i.e., to put the EUon the path toward meeting the Kyoto requirements) Table 2 provides the national emissionsallocations and 2005 emissions levels for 21 EU countries as recorded by the CommunityIndependent Transaction Log (CITL) by the compliance deadline of April 30, 2006. The 2005 emissions totalreflects emissions from 8,980 sources representing more than 99% of the allowances allocated. Noncomplying sources are subject to a 40-euro penalty for each tonof emissions in excess of surrendered allowances under the ETS. resulted in revisions were excessive allocation of allowances. Excessive allocation problems resulted from statesthat left a gap in how they would achieve their target, to be filled with measures to be defined later. Ex-post adjustments by states are not allowed; such adjustments are seen by the ECas potentially disruptive to the emissions market and creating uncertainty for companies. For the 2005-2007 period, the European Union is not attempting to meet the Kyoto Protocolbut to get experience with emissions trading with other countries. The Climate Action Network (CAN), a network of 365non-governmental organizations, stated the following: Emissions limits set by MemberStates for the first phase were a major disappointment. CAN: To ensure maximumenvironmental benefit of the ETS and the overall success of the system as awhole, they need to be strengthened considerably. The Kyoto targets requireambitious caps with new entrants. The EU is not on the path to the Kyoto requirements nordeveloping the trading market. This "over-allocation" does not includethe 73.4 million metric tons of allowances held in reserve by the various countries. third, trading period. Allocating allowances according to output and not differentiatingaccording to the carbon intensity of the project would provide an incentive to developlow carbon alternatives. An example provided by Grubb and Neuhoff: New entrant reserves should be basedon output or capacity, and avoid differentiating according to the CO 2 -intensity of thenew investment. In particular, giving more to coal than gas plants would be an incentive for development of low-carbon alternatives. The manner inwhich new entrants receive allowances may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment -- whether it is directed toward low- carbon opportunities orused to support continuation of current economic development. rewardsinvestment in new coal facilities, which would conflict with objectives to tackleclimate change. The damaging effects would be amplified ifcarbon-intensive new entrants not only receive free allowances for the period2008-2012 but also receive promises for subsequent periods. The proposed treatment of coal-fired powerplants by the German Government shows how difficult it will be to direct future investment toward low-carbon projects. However, it could be argued that the long-term success of the ETS and theEU's commitment to Kyoto rests on such agreements. questionnaire conducted by theEuropean Environmental Agency's Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change. Most Member States would welcome harmonization of the treatment of new entrants and closures across the EU. Analogous to the U.S. acid rain program, EU states have set up reserves toprovide allowances to new entrants. In general, these allowances are provided free,as that is widely seen as helping boost new investment. Most states have yet to dip intotheir reserves for new entrants; however, the importance of the reserve will increase as the ETS enters its second, and eventually third, phase. only 20% ofFrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered, compared with 69% of Estonia's emissions. National Allocation Plans (NAPs) are central to the EU's effort to achieve its Kyotoobligations. Each Member of the EU must submit a NAP that lays out its allocation scheme under the ETS. These NAPs are assessed by the EC to determinecompliance with 11 criteria (12 for the EU) for the first trading period, and for the second period. to the individual Member's NAPs, the EC harmonizes the NAPswith respect to penalties, allocation method (e.g., grandfathering), monitoring, andregistries. It allows Members flexibilitywith respect to allocations to individual participants, the extent to which banking ispermitted, and whether to permit the auctioning of up to 10% of allowances in thesecond trading period. As a result of this framework, there are significant differencesbetween Members with respect to participant definitions, industry level emissionscaps and allocations, and enforcement. the second period) delineated in an annex to the emissionstrading directive. Criteria include requirements that the emissions caps and other measures proposed by the state aresufficient to put it on the path toward its Kyoto target. For the first period, the EC approved most of the necessary NAPs by the end of 2004. Thelast NAP was approved June 20, 2006 (from Greece). In general, the primary problem the EC foundwith NAP's that was that they did not guarantee Kyoto compliance. share of phase 1 allocations. Modestvolume for a new system is not surprising; trading volumes under the U.S. CleanAir Act Title IV sulfur dioxide trading program were very thin in the beginning. Even after several years of operation, SO 2 allowances prices can changeunpredictably and inexplicably. Some reasons for ETS allowance price derivatives are explicable. ETS market responded to a variety of regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. Regulatory eventsinclude the late approval of NAPs for several countries, along with the resultingover-allocation causing the sudden market correction in May.