corrosion. Army officials from the 3rd Infantry Division have stated that with the exception of rubber seals on some vehicles, prepositioned equipment entering Southwest Asia was in good shape. These officials said they did not experience any corrosion that affected their ability to perform operations. Officials with the 1st and 2nd Marine Expeditionary Forces who used or observed the use of prepositioning equipment in Southwest Asia found it was in a high state of readiness and could not recall any instance where corrosion affected their operations. 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force said the equipment on the prepositioning ship USNS Lummus that was used in a 2004 training exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good operating condition it was when first uploaded about 2 years previously. They told us that with the exception of minor hydraulic leaks and o-ring deterioration, the equipment was generally free of corrosion problems. The primary measure to reduce corrosion problems is to replace the equipment with new, more modern equipment. The equipment was removed from the ship in August 2005. Corps have taken other measures intended to help reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets. Army and Marine Corps policies require that repaired equipment be restored to good condition before being placed in prepositioning status. Marine Corps maintenance guidance for prepositions includes visual inspections for leaks, corrosion removal and recoating, and preservation. Army maintenance regulations also provide for the use of lubricants and preservatives, as well as regular inspections for equipment stored on the prepositional ships.. The Army and Marine Corps consider collection of this information to be a low priority. Army regulations require units to collect corrosion-related data as part of their equipment maintenance and storage programs. The Marine Corps, on the other hand, does not require the collection of corrosion information for all equipment, but believes it to be beneficial. The mission of the Marine Corps’ Corrosion Prevention and Control Program is to reduce maintenance requirements and costs associated with corrosion. The program seeks to identify and assess current and projected corrosion problems for all tactical ground and ground support equipment. Officials from both the Army and the Marine Corps said that corrosion is routinely treated as part of the overall maintenance process. Army officials at Camp Carroll, South Korea, told us that corrosion observed on the engine blocks in 5-ton trucks would be repaired during maintenance performed on the entire engine. According to Marine Corps officials, corrosion information has value but not enough to be included with more critical information, such as the amount of equipment in the inventory and amount in serviceable condition. Although the army and Marine Corps are not collecting data about corrosion, they have no incentive to collect it. We believe that funding and priorities should be aligned to the greatest extent possible to provide greater assurance that the department’s resources are being used prudently. As stated in our report, DOD can achieve long-term cost savings by investing in additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. We interviewed officials and obtained documentation at the following locations: Office of the Secretary of Defense Corrosion Policy and Oversight Office Headquarters, Department of the Army U.S. Army Materiel Command, Fort Belvoir, Virginia Tank-Automotive and Armaments Command, Warren, Michigan. given the resources the military services devote each year to addressing corrosion-related problems. Corrosion prevention measures may reduce the amount of maintenance needed, thereby extending the availability of equipment items over their life cycle. The Army has had previous success using corrosion data regarding non-prepositioning programs to support corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. For example, the Army National Guard began the initial phase of a humidity-controlled storage program for its vehicles and equipment in 1994. Guard officials told us that they collected and analyzed an extensive amount of information on corrosion and its cost impacts. work that DOD and the military services did not have an effective management approach to mitigate and prevent corrosion. We recommended that DOD develop a departmentwide strategic plan with clearly defined goals, measurable outcome-oriented objectives, and performance measures. DOD concurred and in December 2003 issued its corrosion strategy. According to DOD’s corrosion strategy, knowing the costs of corrosion is essential to adequately implementing the strategy. Having corrosion data helps the department learn what works so it can be more effective in reducing corrosion. on selected pieces of equipment and estimated that a significant amount of corrosion-related costs could be avoided by using humidity-controlled storage facilities. Program officials currently estimate that the sheltering and preservation effort will save a total of about $1.2 billion through fiscal year 2010. Army officials cited similar results after collecting corrosion data on Hellfire missile launchers. Effectively addressing corrosion on prepositioned stocks of equipment can enable the services to achieve significant cost savings and increase readiness and safety for rapidly fielding combat-ready forces. The extensive and long-term deployments of U.S. troops in Southwest Asia are likely to magnify the effects of corrosion on military equipment. Higher rates of corrosion result in increased repairs and replacements, drive up costs, and take critical systems out of action, reducing mission readiness. Corrosion can also reduce the safety of equipment items. estimates of corrosion costs DOD-wide have ranged from $10 billion to $20 billion annually. We have found in our prior research that corrosion can reduce mission readiness by as much as 50 percent. The Army determined that about $8.7 million (31 percent) of the estimated $28 million spent to restore this equipment to serviceable condition was used to address corrosion-related problems. Marine Corps officials estimated that corrosion costs make up at least 50 percent of the $110,000 needed, on average, to repair motorized lighterage prepositioned equipment. The additional information that would be obtained through the collection of corrosion data could support the Army’s and Marine Corps’ efforts to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion. efforts, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense take the following three actions. The Army should examine the feasibility of using temporary shelters, including humidity-controlled facilities, to store land-based prepositioned assets currently stored outdoors. The Marine Corps should require the collection of corrosion-related data and use these data to support additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. We were told by Marine Corps officials that collection of these data has been a low priority. However, DOD did not provide specific information on planned actions, milestones, and resources for implementing the recommendations. Corrosion data could be used to help identify underlying causes of maintenance problems. The military services have estimated that at least 25 percent of overall maintenance costs are corrosion related. As much as one-third of these costs could be reduced through more effective corrosion prevention and mitigation. According to Army and Marine Corps officials, corrosion information on prepositioned assets is unavailable primarily because it has low priority.. Army officials said most of those responsible for documenting the maintenance action do not want to take the extra time to include corrosion information because they see it as having the current costs. We focused our review on the prepositioned assets managed by the Army and Marine Corps. These services provided most of the equipment used in current operations in Southeast Asia. We met with DOD officials involved with developing DOD’s long-term strategy to prevent and control corrosion. We also discussed additional actions that could be taken to further prevent and mitigate corrosion. The Army and the Marine Corps have the majority of the military’Southeast Asia prepositioning assets, the report says. The U.S. Army is the largest prepositioner of military equipment in the world. The Army and Marine Corps have taken some measures to reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets. The Army could increase its use of storage facilities for land-based assets. Sheltering assets, especially sheltering in humidity-controlled facilities, has been shown to be a key anticorrosion practice. Without such data, the services may lack the incentive to support efforts to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion and achieve long-term cost savings, the authors say. and new incentives to reward life-cycle cost reduction efforts must be implemented. The Army is currently storing a substantial portion of its prepositioned equipment outdoors. Temporary shelters may be a feasible option to address immediate storage needs. Maintaining low humidity levels reduces corrosion because moisture is a primary cause of corrosion. Army and Marine Corps officials told us that the use of humidity-controlled facilities is effective at minimizing equipment corrosion and maintaining high readiness levels. The Army stores some of its land-based prepositioning equipment in humidity- Controlled warehouses. Marine Corps prepositiones assets are stored in humidified facilities either on ships or in caves in Norway. The humidity-controlled sheltering program includes combat vehicles, trailers, radar systems, and other equipment located at Guard facilities in 45 states and U.S. territories. According to Army storage and maintenance guidelines, storage of equipment in facilities without humidity control invites greater and more rapid deterioration because of corrosion. For example, whereas combat vehicles in humidity- controlled facilities need to be exercised and road tested every 30 months, vehicles stored with humidity control require exercising every 12 months. One of the benefits of humidity. Temporary shelters are available in a range of sizes, materials, and features, including humidity control. Army officials told us that temporary shelters are used primarily in situations where immediate storage is required. The military services have made prior use of temporary shelters in several locations, for both prepositioned and non-prepositioned equipment. For example, the Marine Corps uses temporary humidity-controlled facilities in Florida to store some of its prepositioning assets awaiting maintenance and upload to ships. In addition, the Army has stored prepositione equipment in temporary shelters located in Livorno, Italy, and Camp Carroll, South Korea. The Army National Guard estimates that it will have achieved a total of over $1.2 billion in cost savings by fiscal year 2010. Most of the projected savings is based on having to perform less maintenance on equipment that is stored in humidity-controlled facilities. According to a study by the Army Cost and Economic Analysis Center, sheltering equipment in a humidity- controlled facility had a potential return on investment of a minimum of $8 for every $1 invested. The Army estimates that the cost savings will be in excess of $1 billion. amount of land-based prepositioned assets outdoors without adequate sheltering. At these locations, assets are left relatively unprotected from moisture, sand, and other elements that contribute to corrosion. At Camp Carroll in South Korea, about 30 percent of the Army’s Heavy Brigade Combat Team equipment—mostly sustainment stock—is stored outdoors in an often damp and humid region. In some cases, equipment is stored outside well over 3 months. For example, 44 M1A1 tanks and 10 fuel tankers sat outdoors for more than a year after undergoing maintenance and experienced a total of $1.2 million. facilities. Army officials told us that the equipment had been poorly maintained and, as a result, experienced many significant defects and readiness shortfalls. Officials said some of the equipment corroded faster and more severely because of being stored outside. It costs more to maintain equipment that is stored outside in part because the equipment needs to be inspected three times more often than equipment in humidity-controlled storage, officials said. Large amounts of Army prepositioned equipment are being stored in South Korea and Japan. As of April 2006, the Army was storing outside nearly all of its prepositioned assets (numbering about 11,000 items) in Southwest Asia. At the Army’s prepositioning facility in Goose Creek, South Carolina, equipment is stored outside during the time it is not undergoing maintenance because of a lack of storage facilities. Also stored outside in Kuwait where the environment is highly corrosive because of the humid climate, sand with high salinity levels, and strong winds. The amount of time equipment is storage outside ranges, on average, from 1 month to more than 3. plans, additional storage facilities will not be available at all three sites until 2012 at the earliest. In South Korea and Kuwait, Army officials said that even with the additional planned storage facilities, substantial amounts of equipment will still be stored outdoors. Officials estimated about 20 percent of equipment in Kuwait will remain outside. Officials cited competing funding priorities as the primary reason for not providing indoor storage for all land-based prepositioned assets. Army officials also cited uncertainties regarding the number and type of equipment and length of time it is stored. The lack of available land limits the ability to construct new, or expand existing, facilities. Estimates of storage needs are difficult because of uncertainties regarding the consolidation and reconfiguration of U.S. Forces Korea facilities. Army officials said that the Goose Creek facility primarily is a maintenance facility and is not meant for the storage of equipment, which makes it difficult to justify the building of new storage space. Although building new storage facilities is difficult, Army prepositioning afloat is possible, officials said. The military services have prepositioning programs to store combat or support equipment and supplies near areas with a high potential for conflict. The Army’s program involves three primary categories of stocks: combat brigade sets, operational projects, and war reserve sustainment stocks. The Air Force prepositions stocks of war reserve supplies to meet initial contingency requirements and to sustain early deploying forces. The Navy prepositioned war reserve stocks include bare base sets; vehicles; munitions; and a variety of consumable supplies. DOD has made significant investments in its military prepositioning programs. The services have collectively used an average of over $1 billion each year to operate and maintain these assets. Prepositioned assets have been used extensively to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army spent $386.1 million for storage and maintenance of prepositioned. assets in fiscal year 2005, including $76.5 million for assets in South Korea and $38.3 million for Assets in Southwest Asia. The Marine Corps used equipment from two of its three pre positioned squadrons to support these operations. Most of the military services store equipment and supplies in Southwest Asia, the Pacific theater, Europe, and aboard prepositioning ships. Figure 1 shows the major locations of prepositioned stocks.ships around the world. In addition to the contact named above, Thomas Gosling, Assistant Director; Larry Bridges; Renee Brown; Lisa Canini; Amy Sheller; Allen Westheimer; and Tim Wilson were major contributors to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Battalion Afloat, Goose Creek, South U.S. Forces Korea, Yongsan Garrison, South Korea. Field Support Battalion Far East, Camp Carroll, Materiel Support Center Korea. 19th Theater Support Command, Camp Walker, Daegu, South Korean. U.s. Army Pacific, Fort Shafter, Hawaii. Marine Corps Headquarters, Quantico, Virginia. Blount Island Command, Jacksonville, Florida. Office of the Inspector, Jacksonville,. Florida. The Marine Corps Logistics Command, Albany, Georgia. We conducted our work from May 2005 through February 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We reviewed available data for inconsistencies and discussed the data with DOD and service officials. We determined that the data used in this report was accurate and reliable. We are happy to make clear that this is not the case with any of the other data used by the U.S. military during this period of time. We apologize for any confusion caused by the use of this data. We have no further comment on this matter. for our review were sufficiently reliable for our purposes. If you or your staffs have any questions, please contact me at (202) 512- 8365. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. In addition, this report is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.