FSOC was created to address some of the perceived weaknesses that may have contributed to the financial crisis of 2008. The FSOC provides a common forum for financial regulators to evaluate and address risks to the stability of the financial system. This report will discuss the FSOC's mission and issues it is intended to address in Section I, and the members and their roles in Section II. Section III will analyze the perceived threats to financial stability as identified in law and by theFSOC in its 2013 annual report. exchange rate, expansionary monetary policies can cause exchange rates to depreciate, and thus exports to rise and imports to fall. The 2013 FSOC report addressed several issues related to global financial stability. The FSOC noted a number of positive developments in Europe, including the potential for the European Central Bank (ECB) to purchase sovereign debt of member states under some circumstances. However, the report also noted that banking disruptions and policy changes could have a negative impact on the global economy. responses in Cyprus (which briefly cast doubt on the status of insured bank deposits) create downside risk. austerity programs in Europe have "contributed to a contraction in euro-area economies," although euro area deficits may also have declined. The report also discussed expansionary monetary policies in Japan, which have contributed to a depreciation of the Yen. The FSOC took the view that "the U.S. has a strong financial stability interest in Japan finally escaping from deflation and securing more robust growth" The FSOC's annual report to Congress is to include an analysis of perceived threats to the financial system. The following sections analyze specific threats mentioned in the 2013 FSOC annual report. For each topic, the reader is provided a brief description of the issue, how it might contribute to a systemic event, and a analysis of the report. The reader is also provided a summary of each topic and the report's analysis of each issue. The report also explains the expected costs of resolving the firm. confidential information or disrupt their telecommunications (cyberattacks). The 2013 annual report noted several initiatives to address operational issues. The SEC recently proposed Regulation Systems Compliance and Integrity (Regulation SCI) to try to address malfunctions in capital markets. Future interest rate changes may be a factor in the future of the capital markets, according to the FSOC's 2013 annual Report. The 2013 report was released on Thursday, November 14. It is available online at: http://www.fsoc.org/. distress sales by lenders can magnify a downward spiral in prices. Both asset-backed commercial paper and repos use forms of collateral and may be subject to fire sales. FSOC's Perspective The 2013 annual report notes some positive and negative developments (from the FSOC perspective) in wholesale funding. However, the potential for runs on broker-dealers, or runs on banks, is still a concern for FSOC. The potential for run on banks is a concern, as well as runs on brokers. Pension systems may find it difficult to earn adequate returns safely, especially if they have committed to defined benefits (a preset fixed payment) Other investors may have a greater temptation to "reach for yield" by investing in more risky categories of investments, increasing the likelihood of asset bubbles in other markets. In its 2013 report, the FSOC attributes current interest rates (low yields) to three factors: low yields, low inflation, and low interest rates on long-term Treasury bonds and short-term interest rates. factors. Capital market participants forecast continued low interest rate policies by major central banks globally. The second is the pricing of short-term risk, which is partially caused by the increase in Treasury market purchases by institutions with low-risk sensitivity. The third factor cited by the FSOC is the willingness of bond market buyers to accept credit risk (i.e., the risk that borrowers will not pay back fully and on time) Provisions for credit losses and loan losses have declined recently. The FSOC notes a number of initiatives to mitigate the risks when FSOC to restore private capital as the primary source of long-term mortgage funding, along with improvements in consumer protection and financial stability. House prices have begun rising in a number of areas, default rates and foreclosures are no longer rising sharply, and the flow business of the GSEs has been positive in recent quarters. One possible contributing factor for a delay in the return of private capital to mortgage markets (in addition to general pessimism about the speed of the recovery) is the lack of interest rate relief. The 2013 annual report says that there has been significant improvement in mortgage markets, but additional progress is needed. There may be regulatory uncertainty as federal agencies implement changes to regulations related to the mortgage market. The conservatorship agreements (Treasury Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements, PSPAs) have been modified to expedite the wind-down of the retained portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Regulatory uncertainty in mortgage Markets may be reduced by the publication of final rules for the Real Estate Settlement Procedures. The Secretary of the Treasury has a consultative role with the OFR. The Secretary negotiates with foreign regulators and multilateral organizations to coordinate prudential supervision and regulation for all highly leveraged and interconnected financial companies. The secretary plays a role in recommending receivership procedures for failing firms that have been designated as systemic. Although the Fed and the FDIC can make their own request for a receivership of a systemic firm based in the U.S., the Treasury can recommend a plan of action. on the firm's creditors and other counterparties; (5) the likelihood of FSOC resolution avoiding or mitigating systemic risks, its likely cost to the general fund of the Treasury, and the potential of receivership resulting in excessive risk taking by the firm. (6) a federal regulatory agency has ordered the firm to convert all of its convertible debt instruments that are subject to the regulatory order; and (7) the company satisfies the definition of a financial company. The Secretary has a number of duties pertaining to the determination and procedures for the FSOC. from the resolution fund to support orderly liquidation under a liquidation plan must be acceptable to the Secretary. To date, no firms have been subject to an orderlyLiquidation. The FDIC is to assure the Secretary of a repayment plan for the orderly Liquidation plan, and the Secretary and the FDIC must report to Congress on the terms of the repayment plan. The Fed has had the authority to address financial market instability since its creation in 1913. Congress created the Fed as a central bank. lender of last resort following the recommendations of a commission established to investigate the causes of a financial panic that had occurred in 1907. Relative financial stability after WWII, and congressional directives to focus on price stability and maximum employment, may have redirected the Fed's focus to macroeconomic variables. But addressing financial market instability has always been a core mission of the Fed. Under the FSOC, the Fed will also have additional supervision and examination authority for individual non-banks designated by theFSOC. The The Secretary must notify certain majority and ranking members of Congress within 24 hours of the appointment of the FDIC as receiver. The rules and regulations that theFDIC issues for the use of funds pursuant to receivership must be acceptable to the Secretary. The FDIC is to provide to the secretary and the comptroller general an annual accounting report of receiverships. The Secretary has a number of roles regarding orderly liquidation plans of covered institutions. Amounts FDIC may pay resolution costs as described in Section 204(d) of the DFA. The Secretary may request a determination that a financial firm will default or is likely to default, with a systemic impact, and then appoint the FDIC as receiver. Note that the determination requires two-thirds vote of both the Fed and FDIC board. In cases in which the firm is a broker-dealer, or its largest subsidiary is a brokerage, the Fed makes the determination, in consultation with FDIC. The Fed and the director of the Federal Insurance Office make the recommendation for insurance companies. The FDIC must consult with the Secretary to obtain a second extension of the time limit for the receivership. Once a recommendation for receivership has been made, the Secretary is to make the determination and findings that trigger the resolution regime under the FDIC. The Secretary's determination must address (1) the likelihood that the firm will default or is in default; (2) the likely effect of the firm's failure on financial stability; (3) the viability of private sector alternatives available to prevent the default. The powers and duties of the FDIC with respect to resolving systemic firms are set out in Section 210 of DFA. Among the eight factors that the determination must address are the likelihood that the non-bank will default; a description of likely financial instability that could result from default; the recommended actions under liquidation authority; and an explanation of perceived deficiency of the bankruptcy process for this firm. The FDIC's resolution is intended to ensure that shareholders and unsecured creditors bear losses.must include the votes of two-thirds of theFDIC's Board. firms are systemically important, designates the Fed as the prudential regulator of these firms, and authorizes the FDIC to resolve covered non-banks outside the bankruptcy courts under certain circumstances. Under the DFA, policymakers have tried to construct resolution regimes for both banks and non-bank financial firms that will dispel investor expectations that some firms are too big to fail. The following sections provide more detail on the mission, members, and recommendations of the FSOC during the 113 disclosures, short-term debt limits, and other prudential standards. In fall of 2008, Congress provided Treasury with up to $700 billion to address troubled assets (such as mortgages) in the financial system. Congress passed the DFA to reform the financial regulatory system. For banks that accept deposits insured by the FDIC, technically "insured depositories," the general prudential regulatory approach and resolution regimes were relatively unchanged. For large, complex non-banks, the D FA instructs the FSOC to identify which non-bank institutions are at risk of collapse. investors that money market mutual funds exposed to holders of mortgage-related assets could be in financial trouble. If correct, it would be difficult to construct or estimate a firm-specific index of systemic risk arising from this type of contagion. The next section discusses the membership of the FSOC, and the special roles that some members have with respect to these six policy tools. The FSOC has 10 voting members and 5 nonvoting members. The council is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury. a meeting of the FSOC. Otherwise, meetings may be called by a majority of the members, but shall be held at least quarterly. The Secretary must testify before the House Committee on Financial Services and the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs in conjunction with the release of the annual FSOC report. If any member agencies have notified Congress of deficiencies in systemic risk efforts, the Secretary is to address those concerns at the hearing. Under Section 113(a)(1), a two-thirds vote of theFSOC is required. Treasury Secretary serves as the chair of the FSOC. The chair has a number of powers and responsibilities related to FSOC meetings, congressional reports and testimony. As chair, the Secretary may call.to act without further approval from theFSOC as a whole. The Fed's role as prudential regulator of firms designated systemic by the FSoc, and the FDIC's role in resolving non-banks if the firm's failure is perceived as a threat to financial instability (not necessarily just firms designated as systemic) The FSOC is expected to facilitate communication among existing financial regulators. OFR is housed within the Department of the Treasury, although it is funded separately. Congressional staff may be interested in the organization, actions, and assessments of the FSOC, especially if a systemic financial event were to occur, a covered non-bank financial institution were to fail, and when the Secretary of the. Treasury offers testimony to Congress (which is required at least once per year its mission. The council facilitates communication among the heads of financial regulators and collects confidential financial information.  FSOC has the ability to classify certain non-banks as systemic. Systemic firms with more than $50 billion in assets must also provide and maintain resolution plans. The DFA establishes a regulatory framework of which the FSOC is a consultative council. The new regulatory regime has six basic policy tools with which to pursue, the DFA says. It says the new regime has the potential to reduce the risk of a financial crisis in the U.S. and the global financial system. Nonvoting members include state level representatives from bank, securities, and insurance regulators, as well as the directors from the OFR and the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) Several agencies have special roles in addressing the kinds of systemic risks that the FSOC was designed to monitor. The DFA grants specific authority under certain circumstances for the Secretary of the Treasury, the Fed, and the FDIC. The FSOC has a five-year term, and can be renewed for a further five years. The chair of the FSOC has an effective veto over the designation of individual firms as systemically important. This applies to domestic and foreign firms, and for anti-evasion. The chair's vote is required to rescind or reevaluate the systemic designation of a firm. In emergencies, the chair's affirmative vote is needed as part of the determination that a non-bank will not be granted the systemically-important designation by the Federal Reserve. The vote must be that of the Secretary of the Treasury. usual hearing before its designation as systemic. As part of those anti-evasion provisions, if certain large recipients of Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) funds (specifically, if they hold over $50 billion and were part of the Capital Purchase Program) cease to be bank holding companies, then they are automatically considered a systemically significant firm. As chair of the FSOC, the Secretary also has the responsibility to conduct or coordinate and report on periodic studies of the economic impact of systemic risk regulations. Dodd-Frank Act directs the Fed to supervise certain large non-bank financial companies. The FSOC recommends the standards for these firms. The standards must be more stringent than the standard for non-Bank financial firms which are not under Fed supervision and do not present systemic risks. The requirements include risk-based capital requirements, leverage limits, liquidity requirements, resolution plan and credit exposure report requirements, concentration limits, a contingent capital requirement, enhanced public disclosures, and enhanced public disclosure requirements. (8) short-term debt limits, and (9) overall risk management requirements. Standards for foreign firms are to acknowledge equality of competitive opportunity and take into account the extent to which the foreign non-bank is subject to comparable standards in its home country. The Fed has several powers and duties over covered bank holding companies and non-banks. For example, the Fed can limit the ability of the company to merge with other companies. It can restrict the products the firm offers, or impose conditions on the manner that the firm conducts activities. the Fed can require the company to sell or otherwise transfer assets or off-balance-sheet items to unaffiliated entities. The Fed also has information collection authority, including through examinations, for covered firms. In cases in which the covered firm has another primary regulator (such as the OCC), the Fed is to give the primary regulator reasonable notice of the proposed examination. The DFA permits the Fed to establish standards for systemic firms in a number of additional areas. These areas include a contingent capital requirement, enhanced public disclosure. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) is composed of the heads of the agencies that regulate financial institutions and markets. The FSOC has its own permanent staff in the newly created Office of Financial Research (OFR) that collects data on the financial system and provides information and technical expertise. Table 1 lists the member agencies of the FSOC. The Council was created by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (DFA) in 2010. The DFA established a new regulatory framework to address financial market instability. national and state-chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries to engage in activities that would not otherwise be permitted within the bank itself, subject to certain limits. The law provides a mechanism between the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for a financial subsidiary. Financial Stability Oversight Council — A council created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) with identifying and monitoring systemic risks to the U.,S. financial system, reducing expectations of extraordinary government intervention. Net Asset Value (or NAV)—Value of an asset minus any associated costs; for financial assets, typically changes each trading day. Operational risk —The possibility that a financial institution will suffer losses from a failure to process transactions properly, from accounting mistakes, from rogue traders or other forms of insider fraud. Office of Financial Research (OFR)—An office created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) to support the Financial Stability Oversight Council and member agencies. There are several examples of rising interest rates contributing to stress in the financial system. Rising rates in the 1970s and 1980s created a great deal of stress for banks that had funded long-term mortgages with short-term deposits. In 1994, rising rates in 1994 caused a significant sell-off in the bond market. Rising Rates during 2004-2006 contributed to the financial crisis of 2004-06. In 2008, the U.S. Federal Reserve raised interest rates by 0.25 per cent. Investigation and prosecutions related to LIBOR (and similar reference rates) may reduce the incentive to misreport. The FSOC did express concern at potential reaches for yield, noting that the issuance of high yield bonds (riskier classes of bonds) had increased markedly. Underwriting standards for collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) had reportedly loosened. Furthermore, threats to financial stability posed by rising rates are mitigated in part by one of the potential causes of rising rates—improved financial conditions. A combination of a global savings glut, deficient aggregate demand, and central bank interest-rate policies have contributed to an extended period of low interest rates. At some point, interest rates are likely to rise, either because the demand for loanable funds rises as the economy improves driving up the rates or because a negative shock causes a spike. Financial intermediaries, including but not limited to banks, can be damaged by rising interest rates if they have not adequately addressed the mismatch between the interest rates on their cost of funds. to the end of the housing bubble (which would have ended eventually, but perhaps not at that time) Under-reporting of LIBOR rates in 2008 may have given financial regulators an overoptimistic view of the lending ability of major financial institutions during the liquidity crunch. Low interest rates make it difficult for savers to earn significant returns with relative safety. Money market mutual funds are at greater risk because their income stream (from relatively safe bonds) is close to zero, according to the IMF. as if they were risk-free. Financial institutions and financial systems do not typically retain capital buffers against the possibility of sovereign debt restructuring. The resulting financial instability can cause credit to dry up, interest rates to rise, and may magnify the financial difficulties of the sovereign experiencing the financial stress. There is no formal way to address a sovereign default (no international bankruptcy law applies to sovereigns), and thus European sovereign debt crises have been a series of evolving government funding and banking crises. Even if central banks target their domestic economies rather than their sovereigns, financial instability could still spread. In introductory finance classes, sovereign debt of the governments of developed economies is often characterized as a risk-free asset. Recent events in Europe have cast serious doubt on this simplifying assumption. Changes in the perceived risk of the debt of sovereigns, such as Greece, Cyprus, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, are potential threats to financial stability in part because many financial regulators and financial institutions treat those debts as risk free.in some cases cause asset bubbles in the recipient country. Sovereign debt problems or banking policies in one country can cast doubt on the reliability of government debts or guarantees in other countries. fiscal cliff) and the February 2013 debt ceiling debates. Similarly, the downgrade of U.S. Treasury securities by Standard & Poor's did not cause a significant spike in Treasury yields. Financial markets are global; therefore, financial instability overseas can threaten financial stability in the United States. For example, the failure of a global bank could cause cross-border resolution issues. Capital flights away from some countries can cause global investment money (i.e., hot money) to flood other countries. The U.S. has not experienced any backlash in bond markets for running extended fiscal deficits. Unlike Cyprus or Greece, short-term fiscal problems of the United States could be cushioned by purchases of Treasury securities by the Fed. In the longer term, the combination of higher interest rates and higher outstanding debt can cause interest payments to crowd out interest payments. It is possible that a short-run fiscal crisis is often accompanied by the same kinds of poor economic conditions that cause the Fed to expand its monetary policies. The FSOC does not see a gradual normalization of long-term Treasury yields and volatilities as a significant threat to fiscal imbalances or the wider economy. However, the long-runImbalances could threaten financial instability if there is a sudden spike in yields. The FSOC notes that the financial impact of potentially disruptive short-run fiscal events has had "minimal impact" thus far. U.S. debt is still seen as a safe harbor despite the automatic tax increases and spending cuts at the start of 2013. rates rise for the "wrong" reason, a second credit crunch. The FSOC notes that the measurable financial resilience of major banks (such as capital levels and measures of liquidity) have improved. Typically, recessions cause government revenues to decline and government spending to rise (fiscal policy expands) Economic booms can cause fiscal policy to contract if government revenues expand faster than government spending. Long-term fiscal policy refers to the balance between expected government spending and revenues over an extended period of time. a firm provides a unique financial service with no close substitutes. domino effects, fire sales, and critical functions, depend upon a firm's connections to other firms. These three forms of interconnectedness will typically be correlated with the size and scope of the firm, at least in relation to its market or service. If potential creditors to large firms judge large firms to be too big, they may not be able to pay them. If a clearinghouse has a monopoly on settlement services for a market, and the clearinghouse fails, then other market participants may be unable to process their own transactions. that governments are likely to intervene to prevent an eventual bankruptcy, then this lower perceived risk of default may result in creditors being willing to offer the firms loans on easier terms. Big firms may thus gain funding advantages over smaller competitors, reinforcing the tendency of these firms to grow relative to their markets. The remaining source of systemic risk identified by Tarullo, contagion, is relatively independent of firm size and complexity. Systemic risk regulators may attempt to construct and estimate a firm-specific index of systemic risks. Possible features of systemic risks include externalities and the fallacy of composition. With externalities, there are costs or benefits of actions by financial market participants that are not borne by those participants. With fallacies of composition, what is true for each individual firm in isolation may not be true when all firms follow similar strategies. Just as while one person standing in a crowded stadium sees better, that strategy will fail if everyone stands at the same time. To better understand this article, please visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. Federal Reserve Governor Daniel Tarullo identified four such ways that in his view are most common. Domino effects occur when the failure of one firm causes its creditors to fail. Fire sales may become reinforcing when a product serves as the collateral to finance itself or in markets in which participants must post risk-based margin. The Fed's approach addresses commonly understood channels of risk proliferation, he says. The approach could be applied to other areas of the economy, such as the energy sector, he adds. the death of a canary in a coal mine, the failure of even the smallest firm may signal that large firms, if they are exposed to similar risks, may be in danger. Contagion is based on the information that a firm's failure provides to investors, rather than a specific transactions or interconnections of the failed firm. Tarullo interprets the run on money market mutual funds that occurred in September 2008 as contagion that had little to do with the size, complexity, or transparency of Lehman Brothers. self-reinforcing if failure to pay causes lenders to seize the collateral (the good itself), sell it at distressed prices, and thereby cause further losses on other holders of the asset. These holders may then default on their loans or fail to post margin. Contagion can occur if the failure of one firm is a signal to investors that firms in the same industry or with similar assets are likely to be in financial trouble. It can result in the restriction of liquidity to other firms as possible counterparties shy away. A fire sale occurs when someone holding an asset must sell it in a distressed market. Collateralized lending can be subject to fire sales because borrower defaults are likely to occur at the same time that the market for the collateral is also distressed. As a result, when the lender seizes the collateral, the value of the collateral may be falling—the addition of the government guarantee. Some wholesale sources of funding, such as repos and asset-backed commercial paper, may besubject to fire sale. The financial infrastructure is vulnerable to natural disasters and human activity. Hurricane Sandy temporarily halted trading on the New York Stock Exchange in October 2012. Malfunctions have disrupted the issuance of securities (such as the initial public offering of Facebook). Reportedly, major financial institutions have been subjected to attempts to access the system. The stability of such systems can be threatened by the potential disruptions to the operational network. It can be difficult to predict the impact of a cyber-attack on the financial system. It is possible that a cyber attack could have a significant impact on financial markets. financial activity for FHCs. Blue sky laws —State statutes that govern the offering and selling of securities. Broker/dealer —An individual or firm that buys and sells securities for itself as well as for customers. Bubble —Self-reinforcing process in which the price of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period, often followed by a rapid price decline. Speculative bubbles are usually associated with a "bandwagon" effect in which speculators rush to buy the commodity (in the case of futures, "to take positions") institutions, even though in some cases they may have had relatively small subsidiaries that accepted deposits. Authority to regulate non-bank thrifts and their holding companies had resided in the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) Some non-banks accepted prudential regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Bankruptcy courts were to handle failures among most non- Banks. The government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, are large, complex financial institutions. Treasury. offered a temporary guarantee program for money market mutual funds. Lehman Brothers failed shortly thereafter, and declared bankruptcy. AIG, one of the world's largest insurers, would have failed the day after Lehman. However, the Fed subsequently intervened on behalf of AIG,. In this case avoiding a bankruptcy process. Following the declaration of bankruptcy, financial panic spread to other non-bank institutions and markets, with runs on money market Mutual Funds and repurchase agreements (also known as "repos") institutions that did not accept deposits, but had their own prudential regulatory regime under the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. In common parlance, people have sometimes referred to "too-big-to-fail" firms (TBTF), but what is typically meant are complex and interconnected financial institutions that may not rely on deposits. As then-Federal Reserve Governor Donald Kohn evaluated lessons from the financial crisis, "We [the Fed] traditionally have provided backup liquidity to sound depository institutions" Governor Kohn expressed frustration for the perceived inadequacy of existing tools to deal with TBTF non-banks. Dissatisfaction with existing regulation grew with the progression of the mortgage crisis that began in August 2007. Some of this support was designed to prevent some creditors of failing non- banks from protracted uncertainty in the bankruptcy courts or other resolution process. Similarly, for some qualified financial contracts, support was also designed to help some creditors in the event of a failure of one of the firms. In March 2008, losses on mortgage-related securities caused the distress sale of investment bank Bear Stearns. In July 2008, the GSEs, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, had trouble raising additional capital. Policymakers tried unsuccessfully to enhance investor confidence by pledging financial support for the G SEs. Despite this pledge, in September 2008, F Freddie Mac were placed in conservatorship with explicit financial support from the Fed. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the world's largest lender of credit. almost completely evaporated, making the government sponsored enterprises (GSEs) the dominant providers of wholesale mortgage funding. GSE funding has a variety of government support, including preferred stock purchases by the U.S. Treasury. The lack of significant private capital in mortgage funding is a sign that financial instability in mortgage markets has not yet completely healed (things already went wrong). It has been an announced goal of the Obama administration to stabilize the mortgage market. It has not been achieved yet, but it is a step in the right direction. fire sales should there be a default by a major market participant, has not been completely eliminated. Efforts to address potential instability in money market mutual funds have not as yet been finalized by the SEC. Reliance on government assisted sources of funding increased markedly as a share of all mortgage funding in 2008. At the origination level, the mortgage market share of Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans increased even for borrowers who could offer significant down payments with their house purchase. Private mortgage securitization increased at the wholesale level. Mortgage-backed security (MBS) is a bond backed by a pool of mortgage loans. The bondholders receive a share of the interest and principal payments on the underlying mortgages. The cash flows may be divided among different cash flows. Most MMFs offer check-writing redemption features. The tendency of people to take more risks once another party has agreed to provide protection. Regulatory interventions to bail out failing firms are often said to create moral hazard, on the assumption that others will expect to be saved from their mistakes, too. Two companies are affiliated when one owns all or a large part of another. All subsidiaries are affiliates, but affiliates that are less than 50% controlled are usually not treated as subsidiaries. Asset-backed security is a bond that represents a share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets. The holder is entitled to some part of the repayment flows from the underlying debt. (See "Securitization.") Bank holding company is a company controlled by a third company (see "Subsidiary"). also have authority over securities companies, mortgage lending companies, personal finance companies, and other types of companies offering financial services. Structured debt —Debt that has been customized for the buyer, often by incorporating complex derivatives. Subordinated debt — Debt over which senior debt takes priority. In the event of bankruptcy, subordinated debt holders receive payment only after senior debt claims are paid in full. Subsidiary — A company whose controlling shares are owned 50% or more by another ("parent") corporation. Consolidated Supervised Entities program — Securities and Exchange Commission program that provided voluntary supervision for the five largest investment bank conglomerates. Conservatorship —When an insolvent financial institution is reorganized by a regulator with the intent to restoring it to an ongoing business. Counterparty —The opposite party in a bilateral agreement, contract, or transaction, such as a swap. Credit Default Swap (CDS)—A tradeable contract in which one party agrees to pay another if a third party experiences a credit event. Too-big-to-fail doctrine — An implicit regulatory policy holding that very large financial institutions must be rescued by the government. Tri-Party Repo Market — A repurchase agreement in which a third party agrees to clear and settle the transaction. Umbrella supervision — The term applied to comprehensive regulation of a holding company and its parts by one or more holding company regulator(s) Undercapitalized — A condition in which the business does not have enough capital to meet its needs. computing the value of assets for purposes of capital, segregation, or margin requirements. Hedge funds are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets, including precious metals, commodities, foreign currencies, and derivatives. Hedging —Investing with a hedge fund is similar to buying and selling shares of a stock or bond with the intention of betting on its future price rising or falling. It is illegal to sell shares of hedge funds with the intent of profiting from their losses. Mutual fund is an investing company that pools the funds of individuals and other investors. Owners of a mutual fund hold proportional shares in the entire pool of securities in which a fund invests. Owners pay taxes on their distributions from a fund; the mutual fund itself is not normally subject to federal or state income taxation. Naked option is the sale of a call or put option without holding an equal and opposite position in the same stock or bond. The naked option is a sale of an option to sell a stock without holding the opposite position. even greater rush to sell the commodity (unwind positions) when prices reverse. Capital requirements help assure that losses that might occur will accrue to the institution incurring them. In the case of banking institutions experiencing problems, capital also serves as a buffer against losses to the federal deposit insurance funds. Capital is the owners' stake in an enterprise. It is a critical line of defense when losses occur, both in banking and nonbanking enterprises. Capital —Assets minus liabilities; what a firm owns minus what it owes. Hedging instrument gains value as the hedged item loses value, and vice versa. Illiquid Assets —Assets that cannot be easily or quickly sold. Insolvent —A firm whose liabilities exceed its assets. Institutional regulation —Regulation that is institution-specific as contrasted with activity specific (see "Functional regulation"). Investment banking functions include underwriting (marketing newly registered securities to individual or institutional investors), counseling regarding merger and acquisition proposals, brokerage services, advice on corporate financing. respond to emerging threats to U.S. financial stability. Firewalls —Barriers to the flow of capital, information, management, and other resources among business units owned by a common entity. In case of financial distress of one operation ("fire"), the "walls" are intended to prevent the spread of loss to the other units. Example: losses in a securities subsidiary of a holding company could not be covered by any of the holding company's bank subsidiaries. Foreign bank —Banks and their holding companies headquartered in other countries may have a variety of financial operations in the United States.  securitization is the process of transforming a cash flow, typically from debt repayments, into a new marketable security. Holders of the securitized instrument receive interest and principal payments as the underlying loans are repaid. Shadow Banking is financial activities that in some respects parallel banking activities but are subject to less regulation than commercial banks. Institutions include mutual funds, investment banks, and hedge funds. Special-purpose entities (SPEs)—Also referred to as ‘shadow banks’  SPEs are legal entities created to perform a specific financial function or transaction. They isolate financial risk from the sponsoring institution and provide less-expensive financing. The assets, liabilities, and cash flows of an SPE do not appear on the sponsoring institutions' books. Speculation — A venture or undertaking of an enterprising nature, especially one involving considerable financial risk on the chance of unusual profit. State regulation —Under the dual system of bank regulation, states as well as the federal government may charter, regulate, and supervise depository institutions. Act (RESPA), the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), and the Dodd-Frank Act's ability-to-pay standard. Additional work may need to be done to raise GSE guarantee fees to make room for private competitors to the GSEs. The financial infrastructure can also be a source of systemic risk. This is essentially the "plumbing" of the financial system. It includes the environment in which financial trading occurs, communications of the interbank payment system, clearing and settlement of retail payments. Wholesale funding sources are not eligible for certain government initiatives that assist financial stability, such as deposit insurance. Non-banks that use wholesale sources to fund capital market activity may be subject to runs similar to a depository bank, but would not typically have access to certain emergency lending facilities such as the Fed's discount window. During periods of uncertainty and financial instability, financial intermediaries may lose trust in each other, and refuse to extend or roll over their loans. The resulting reduction in wholesale funding can have many of the characteristics of a bank run by depositors. Financial institutions are differentiated by the manner in which they invest their funds: in loans, bonds, stocks, or some combination; as well as by their sources of funds. Depository financial institutions may accept deposits which are federally insured against loss to the depositor. Non-depository financial institution such as life and property/casualty insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds obtain funds through other types of receipts, whose values may fluctuate with market conditions. Financial subsidiary —Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ), both financial subsidiary and financial subsidiary. A holding company for securities firms authorized under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Such holding companies are subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The issuing of securities, where the proceeds accrue to the issuer, is distinct from the secondary, or resale, market. Lender of last resort —Governmental lender that acts as the ultimate source of credit in the financial system. In the United States, the Fed has this role. Leverage —The ability of a company or bank to make a profit by proprietary trading. credit unions, since traditionally the greater part of their funding has been in the form of deposits. Deposits are a customer's funds placed with an institution according to agreed on terms and conditions and represent a credit to the depositor. Derivatives are financial contracts whose value is linked to the price of an underlying commodity or financial variable (such as an interest rate, currency price, or stock index) Ownership of a derivative does not require the holder to actually buy or sell the underlying interest. to control large dollar amounts of a commodity or security with a comparatively small amount of capital. Leverage can be obtained through borrowing or the use of derivatives. Liquidity risk —The possibility that the market for normally-liquid assets will suddenly dry up, leaving firms unable to convert assets into cash. Also, the risk that other firms will refuse to extend credit on any of the firms listed. The ability to trade an asset quickly without significantly affecting its price, or the condition of a market with many buyers and sellers present. terms to a firm that is perceived as distressed. Mark-to-Market — The process by which the reported amount of an asset is adjusted to reflect true the market value. Market risk — The risk that the price of a tradeable security or asset will decline, resulting in a loss to the holder. Money market mutual fund (MMF)—A form of mutual fund that pools funds of individuals and other investors for investment in high-grade, short-term debt and bank deposits paying market rates of return. meet its capital requirements if it is a regulated entity. Variable Rate Demand Obligation — A security which pays a variable interest rate, and can be redeemed upon the demand of the holder. Write-Downs —Reducing the value of an asset as it is carried on a firm's balance sheet because the market value has fallen. Appendix B. Acronyms for this article include:  ‘’’, ‘””, ’ ’. Bank Holding Company Act regulates bank holding companies and financial holding companies. Federal Open Market Committee oversees market conditions and implements monetary policy through such means as setting interest rates. Financial holding company can control one or more banks, securities firms, and insurance companies as permitted by law and/or regulation. A financial institution is an enterprise that uses its funds chiefly to purchase financial services. The Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury decide what is an appropriate new these cushions against loss, according to the Act. Federal Reserve is primary federal regulator. States and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency may also regulate them. Government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) is private company with government charters. Government sponsorship typically gives them a funding advantage over purely private competitors. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ) called for more functional regulation than in the past. In the U.S. banks are regulated based on activity ("function") rather than organizational structure. Troubled Asset Relief Program provides financial assistance to U.S. financial institutions through the purchase of senior preferred shares in the corporations. Charter conversion —Banking institutions may, with the approval of their regulators, switch their corporate form between: commercial bank or savings institution, National or State charter. Clearing Organization —An entity through which futures and other derivative transactions are cleared and settled. Also known as a clearing organization may be a division or affiliate of a particular exchange, or a freestanding entity. Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA, P.L. 106-554, 114 Stat. 2763)—Overhauled the Commodity Exchange Act to create a flexible structure for the regulation of futures and options trading. Commercial Paper Funding Facility Emergency Program —Created by the Fed in 2008, this program purchased three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible companies. Community Reinvestment Act 1977 — A federal law which encouraged depository institutions to make loans and provide services. called a clearing house, multilateral clearing organization, or clearing association. Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)—A bond created by the securitization of a pool of asset backed securities. Commercial bank —A deposit-taking institution that can make commercial loans, accept checking accounts, and whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. National banks are chartered by the National Bank of Canada. (See CDO and CMO.) Collateralize mortgage obligation (CMO)—A multiclass bond backed by a pool. of mortgage pass-through securities or mortgage loans. Debt obligation, bankruptcy, or credit rating downgrade. Credit Risk — The risk that a borrower will fail to repay a loan in full. Credit Rating Agency — Private company that evaluates the credit quality of securities and provides ratings on those securities. Credit Union — A nonprofit financial cooperative of individuals with one or more common bonds (such as employment, labor union membership, or residence in the same neighborhood). May be state or nationally chartered. Credit unions accept deposits of members' savings and transaction. arising inside the institution. OTC transactions can occur electronically or over the telephone. Receivership —When an insolvent financial institution is taken over with the intent to liquidate its assets. Repurchase Agreement (Repos) —A method of secured lending where the borrower sells securities to the lender as collateral and agrees to repurchase them at a higher price within a short period, often within one day. Savings association —A savings and loan association, mutual savings bank, or federal savings bank. saving (thrift) and home buying through mortgage lending. In recent years, such institutions' charters have been expanded to allow them to provide commercial loans and a broader range of consumer financial services. The federal regulator for most savings associations is the Office of Thrift Supervision. Also known as savings and loans, thrifts, and mutual savings banks. The Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC) is a private nonprofit membership corporation set up under federal law to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers and/or dealers. The term "systemic risk" does not have a single, agreed-upon definition. Systemic risk is defined as the risk that the linkages between institutions may affect the financial system as a whole. Thrift holding company —Also known as a savings and loan holding company, a business that controls one or more savings associations. These holding companies are regulated under the Home Owners' Loan Act by the Office of Thrift and Deposit Guarantee.and reporting purposes with its parent. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Non-bank financial firms is important to understanding the FSOC. Many of the new powers attempt to create a regulatory and resolution regime for non-banks that is similar to the way depository banks are handled. The term bank generally refers to financial institutions with bank, thrift, or credit union charters that offer loans and raise a large proportion of their funds through insured deposits. Insured depository Banks have prudential regulators who monitor their assets and liabilities, including the ability to prevent concentrations in particular types of loans or reliance on particular funding sources. The term non-bank refers to financial institutions that offer loans or other sources of capital, but do not have a bank charter. Resolution of failing depository banks is done administratively by the FDIC (or NCUA for credit unions), not through the bankruptcy courts. Banks generally have access to liquidity facilities, such as the Federal Reserve discount window. Prior to the financial crisis of 2008, investment banks such as Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers were examples of large, complex, non- bank financial institutions. criteria and designates which financial market utilities be subjected to safety and soundness regulation. An example of a financial market utility would be an organization that provides settlement and clearing services. A covered non-bank in danger of failing may under certain conditions be resolved by the FDIC rather than through the bankruptcy process. The FSOC may set aside some financial regulations for consumers if the rules might cause systemic risk, under certain circumstances. The distinction between depository banks and non-depository banks will be clarified. The federal regulator for credit unions is the National Credit Union Administration. Commercial banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified high-quality debt obligations, such as those of the federal government. A dealer is an individual or financial firm engaged in the purchase and sale of securities and commodities such as metals, foreign exchange, etc., for its own account and at its own risk as principal (see "Broker/dealer"). Depository institution —Customarily refers to commercial banks, savings institutions, and the fact that banks may be either federally or state chartered. Exchange — A central marketplace with established rules and regulations where buyers and sellers meet to trade futures and options contracts or securities. Federal safety net — A broad term referring to protection of banking institutions through deposit insurance, discount window credit, other lender of last resort support, and certain forms of regulations to reduce risk. Commercial and industrial companies generally lack any of the above-listed safety net protection measures for banks and other commercial and industrial firms. profit if they can successfully forecast price trends. Examples include futures contracts, options, and swaps. It may be used to relieve temporary cash shortages at banks and other depository institutions. Borrowers are expected to have tried to borrow elsewhere first and must provide collateral as security for loans. The term derives from the practice whereby bankers would come to a Reserve Bank teller window to obtain credit in the early days of the Federal Reserve System. The phrase refers to the Dual banking system, which is a system of multiple banks.