Congress appropriated $38.346 billion for all versions of the MRAP. The full FY2011 DOD budget request of $3.4 billion was authorized by the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 ( P.L. 111-383 ). In the President's FY2012 DOD budget proposal, there was no request for procurement funds for the MR AP program. Citing an operational requirement for 27,344 MRAPS to support CENTCOM operations, DOD requested $3,195 for theMRAP vehicle program for FY2012. The House and Senate Armed Services Committees recommended fully funding the FY2012 OCO budget request. As previously noted, many older MRAPs shipped to Afghanistan are reportedly not being used because their size and weight severely limit their effectiveness. If a large number of MRAPS are, in fact, not being use, the budget request could be in jeopardy. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended fully Funding the FY 2012 OCO Budget request. The FY2012 budget request includes $.765 billion for survivability and mobility upgrades; and $.03 billion for automotive and ballistic testing. Pentagon agreed to loan 300 MRAPs in Afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently. If these vehicles are not being used, is there a better use for them elsewhere or are they to be left in country after the eventual departure of U.S. forces? Some say the vehicles were shipped to Afghanistan, as some say, for symbolic as opposed to operational reasons and, if so, what is the total cost for these unused vehicles to be shipped and maintained in theater? About 85 MRAPs are already out on loan to Poland, Romania, Georgia, and the Czech Republic. All countries that are loaned MR APs can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) says the loans could help to reduce allied casualties and help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of the vehicles. In August 2009 briefings to the House Armed Services Committee Air and Land Forces, and Seapower and Expeditionary Forces Subcommittees, the GAO said that the loans would help reduce casualties in Afghanistan. contract for additional M-ATVs over and above the original 8,100. According to DOD, as of July 21, 2011, 14,749 MRAPs had been delivered to Afghanistan. Reports suggest that many of the older model MR APs deployed to Afghanistan are not used, as they are considered too large and bulky for tactical missions. Congress might wish to explore the performance characteristics of these modified M- ATVs in greater detail with DOD to ensure that a proper balance between protection and operational utility is reached. M-ATVs initially enjoyed success in Afghanistan, but reports suggest insurgents have increased the size of IEDs. In response to the enhanced IED threat, two additional layers of Israeli-made armor plates are being installed to the M-ATV's underside. New padding and crew harnesses inside the vehicle reportedly will enable the M/ATVs to withstand explosions twice as large as before. If U.S. decides to look for "the next best thing" in terms of tactical wheeled vehicles, they could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the HMMWV fleet. DOD reportedly concluded a $245 million dollar contract with Oshkosh to acquire 5,100 sets of armor. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Ashton Carter supposedly intends to outfit all of the almost 7,000 M-ATVs in Afghanistan with these armor kits. There are concerns that additional armor might have an adverse impact on vehicle mobility, which was the prime consideration for the development of the M- ATV. Their current classified capability. While additional armor and interior improvements could improve M-atV survivability up to a point. Mine-Resistant, Ambush-Protected (MRAP) vehicles are a family of vehicles produced by a variety of domestic and international companies. They generally incorporate a "V"-shaped hull and armor plating designed to provide protection against mines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) DOD originally intended to procure three types of MRAPs. These included Category I vehicles, capable of carrying up to 7 personnel and intended for urban operations; Category II vehicles, able to carry up to 11 personnel; and Category III vehicles. The Army and Marines first employed MRAPs in limited numbers in Iraq and Afghanistan in 2003. The vehicles are intended to be used primarily to clear mines and IEDs, capable of carrying up to 13 personnel. DOD officials have stated that the casualty rate for MR APs is 6%, making it "the most survivable vehicle we have in the Army" and the Marines" MRAP's have been used for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) operations in Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere. DOD has approved an acquisition objective of 25,700 MRAP vehicles for all services. Of this total, 8,100 will be the new MRAP-All Terrain Vehicle (M-ATV) designed to better handle the rugged terrain of Afghanistan. DOD officials have indicated that this requirement may increase depending upon the operational needs in Afghanistan. Some defense experts suggest that the Joint Program Office's estimates seem too high. The M-1 Abrams main battle tank was said to have a casualty rate of 15%, and the up-armored HMMWV, a 22% casualty rate. Of the almost 15,000 Army MRAPs, about 5,750 will be assigned to infantry brigade combat teams, according to a June 2010 Army briefing. About 1,000 MR APs will be used for home station and institutional training, and approximately 1,500 will be placed into logistics and route clearance units. However, with the increase of U.S. forces deploying to Afghanistan and Secretary of Defense requirements to make better use of MRAP's, these plans have been adjusted. The Marines are reportedly still developing their ground vehicle strategy. MRAPs have proven to be 10 times safer than HMMWVs in protecting soldiers during IED attacks. As many as 40,000 lives had been saved in Iraq and Afghanistan, according to the Pentagon's Joint Program Office for MR APs. In an interview with outgoing Secretary of Defense Robert Gates, it was suggested that MRAP's were 10 times more likely to survive an IED attack than other vehicles. The Marines are currently developing a sea-based expeditionary Marine force. noted that "the introduction of MRAP, M-ATV and eventually the JLTV creates a potential risk of unplanned overlap in capabilities," a risk that needs to be managed. Defense officials have also been asked if there is a need for the MRAP/M-ATVs and JL TV programs, as these programs share as many as 250 requirements. Some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs, particularly in light of anticipated defense budget cuts.