The amount of federal funds authorized for demonstration projects has grown since 1982. In 1991, we found that for 66 projects reviewed, the federal funding and state matching funds together accounted for only 37 percent of the projects’ total anticipated costs. Future finances could be drained if extra federal funds are needed to cover the cost of completing the projects. Demonstration projects can yield a low payoff for a variety of reasons, including that they frequently are not aligned with the states’ transportation priorities, can languish in the early stages of project development. Under the first alternative, 33 states would receive an average of $64 million more than they were apportioned in fiscal year 1995. 17 states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, would lose $111 million on average. Under the second alternative, a slightly different redistribution pattern would emerge. One indicator of need that we intentionally omitted from the above discussion is that of the states’ contributions to the federal Highway Trust Fund. These contributions have a special status because they align with two key objectives of the highway. would receive less funding than they did in fiscal year 1995. For these recipients, the average loss would be $82 million. In total, about 9 percent of the highway funds would be redistributed. While many social objectives are probably best addressed through means other than the highway apportionment formula. A portion of highway funds might nonetheless be retained to advance specific objectives and/or to counterbalance some of the potential disadvantages of the principal formula factors. For instance, a certain percentage of funds—10 percent, for example—could be set aside before the remaining funds were. 27 states would receive more funds than they were apportioned in fiscal year 1995. The average dollar gain would be about $68 million. 23 states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, would receive less funding. For these recipients, the average loss would be $73 million. Under the third alternative, all funds would be returned to the states, including funds for Interstate Construction and demonstration projects along with other program funding. (State-by-state details are provided in app. VII.) considered three different alternatives, which are summarized in table 3.2. Under the first alternative, $17.8 billion of the total $19.1 billion would be returned to the source. This amount would represent all the funds distributed to the states in fiscal year 1995, except funds for Interstate Construction. These funds were excluded since the Interstate Construction program’s final apportionment was made at the beginning of fiscal year1995. Under this alternative, 24 states would receive more funds than they would have received otherwise. This alternative recognizes the full $19.1 billion distributed to the states in fiscal year 1995. Under this alternative, 24 states would gain an average of $86 million, while 26 states along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico would lose anAverage of $74 million. (State-by-state details are provided in app. VIII.) As mentioned previously, the first two formula components discussed above can be combined. A significant advantage of blending these components is that programs of particular concern (notably, the NHS) could receive special attention through the use of this formula. and preserving the Interstate Highway system and on maintaining other federal-aid highways as well as bridges eligible for federal funds. While these goals remain a part of the overall surface transportation program, ISTEA broadened the goals and included new programs, planning processes, and management systems. For example, the Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement Program (CMAQ) directs funds to transportation projects in clean air nonattainment areas. The goal is to ensure that the states’ transportation plans are intermodal (that is, coordinate various modes of transportation) and environmentally sound. is the existing Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) program, which directs funds to states with particularly severe problems in air quality. CMAQ is focused on investment in airquality improvements and provides funds for projects that expand or initiate transportation services. It is directed to those states that are classified as nonattainment areas for ozone and carbon monoxide. Every state, regardless of its air quality status, is guaranteed an annual minimum apportionment of 0.5 percent of the program’s program. construction, to the possible detriment of adequately preserving the existing network and of considering air quality. Several actions could be taken to counterbalance such tendencies. First, as part of the third component of the formula framework, set-asides could be established to reward those states that meet certain preservation or maintenance goals. Second, greater use of performance measures geared to preserving theexisting infrastructure would help FHWA ensure that the states do not neglect needed preservation and maintenance. As we noted in our July 1994 testimony before the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, performance measures are important. total funding.) The advantage of such a program is that it focuses funding on precisely those areas with the greatest needs. The disadvantage is that, as occurs with the needs-based formula factors discussed earlier in this chapter, directing funding to states with specific needs can foster a perverse incentive. Questions have been raised about the wisdom of essentially rewarding states for their nonattainment status, particularly given that a state loses CMAQ funding if it makes “too much progress” in improving air quality. A second approach to directing set-aside funding towards specific goals is The funding for four programs is interdependent since a state’s total share of funding is fixed. Later steps provide additional funding to certain states; these funding categories are legislatively designated as equity adjustments. Equity adjustments generally address the concerns of states that contribute a greater share of highway user taxes than they receive in federal-aid highway funds. The Minimum Allocation guarantees a state an amount such that its percentage of the total apportionments and prior-year allocations is not less than 90 percent of certain highway funding categories. The Congress has used funding adjustments to improve equity among the states. Alternative factors, such as lane miles, are more closely aligned with highway needs. In fiscal year 1995, the equity funding categories increased the amount of federal highway funds apportioned to 41 states and the District of Columbia. The amount of funding that the majority of states received through the the basis of the funding for the programs alone was ultimately increased by equity adjustments. The total amount ofFederal highway funding apportioning in fiscal year1995 was ultimatelyincreased by equityadjustments. DOT has proposed changes to the existing equity adjustments and program categories. In fiscal year 1995, these equity adjustments represented 16 percent of the total funds apportioned. The changes, proposed in DOT’s fiscal year 1996 budget justification, were preceded by the statement that if less federal money will be invested in transportation, state and local governments need to have greater authority and flexibility to decide which projects are most important. DOT has stated that it will not change the funding it has received in the past. The calculations that determine the level of funding that each state receives for the various funding categories occur in a strict sequence. All of the equity adjustments come into play late in the sequential calculation. These adjustments essentially increase the funding calculated for a state up to that point. For example, if a state is hypothetically entitled to a total apportionment of of Illinois, and 4.36 for Massachusetts, these adjustments increase the state’s total funding to that amount by 1.5%. This is the case for Illinois. $500 million on the basis of the Hold Harmless provision, it will receive that amount regardless of whether all the calculations up to that point yielded a total of $200 million, $300 million, or $400 million. In fiscal year 1995, equity adjustments accounted for $2.8 billion (16 percent) of the approximately $18 billion distributed to the states. Only nine states—Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and Washington—and Puerto Rico did not receive funding through equity adjustments. period of time during the transition to a new funding amount. If the existing, intricate equity adjustments were replaced with a single, simple cap, the funds devoted to these equity adjustments in fiscal year 1995 would more than offset the states’ combined losses in that year. The scenario resulting in the greatest adverse impact on the states—alternative 1 of the needs proxy approach—produced a combined loss of $2.4 billion. Alternatively, other scenarios could be used to shield the states from severe losses. Each state’s ultimate share of funding for all four programs is fixed. With a few minor adjustments, these fixed shares derive from the shares of funds that the states received, on average, during fiscal years 1987-91 for the predecessor programs. The states’ funding levels for the other three programs are independently calculated on the basis of factors specific to each program. The final program included in the four-part calculation, the STP,behaves as an adjuster for the states. This means that any annual increase or decrease in a state’s funding for the Interstate Maintenance Program, Bridge Program, or NHS must be offset by a corresponding, reciprocal change in the STP funds the state receives for that same year. Figure 2.2 illustrates this zero-sum game through a hypothetical example involving 2 years and two states. In the example, both State A and State B experience shifts in their apportioned funding between fiscal years 1993 and 1994. However, for both states these shifts are rendered irrelevant because they are offset. of the funds. Funding is provided for eight programs, including the NHS and STP, and for five separate mechanisms to raise individual states’ funding levels to achieve certain goals for equity among the states. The calculations that determine the level of funding that each state receives for these various categories occur in a strict sequence, as illustrated in figure 2.1. During the first step of the calculation, for example, funding is provided to complete the construction of the Interstate Highway System. Funding for the other program categories is also based on separate calculations. The current funding level for the STP represents about 40 percent of the total funds authorized for these programs. The two alternatives outlined blend needs-based and return-to-origin approaches. For purposes of illustration, the following two hypothetical distributions blend the two approaches along the existing split between STP and two other primary highway programs—Interstate Maintenance and the NHS. In contrast, a return- to-origin approach might be more appropriate for theSTP, which already has characteristics that resemble those of a block grant program. distributed to the states. Payments drawn from this set-aside could be used to provide bonuses to advance quality-of-life objectives, to reward improvements in the condition of highway infrastructure above a certain defined floor, and to advance highway safety. These and similar objectives are all laudable; however, constraint in selecting the objectives may be warranted to prevent the dilution of funds that could result from attempting to meet numerous objectives. A prime example of this approach would be to direct set- aside funds to those states suffering from unique or concentrated needs in certain areas. to treat the funds as incentive payments. Incentive payments, as the name implies, do not redress shortcomings, but instead reward desired behaviors or accomplishments. For example, shared set-aside funding could be used to reward states that make notable and measurable improvements in the percentage of the state’s pavement condition rated as “good” under FHWA’S classification system. To emphasize the condition of the nation's most heavily traveled highways, such rewards could be further refined. a component designed to place a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any individual state would be expected to bear as a result of the changes. For example, a maximum-loss cap of 20 percent might be established. If a new formula calculation caused a given state’s funding to fall by 50 percent from the level it would otherwise be, the cap would come into effect and funding for the state in question would be reinstated to 80 percent of what the state would otherwise have received. aid was apportioned to Interstate, primary, secondary, and urban highways. The NHS is the centerpiece of ISTEA, and the system is expected to be the major focus for the federal-aid highway program into the 21st century. In a speech on December 9, 1993, the Administrator of FHWA noted that since the Interstate was begun in 1956, the nation’s population has grown and shifted, the economy has changed, and needs are different. To serve these needs, the NHS must be expanded. foundation for the nation to compete in the global economy, and move people and goods in an energy-efficient manner. Section 1098 of ISTEA tasked us with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds to the states. In discussion with the congressional committees identified in section 1098, we agreed to address (1) the way the formula works and the relevancy of the data used for the formula. The NHS is expected to reflect this emphasis and will provide links in a seamless intermodal network that will enhance economic growth and national security. needs—to extend the benefits of the Interstate system to areas not served directly by it. The NHS was conceived as a way of focusing federal resources on the nation’s most important highways. DOT, working cooperatively with state and local officials as well as the private sector, proposed to the Congress in December 1993 an NHS network of about 159,000 miles. This network is about 17 percent of the approximately 950,000-mile federal-aid network and includes only 4 percent of about 4 million miles of public roads. A well-maintained system is the necessary foundation for pursuing the myriad goals for the system. Without such a foundation, system enhancements such as alleviating congestion and improving the efficient movement of goods may not be fully realized. While measures of a system’s extent provide part of the story on highway needs, the condition of the road is also an important element. Condition can be captured by measures of the use of the system, as well as by the state of the highway itself. Federal highway funds are provided to the states through the Federal Highway Administration. The money is distributed to states through various formula calculations and, to a lesser extent, through congressionally designated projects. The fund is divided into a highway account and a mass transit account. DOT forecasts that the income to the highway account will total $20.5 billion in fiscal year 1996. For more information on the Highway Trust Fund, go to: http://www. highwaytrustfund.org/ or call 1-800-273-8255. In fiscal year 1995, 70 percent of the funding under the formula went to the four largest programs. Separate calculations determine each state’s share of funds for the Interstate projects had been authorized 4 years earlier. Figure 2.3 depicts the funding to each state for highway programs, and, if applicable, any modifications to that funding realized through either equity adjustments or funding for demonstration projects provided under ISTEA in fiscal year1995. The formula authorized approximately $120 billion for highway construction and repair over 6 years. state transportation officials, ISTEA’s myriad objectives for highways can be placed into four overarching categories. The first two objectives translate into formula components that are at the core of the distribution process. Addressing the states’ highway needs, such as the miles of highway in need of repair and the deterioration of the highway associated with traffic loads, is a primary objective in the distribution of highway funds. The second objective is returning the majority of funds to the state where the revenue was generated, and the third is fostering social benefits. SISTEA authorized funding to sustain and enhance the nation’s surface transportation infrastructure. The act provided an unprecedented authorization of $122 billion for highways, bridges, and related activities for fiscal years 1992-97. The Congress can further adjust the federal highway funds a state receives by authorizing specific projects, commonly referred to as demonstration projects. Funding for these demonstration projects is not distributed by formula. Rather, the Congress requires that particular projects receive a specified amount of funding. The formula for apportioning federal-aid highway funds established in ISTEA is a complex arithmetic tool used by FHWA. Reauthorization of the federal-aid highway program presents Congress with the opportunity to review the objectives associated with providing federal highway funds. A review of the program’s objectives could be structured to recognize differences among highways and the federal role associated with important highways, such as those included in the NHS. There are no perfect factors that embrace the breadth of ISTEA”s diverse objectives as well as its role in the health care system, says Tom Zoellner, president of the Center for American Progress. The existing federal-aid highway formula is the vehicle for distributing billions of dollars annually for highway construction and repair. Since the mid-1980s, a number of organizations (including GAO) have suggested fundamental changes in the formula. Section 1098 of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (ISTEA) tasked GAO with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds. The formula is based on outdated data, according to GAO's review of the highway funding formula. The states are the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. over 70 percent of all commercial truck traffic. For other roads eligible for federal assistance, a program with the characteristics of a block grant, the Surface Transportation Program (STP), provides financial assistance. ISTEA continued authorizations for a separate Bridge Replacement and Rehabilitation Program and Interstate Maintenance Program and an array of other separate highway program initiatives as well as funding categories addressing various equity issues, such as each state’s share of funding as compared with what it received in past years. Previously, the federal-aid highway program had focused on completing projects. ISTEA expanded the use of equity adjustments for the apportionment of federal-aid funds among the states. It also created “hold harmless’ funding, which establishes the state’s share of overall federal highway apportionments. ISTEA also embodied quality-of-life objectives, stating that the nation”s transportation system should be economically efficient and environmentally sound, provide the elderly, disabled, and economically disadvantaged with access to transportation. The bill was signed into law on July 1, 2013. is brought up to the level of return for those states with the next highest level of returns. This process is repeated successively for each state until the funds authorized for this funding category in that fiscal year are exhausted. Finally, a fourth adjustment category, referred to as Hold Harmless, addresses a different objective—preserving the states’ historical funding share. For example, this legislatively prescribed funding percentage is 1.74 for Alabama, 0.41 for Delaware and 0.69 for Idaho. highway programs—the NHS and STP—essentially remained the same. Each state’s funding was to be based on the historical share of funds the state received from major programs before ISTEA was enacted. Locking in the status quo on the basis of historical funding averages has also been supported through two other funding avenues. The Hold Harmless equity adjustment category serves to raise the states’ ultimate level of annual funding to a predetermined percentage share of the total funding available. These percentage shares are fixed over the life of ISTEA. Each state’s share of funds is calculated annually for each of these separate programs. These separate calculations are essentially meaningless since the total funding for the four programs is fixed over the 6-year authorization period for ISTEA. The data underlying the distribution of highway funds to the states are generally outdated, unresponsive to changing conditions, and often not reflective of the nation's highway system or its usage. On the basis of our analysis and discussions with federal and federal and state officials, we believe that the current system is not working as intended. Population figures for formula use were derived every 10 years from the census. As a result, changes in the states’ populations were accounted for only at 10-year intervals. This problem has been exacerbated under ISTEA, since the population data underlying the states' historical shares for ISTEA’s major funding calculations are, in part, based on 1980 population data, not the more current 1990 data. In our March 1986 report, we also identified those factors previously and identified those that are still relevant today. Until the reliability of these data is improved, their use as an indicator for distributing federal highway funds would be suspect and arbitrary. An alternative measure, the International Roughness Index, is a more objective measure of pavement condition (roughness) FHWA expects this data source to play a more prominent role in the future. In 1993, the most recent year for which data are available on pavement condition, 37 states used the Internationalroughness Index to measure pavement condition on Interstate highways. The remaining 13 states continued to rely on the Present Serviceability Index. states on the condition and performance of their roadways are not always reliable, making it more difficult to equitably distribute such incentive payments. In subcommittee hearings for the House Committee on Appropriations in fiscal year 1994, FHWA was questioned on significant swings in the percentage of Interstate pavement rated in poor condition, as illustrated by table 3.4. FH WA explained that the data were based on the use of an index, referred to as the Present Serviceability Index. This index, however, represents a subjective measure of the pavement’s ride quality and can be arrived at differently. Fuel consumption patterns may differ across states because of the urban-rural population mix, the amount of travel done under congested conditions, and fuel purchases by transients in those states with lower fuel taxes. While vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption correlate well with system usage, they do have some drawbacks. Vehicle miles traveled measure the vehicles moved rather than the people and do not account for different vehicle classifications. Both factors are largely at odds with air quality objectives, and the principle of air quality. rewarding motor fuel consumption with more highway funding also conflicts with the goal of encouraging energy conservation. New Jersey transportation officials, for instance, noted that such factors reward energy consumption and air pollution and penalize those who successfully enact measures to reduce the use of single-occupant vehicles. Congress has previously rejected the notion of giving vehicle miles traveled greater weight in apportioning funds, in part because of the strong environmental objections raised. As in the case of the factors related to the system’s extent, the disadvantages associated with measures of are similar. distinct from the extent of the system. The AASHTO Policy Review Committee observed that data on vehicle miles traveled have been statistically designed for a high level of measurable accuracy. Also, in the Faucett study, vehicle miles travel garnered one of the highest correlation values, 0.913, of the other factors used in the formula for a system’s usage. It is relevant as an indicator of both capital and system preservation needs, the committee said. The study was published in the Journal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. to the extent that the formula uses factors such as vehicle miles traveled, lane miles, and fuel consumption, it encourages behavior that runs counter to the objectives of reducing congestion and improving air quality. In his view, population and population density would be preferable alternatives as proxies. These proxies were recommended because they were perceived as avoiding the perverse effects tied to a system’s extent and usage. Population data, however, also have limitations. As noted by the Executive Director of AASHTO, the link between population and the states’ highway needs is questionable. March 1986 report, we found that the factors used to apportion certain highway funds were not closely related to the highway system. At the time of our report, the data on which these factors were based were already between 40 and 70 years old. A state’s land area was originally included as a factor in the distribution formula in 1916. Land area was thought to provide a balance for the factor based on population and to reflect a state's future highway needs. However, this approach resulted Postal mileage was included as a formula factor in 1916 to provide a constitutional justification for federal involvement in highways. By 1919, changes to the highway legislation had ended the need for this justification. Land area no longer bears a close relationship to future highway needs, namely need for new construction, since the highway system is no longer growing rapidly throughout the country. In addition, since postal mileage is computed on the basis of the postal mileage, land area is not a factor in the formula factor for land area. Some states believe that center-line miles, not lane miles, are a more appropriate factor for distributing highway funds. A highway that is 2 miles long would equal 2 center- line miles or 8 lane miles. However, this measure does not capture any information on the various widths of highways, because a lane mile is not the same thing as a center line mile. The U.S. Department of Transportation says it will continue to use center line miles for highway funding until a new formula is developed. Lane miles are a good measure of the extent of the highway system (capital stock) to be preserved. Using lane miles as a factor for apportioning highway funds was endorsed by a Policy Review Committee of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in fiscal year 1991. Two-lane highway and an eight- lane highway are considered equal under this measure. The width and length of highways is reflected in lane miles, and as we noted in our 1986 report, lane miles are an important measure. suggested to the Congress as consistent with basic federal highway programs and for which data were available. Our results supported lane miles as a direct measure of the size of the road network and thus as a reflection of the extent of the system to be preserved. In addition, we found that vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption reflected the amount of highway use. We recognized that each of these factors has its own advantages and disadvantages in establishing a formula. Finally, we recognized that changing the formula could have a negative effect on the safety of the highway system. both rural and urban areas. The committee further noted that a measure of lane miles is probably the simplest and most efficient potential apportionment factor on which to obtain accurate information. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the close of the calendar year. Regardless of whether center-line miles or lane miles are used to indicate the extent of a system, some observers criticize the use of mileage for apportioning future highway funds. Such usage could reward expansion of the system. Thus, this type of apportionments factor would tend to encourage more highway. The correlation analysis was reported in terms of values between zero and one. The closer the value is to 1, the closer the correlation between the factor and the need for repairs to the Interstate. The highest correlations—at least 0.900—existed for vehicle miles traveled and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund. Equity adjustments were designed to address the concerns of the states that contribute a greater share of revenue to the highway trust fund. The strong correlations between certain of these factors and major needs for repair diminished for federal-aid highways. all the factors related to Interstate repair needs. That is, a state with a high number of vehicle miles traveled would also likely have high needs for repair of the Interstate. Motor fuel consumption reflects travel on all roads, not just on the federal-aid system or on roads under a state’s jurisdiction. It would not be a precise measure for apportioning funds to specific groups of roads. These data are reported by states monthly and adjusted at year's end. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of. funding that the states received with what they would have received under the various alternatives. Four programs account for 70 percent of the largest programs. The NHS and STP, together accounting for 40 percent of all the funding apportioned in fiscal year 1995. The factors that influenced the historical targets for funding in the federal-aid highway program are not closely related to the highway system’s needs, the authors say. They say alternative factors, such as lane miles and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund, are more closely aligned with highway needs. The Donor State Bonus compares each state’s projected contributions to the Highway Trust Fund in the fiscal year with the apportionments that the state will receive in that fiscal year. If the formula were restructured to encompass a pure return-to-origin approach, each state's contribution to the Trust Fund would simply be returned to that state. The majority of revenues credited to the trust fund derive from the federal fuel tax. These contributions offer the same kinds of advantages and disadvantages as fuel consumption does. The task of revising the formula for distributing highway funds will be difficult because needs vary across the country. For example, relief of congestion is more pressing in urban areas of the country, whereas connecting rural areas is more important. Although similar factors have been applied in other programs, they have not been applied to highway programs in the past. But FHWA did provide a report to the Congress in 1994 that addresses measures for assessing how much of their available resources the states or local areas devote to surface transportation. the system’s usage could be at least partially counteracted by building incentives into the formula or by creating appropriate performance standards. A host of other factors—such as population, climatic conditions (daily mean temperature, annual snowfall, and annual precipitation), and per capita income—could also be used to determine how highway funds are distributed. Yet, as the Faucett study demonstrated, a low correlation exists between highway needs as reported by FHWA and climatic variables. The Executive Director of the Surface Transportation Policy Project supports the use of population levels for distributing highway funds. be gained from the Faucett study performed for FHWA in 1986. Center-line miles reflect the length of the system, whereas lane miles represent the number of lanes per section. The primary measures of the extent of the federal-aid highway network are center-line mile and lane miles. The following sections discuss the advantages and disadvantages of certain proxies in more detail. The study indicated a strong correlation, particularly for repairs of the Interstate, between highway needs andlane miles and vehicle miles traveled. share of the funds than the states with better highway and bridge conditions. A formula based on direct measures of need could prove problematic. The use of actual needs can foster a perverse incentive by potentially encouraging the states to permit their highway infrastructure to worsen in order to capture a greater share of federal highway funds. In addition, the condition of highways and bridges varies considerably among the states. For instance, as of December 1993 the state of New Hampshire had the worst highway conditions in the country. The state of California had the best highway conditions, according to the U.S. Census. percentage of deficient bridges on the NHS ranged from a low of 8 percent in North Dakota to a high of 64 percent in Massachusetts. The disadvantages of basing a formula on actual needs can be remedied through the use of proxies of need, such as those reflecting the extent or usage of a highway system. Such proxies have the advantage of being relatively objective and neutral. However, there is debate among the states and other transportation experts on what factors can appropriately serve as proxies for distributing highway funds. As we reported in March 1986, factors reflecting a system’s extent and use in isolation do not provide a complete picture on the states’ needs. Introducing neutral factors, such as population, into the formula further diversifies the mix of factors and alters the amounts the states receive. Table 3.1 provides an outline of the factors to be considered in the two alternatives. The first alternative assumes that 100 percent of total needs are met. The second assumes that only a small fraction of the total needs is met. Funds would be targeted to congested urban areas, the approach would do little to accommodate the needs of rural areas. Some state transportation officials from sparsely populated states believe that much of the traffic that occurs in densely populated areas is local. Officials from these states maintain that the promotion of interstate commerce should be a principal objective of the federal-aid highway program. They say federal funds should target the highways that tend to carry national, not local, traffic. The approach does not recognize that goods produced in sparsely. populated areas ultimately must be transported to dense areas. approach would not be universally attractive. For instance, those states whose fuel usage is low relative to their land area and extent of highway network would be financially hurt. A prime argument made by officials from these states is that the national interest requires highways to span the wide expanses of large, sparsely populated states. The financial resources of those states are often insufficient to construct, maintain, and operate such networks. Two additional arguments are made against the return-to-origin approach to highway construction. on future apportionment issues. We met with state transportation officials from 34 states and the District of Columbia at regional or national transportation meetings. While we focused our review on existing, overarching highway objectives, new components could be added to recognize the states’ capacity to fund highway needs from state resources. We also met with representatives from various transportation organizations, including the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials and the Surface Transportation Policy Project. The U.S. Department of Transportation is the lead agency on the issue. and conserving energy. A share of funding could be set aside and used to protect the states’ historical funding shares. The formula objectives may be used singly or in combination and may further be targeted to specific program categories that are deemed to merit special attention. While we focus in this report on the existing, overarching highway objectives, new components could be added to recognize the states' capacity to fund highway needs from state resources, and geographic differences in the cost of maintaining existing highway networks. provide an authorization proposal for such changes at an appropriate time. For some programs the dollar amount apportioned by formula has little practical meaning because the states have substantial flexibility to transfer funds from one program category to another. In addition, ISTEA’s flexible funding provisions have allowed decisionmakers at the state and regional level to decide for themselves. For example, up to 100 percent of a state's apportionment for the Interstate Maintenance and NHS programs can be transferred to the state's surface transportation program. as the states’ different needs. Some states will experience disadvantages that the construction of a formula may not be able to compensate for. Which states are negatively affected changes with the factors chosen and the percentage weights assigned to various factors. Whether DOT’s proposed changes are adopted or other scenarios for delivering grants are developed, the Congress will have to reach a consensus on the national objective(s) that are critical for the highway program to address; decide whether a highway program should be created. The second component, calling for a return of funds to the state in which they were generated, supports a congressional objective of having the states receive a substantial return on the federal fuel and other tax receipts that they generate. The third and fourth objectives discussed in this chapter could be met through formula components that would distribute funds set aside from the regular apportionment process. A portion of formula funding could be devoted to social goals by, for example, directing a portion of funding to selected purposes such as improving air quality. approach. New York transportation officials noted that formulas based on returning contributions to the Trust Fund to the state where they are raised meet neither federal or state transportation goals nor national policy. If the primary goal of federal apportionment formulas is to return revenues from motor fuel taxes to the place they were earned, these officials questioned whether there was a need for a federal program. Second, state officials have questioned the wisdom of selecting a formula factor that is geared predominantly to fuel use. They argue that such an approach rewards greater. use of motor fuel and as such contradicts federal goals of improving air quality and conserving energy. This approach would not necessarily preclude congressional direction of the use of those funds. Legislation could still specify that the returned funds be used in certain proportions for certain programs, such as the NHS. The return could function as (1) a simple return of funds, in which states would be exempt from any or most federal oversight, or (2) a distribution of funds in which FHWA would oversee the programs for which the funds were returned. We reviewed the history of the federal-aid highway programs. Many individual factors making up a formula are capable of supporting the principle of distributing funds on the basis of the states’ relative needs. In this approach, the states with the poorest highway conditions would be granted a larger amount of funds. One possibility would be to use factors that relate to the states' actual needs, such as miles of poor pavement or number of deficient bridges. The analysis presented in this report is intended to provide the Congress with formula alternatives that reflect the key objectives governing the current highway formula. the factors used in certain highway apportionment formulas would result in some states’ receiving more or less funds than they did under the then-current formulas. We suggested that to lessen these impacts, a transition period could be provided during which the full effect of the formulas would be gradually introduced. However, the Congress elected not to change the basic formula structure. In December 1986, Jack Faucett Associates, a consultant for FHWA, issued a report evaluating alternative apportionments formulas for highway funds. Alaska and Hawaii could lose 50 percent or more of their highway funds under any of the scenarios. Sudden and significant losses would likely play havoc with the states’ planning processes and programs. The effect that a change in the formula would have on any state would depend on the percentage of the state’s highway revenue provided by federal funds. To help temper the effects of changes in the Formula, any new formula might include a provision for the use of other traffic, traffic signals, and other disruptions. formula is the appropriate vehicle for addressing these objective(s); and for those objectives that the formula can best address, determine the most representative factors and corresponding weight to be assigned to those factors. If an alternative formula is adopted for distributing highway funds in the future and this formula would result in dramatic funding losses for certain states, ways could be considered to reduce the magnitude of the losses. For example, providing for a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any one state would be expected to bear.