for response and recovery planning and preparation. We visited a decontamination contractor that performed environmental remediation activities in the aftermath of the 2006 radioactive poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko in London. Two officials from the United Kingdom who we interviewed during our site visit reviewed a draft of the information contained in appendix III for content and accuracy. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 to January 2010 in accordance with the standards set by the U.S. Department of State. We also reviewed documents provided by these officials and from other sources to obtain a better understanding of this system. with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Table 1 provides a brief summary of four RDD exercises, since May 2003, which contained recovery objectives including a planned exercise for April 2010. The United Kingdom provides an example of another country’s efforts to prepare to recover from a terrorist attack using chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear weapons. The U.S. government has conducted four exercises since 2003. In contrast, detonating an IND would require a terrorist group to obtain nuclear weapons material. Another form of nuclear terrorism occurred with the dispersal of radioactive materials through a sequence of events in London during November and December 2006. On November 23, 2006, Alexander Litvinenko, a former officer of the Russian Federal Security Service, was poisoned with a milligram of polonium-210—about the size of a grain of salt. The perpetrators of that attack dispersed the poloniam by the perpetrators of the 2006 London bombings. response capabilities. In November 2006, the Government Decontamination Service was requested to respond to an incident involving the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko with a milligram of polonium-210. This service was asked to assist the City of Westminster, within greater London, given the international nature of the event. The incident was classified as a hazardous materials event rather then a terrorist incident. According to the recovery planning process, the city selected a contractor from a list of specialized contractors for the remediation work. The aftermath of the 2006 polonium poisoning incident in London had many of the characteristics of an RDD incident. FEMA regional office respondents (7 of 9) indicated that it would be beneficial to synchronize existing guidance from multiple and disparate sources to ensure that they are complementary and not competing. In particular, through this incident, U.K. officials gained an appreciation for the need to have an established cleanup plan, including a process for determining cleanup levels, and procedures for handling the radioactive waste. people who might have been in various ways exposed to the polonium. Health officials tested 738 of them and found that 137 had reportable levels of this substance. Few of these individuals turned out to have levels that warranted medical attention. The decontamination activities at these sites spanned 19 days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost more than $200,000. The estimated total cost of managing this incident, including law enforcement investigation, testing individuals, sampling materials, and cleanup, was $4 million. The crime and the victim resulted in widespread contamination across London and even abroad. His poisoning was detected only after he was hospitalized for a few weeks and tested for symptoms of radiation exposure because of hair loss. Following the poisoning, forensic investigators examined 47 sites across London for traces of polonium. Of these locations, about 12 showed signs of this radioactive material, including a restaurant, hotel room, soccer stadium, and an eastbound British Airways plane. British investigators also identified over 1,000. Guidance emphasizes that response and recovery are not discrete activities and do not occur sequentially. Recovery should be an integral part of response from the very beginning, as actions taken at all times can influence longer-term outcomes for communities. Established a Government Decontamination Service in 2005 to address issues associated with contaminated land, buildings, open space, infrastructure, and transportation routes from both deliberate and accidental releases of chemical, biological, and nuclear materials. No single approach could meet the needs of every affected area, so guidance is not prescriptive or operational manual. and used a model contract developed by this service for this purpose. This model contract contains allowable costs per unit, equipment charges, and charge out rates for the emergency response. Under the contract, the selected specialized contractor agrees to start off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches, and then apply more sophisticated approaches, if necessary, to meet the desired cleanup level. The actual payments for these services were made by the owners of properties, such as a hotel where the perpetrators of the crime had stayed, that were contaminated with polonium. contractors, the service has identified three specialized contractors that have capabilities to address various decontamination scenarios. A specialized contractor is invited to visit the location and receives a briefing on the incident scenario. The Government Decontamination Service then assesses the contractor’s approach and recommendations to identify issues, strengths, and weaknesses. The service develops improvement plans, backed with exercises, to address identified performance gaps. For example, in December 2007, the government tested and evaluated the capabilities of one of its specialized contractors. testing of methods and technologies for cleaning up and decommissioning contaminated structures and soils. In addition, since the passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), EPA has undertaken significant efforts to study, develop, and use technologies that can address radioactive contamination. DOD has also played a major role in studying potential applications for innovative technologies for its Superfund sites. As a result of federal agencies’ experience with radioactive materials, there is evidence that the agencies could effectively carry out the analysis and environmental cleanup of localized sites. The report is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. In our review, we examined the extent to which federal agencies are planning to fulfill their responsibilities to help cities and states clean up areas contaminated with radiation. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, current research has focused on predicting the effects of radiation release in urban settings. EPA’s National Homeland Security Research Center informed us that while there are available methods that have proven successful for cleaning up various types of contamination. More research is needed to develop standard national guidance for their efficacious application in urban areas and to other RDD or IND incident scenarios, they say. According to a decontamination expert, experience has shown that without guidance and discussion early in the response phase, it can be difficult to get to the bottom of the problem. a contractor might use a decontamination technology during this phase for no other reason than it was used before in an unrelated situation. This situation might lead to selecting environmental cleanup technologies that generate waste types that are more difficult to remove than the original material and that create more debris requiring disposal. For example, the conventional use of high-pressure hosing to decontaminate a building is effective under normal conditions but could be the wrong cleanup approach for an RDD using cesium-137. In this case, the imbibing (absorbing) properties of some porous surfaces such as concrete would actually cause this soluble radioactive isotope to penetrate even further into surfaces. A senior EPA official with the Office of Radiation and Indoor Air told us that the agency has studies under way to determine the efficacy of high-pressure hosing for removing contamination from porous urban surfaces. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help address, in a timely manner, the magnitude of cleanup, the official said. of contaminated areas and levels of cleanup after applying decontamination approaches. FEMA’s proposed process for determining cleanup standards during the recovery phase for RDD and IND incidents has not been fully exercised. EPA determined that there was a significant capacity and competency gap in efficiently to enhance the capacity and capability of public laboratories. Some technologies are more efficient than others at removing certain kinds of contamination. The current DHS planning guidance for the cleanup of urban areas contaminated with radioactive materials in recovering from RDD or IND incidents. phases of an RDD incident, as this incident is expected to present a challenge for these coordinators. This guidance addresses possible decontamination approaches for eight types of radionuclides. As previously mentioned, federal agencies’ current approaches to analysis and environmental cleanup have only been applied in localized areas. In Exercise Streetwise, a specialized contractor was fully tested at the venue on its capability to detect and clean up actual radioactive materials. According to a senior official with the Government Decontamination Service, “you cannot get a realistic picture of recovery needs and issues through only tabletop exercises” areas contaminated by these materials. DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) has developed operational plans, orders, and publications on how to respond to a radiological or nuclear incident. NNSA has developed various FRMAC manuals to guide operational, assessment and monitoring activities. In regard to environmental cleanup, EPA has published inventories of radiological methods and technology guidance for contaminated sites, surfaces, and media. The cleanup technologies are generally grouped into radiological and environmental cleanup technologies. The Government Decontamination Service has no statutory powers itself. Instead, it provides advice and guidance to local governments. It maintains and builds a framework of specialized contractors to conduct these activities. It also advises the national government regarding the issue of radioactive and nuclear materials. The service was established because it would not be cost-effective for each responsible authority to maintain the level of expertise needed for the analysis and environmental cleanup of affected areas. The release of such material would be a rare event, the government says. chemical and physical technologies. During the initial response phase to an incident, responders might rely on fairly simple cleanup approaches. EPA has also published guidance for its On-Scene Coordinators at each regional office to aid in their response to a radiological incident. This guidance covers the full range of radiological incidents, but its focus is primarily on the early to intermediate phase. The latter recovery phase might require no additional action or use of complex decontamination technologies depending on the level of desired cleanup. Security experts have raised concerns that terrorists may try to smuggle radiological or nuclear materials into the United States to produce either an RDD or IND. Sealed sources are used throughout the U.S. and are commonly called a sealed radiological source. This radioactive material is encapsulated, or sealed, in metal, such as stainless steel, titanium, or platinum, to prevent its dispersal and is commonly known as a sealed Radiological Source (RDS) or dirty bomb. The RDD is a bomb made from a mixture of nuclear and radioactive materials. other countries in equipment designed to diagnose and treat illnesses, preserve food, detect flaws in pipeline welds, and determine the moisture content of soil. Depending on their use, sealed sources contain different types of radioactive material, such as strontium- 90, cobalt-60, cesium-137, plutonium-238, and plutonium-239. While no terrorists have detonated a dirty bomb in a city, Chechen separatists placed a canister containing cesiam-137 in a Moscow park in the mid- 1990s. waste disposal facilities for waste generated by users of radioactive materials in their states. Another issue is paying for waste disposal. In the Superfund program, EPA can bill the responsible party, if known. However, covering the cost of waste disposal would be complicated in the case of RDD or IND incidents. One additional complicating factor would be the mixing and problematic separation of radioactive, biological, and chemical materials in the debris that would stem from such incidents. According to a recent research paper on disposal issues, the proper characterization of the quantity, properties, and level of debris contamination and decontamination is important. and experiences drawn from national and international sources. For example, a Government Decontamination Service official told us that this agency is currently engaged in learning more about how to deal with the disposal of radioactive waste that has no known owner. The issue is not only ownership, but where to put the radioactive debris and how to cover the cost of storage and disposal. In this regard, the United Kingdom has a clearance rule for allowing very low-level radioactive waste to be disposed of in less expensive ways. restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris stemming from such incidents. According to NNSA officials, DOE’s disposal sites currently can only accept low-level and mixed low- level radioactive waste from its own and DOD facilities. EPA is concerned about access to commercial radioactive waste disposal sites in the event of such an incident, according to an EPA decontamination expert. Currently, there is only one low-levels radioactive waste. disposal site located in Utah that could be used by most states for radioactive debris disposal. The United Kingdom has established a framework for addressing the release of radiological materials. This framework was primarily established through the 2001 Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations and the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act. The regulations require preparation of on- and off-site emergency management plans for release of radioactive materials in the event of a nuclear power plant accident. These regulations also require the conduct of exercises to test preparedness to respond to radiological releases.manage and recover from hardship. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. and more numerous solid and hazardous waste landfill sites without specific regulatory approval or exemption. In addition, the United Kingdom and the U.S. have agreed to increase the exchange of information and personnel regarding the research, development, testing, evaluation, and development of technical standards and operations to address chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear incidents. While passage of the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act was an important legislative step to further emergency preparedness, the reaction of local responders to several domestic incidents following passage of this act made it clear to the national government that these responders needed more comprehensive guidance. Sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents, radiological dispersion devices, and satellite accidents. Compendia of comprehensive, state-of-the-art datasheets for around 100 management options. Decision-aiding framework comprising color-coded selection tables, look-up tables and decision trees. The handbooks can also be applied for training purposes and during emergency exercises. Conducted a full-scale RDD recovery exercise in the U.S. in 2009. The handbooks can be applied as part of the decision-aiding process to develop a recovery strategy following an incident, for training purposes, and during emergency exercises. The handbooks are divided into several independent sections comprising supporting scientific and technical information, an analysis of the factors influencing recovery, compendia of state-of-the-art datasheets for around 100 management options, guidance on planning in advance, and several worked examples. An example of a datasheet for one of the management options—high pressure hosing—contained in the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiation Incidents: 2009, is provided. The handbooks are intended to aid decision makers in developing recovery strategies for contaminated food production systems, drinking water, and inhabited areas. The handbooks were first published in 2005 in response to the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The 2009 version of the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiological Incidents is considered relevant to radiological releases from the nuclear and nonnuclear industry sectors. The development of these handbooks was sponsored by six government departments and agencies representing national and local governments, according to a senior official from the Health Protection Agency. Agency, the European Union also supported the development of a series of generic recovery handbooks for use by other countries based on the structure, format, and content of the handbook developed for the United Kingdom. Sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents, radiological dispersion devices, and satellite accidents. The current handbooks, updated from the 2008 version, include management options for application in the prerelease, emergency and longer-term phases of an incident. The handbooks U.K. officials told us that the attention to recovery in their country is rooted in decades of experience with the conflict in Northern Ireland, dealing with widespread contamination from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template considers recovery to be more than simply the replacement of what has been destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. The manner in which recovery processes are undertaken is critical to their success and, therefore, best achieved when the affected community is able to exercise a high degree of self-determination. Recovering from RDD or IND incidents would likely be difficult and lengthy. Completing the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials would be among the first steps in the recovery process after the initial response to save lives. A faster recovery would help lessen the consequences of RDD and IND incidents. In fact, being fully prepared to recover from such an incident may also serve as a deterrent to those who would do us harm. In the U.S. and Canada, the Department of Energy and Climate Change is conducting a study of the effects of radioactive contamination in the United Kingdom. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template provides a generic recovery strategy and structures needed to address a radiological release from a civil or defense nuclear reactor. It is also considered applicable to recovery from RDD and IND incidents. Among other things, it provides guidance on the formation of for them. This guidance is based on examples from existing local government recovery plans and experiences. While not specific to malicious use of radiological and nuclear materials, according to a senior government official with the UK Nuclear Emergency Planning Liaison group. maintains and builds a framework of specialized analysis and environmental cleanup contractors, and advises the national government regarding response capabilities. This service implemented its responsibilities by assisting the City of Westminster. Developed online national recovery guidance in 2007. This guidance reinforces and updates the early emergency response and recovery guidance by establishing, among other things, a recovery planning process during the response phase so that the potential impacts of early advice and actions are explored and understood for the future recovery of the area. The service was established after the November 2006 polonium poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko. a Recovery Advisory Group and Science and Technology Advisory Cell early in the response phase. This advisory group would transition into a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. The guidance requires that all high-risk cities in the United Kingdom prepare recovery plans. Finally, according to United Kingdom officials, the 2006 polonium incident in London showed the value of a long-term recovery plan for radioactive waste. The U.S. government has a similar recovery plan in place, but it has not yet been implemented. strategy would provide guidance to federal, state, and local agencies in revising their operational plans for recovery activities. Currently, the limited federal planning guidance related to the recovery from RDD and IND incidents can be found in a number of documents. There are several annexes to the National Response Framework that address, in part, federal agency responsibilities and assets to help state and local governments recover from these incidents. The June 2008 nuclear and radiological incident annex describes federal responsibilities and provides some operational guidance for pertinent response activities. in a single mission, such as through FRMAC. FEMA has not issued specific guidance describing how federal capabilities would be integrated into and support state and local plans for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior FEMA official, the agency has delayed issuing this guidance pending the reevaluation of its planning approach by the new administration. EPA stated that our survey results underscore the importance having clear communication and notification among federal agencies. If not addressed, could hamper recovery efforts, EPA said. because FEMA is already aware that its planning system does not fully recognize the involvement of state and local governments, the agency is developing regional support plans. FEMA officials: In August 2008, DHS issued stop-gap guidance outside of FEMA’s planning guidance framework to provide some immediate direction to federal, state, and local emergency response officials in developing their own operational plans and response protocols for protection of emergency workers after RDD or IND incidents. In regard to recovery, EPA says it is working with FEMA to develop a plan. FEMA and other federal agencies worked together on this guidance. It was intended to clarify the processes for providing federal cleanup assistance following such an incident. EPA informed us that DOE had convened an interagency workgroup to address gaps in DHS’s guidance and had issued a preliminary report, for comment by September 30, EPA said in a response to a draft of this report. The report is available for comment on the DHS guidance here, and on the DOE guidance at www.dhs.gov/response. 2009, containing additional operational guidelines to respond to an RDD incident. DOD has established operational plans for consequence management following terrorist incidents, including RDD and IND attacks. Without federal guidance for coordinating federal, state, and local planning for recovery from RDD or IND incidents, cities and states lack a framework for developing a recovery plan. EPA has also worked with other federal agencies to examine its own 1992 protective action guides to address shortcomings and to incorporate more recent guidance. However, according to EPA officials, much work remains to convert the new guidance into operational guidance. cities and states in our survey offered some opinions on the need for intelligence information on RDD and IND threats. They generally said that sharing information with law enforcement agencies is necessary for appropriate planning for RDD or IND incidents. Only half of the respondents indicated that they were getting sufficient intelligence information from law enforcement sources. The EPA and FEMA regional office emergency management officials that responded to our survey also offered a number of suggestions on ways to improve federal preparedness to recover from an RDD incident. The United Kingdom reported taking the following actions: Enacted civil protection legislation in 2004. The Civil Contingencies Act established a statutory framework of roles and responsibilities for local responders to address the effects of the most serious emergencies. The November 2005 guidance addressing emergency response and recovery covers the principles, practical considerations, operational doctrine, and examples of good practice for these activities. The terrorism. Act established an integrated emergency management system, not unlike that in the United States, comprising six related activities: anticipation, assessment, prevention, preparation, response, and recovery. than that contained in the 2005 guidance for emergency response and recovery activities. One such event was the July 2005 subway bombing in London by a terrorist group that killed 52 people. This incident, in conjunction with other events in 2005, such as the Buncefield Fire and severe flooding, prompted the government in 2006 to form a National Recovery Working Group. This working group was comprised of a wide range of government departments and agencies, as well as other stakeholders who had been involved in the recovery phase. FEMA has not developed a national disaster recovery strategy, as required by law and directed by executive guidance. FEMA has not issued specific guidance to coordinate federal, state, and local government recovery planning for RDD or IND incidents. The federal government has placed a higher priority on developing a strategy to respond to domestic incidents, including RDD and IND incidents, than it has on a similar strategy for recovering from these incidents. Moreover, federal agencies have conducted few exercises to test recovery plans forThese incidents. FEMA recognizes its responsibility to prepare a national disaster recovery strategy. The new administration has decided to rethink the entire approach. FEMA plans to seek out opinions of nonfederal stakeholders. Once completed, the official said that the recovery once completed will not include guidance on long-term recovery activities. The FEMA coordinator also told us that FEMA could not provide a time frame for its completion. The previous administration had drafted a “white paper” addressing this strategy. This same official did say that in developing this strategy, FEMA will seek out opinion of non-Federal stakeholders. of RDD and IND incidents. In developing such a recovery strategy, respondents from the cities, like those from their states, want the federal government to consult with them. Respondents representing most cities (10 of 13) and states (7 of 10) also provided specifics on the type of planning guidance necessary. This is important because, according to one city official, “recovery is what it’s all about.” For example, respondents said they wanted to clarify responsibilities among federal, state, and local governments. Government charged working group with producing national recovery guidance for local responders. Working group also identified gaps in the country’s recovery capability with recommendations to address them. In 2007, the working group produced a National Recovery Guidance document. This guidance establishes a planning process for involving recovery stakeholders during the response phase to ensure that the potential impact of early advice and actions for the future recovery of the area are explored and understood. The working group also contributed to the ongoing review of the 2005 nonstatutory guidance for emergency response and recovery activities. Online guidance covers 14 generic issues, such as recovery structures and processes, training and exercises. National Recovery Working Group found that many organizations had already conducted small-scale recovery exercises and had applied lessons learned from them. For example, the National Recovery Guidance addresses the need for training recovery personnel on essential roles, responsibilities, and procedures to test competencies, as well as the need to design and conduct recovery exercises. One of the issues addressed is how to train recovery personnel to respond to an emergency. FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule reveals 94 RDD or IND response exercises planned and carried out by these authorities from May 2003 through September 2009. These exercises were identified as either full-scale, tabletop, workshop, seminar, functional, or a drill. Some locations have conducted several of them over the past three years, and some locations have done more than one exercise at a time. The cycle of preparedness for prevention, protection, response, and recovery missions ends with adequate exercising, evaluation, and improvement. a period of time. FEMA’s National Exercise Division told us that only three of them actually included a recovery component that exercised activities associated with environmental cleanup. Many response and a few recovery exercises were conducted over the last 6 years that do not appear in FEMA's National Exercise Schedule. We previously reported that information in the National Exercise schedule database was unreliable. Nevertheless, for the past 6 years, FEMA has conducted a number of response and recovery exercises that don’t appear in the database. Several hundred participants took part in the exercise. The lessons learned from this exercise were incorporated into the United Kingdom’s recovery strategy. One key lesson is the benefit of exercising the handover of government leadership during the response phase to leadership of the recovery phase. Established a recovery strategy for the UK in 2008. 2008. The U.K. launched a recovery plan for the country following the earthquake and tsunami of September 11, 2011. The United Kingdom has a long history of dealing with natural disasters. In November 2008, Exercise Green Star tested government capabilities to recover from a terrorist attack based on RDD scenarios. This was the first time that complex recovery issues had been considered in a national-level exercise. In this exercise, several hundred participants were wholly focused on recovery issues. About 6 weeks after an initial RDD tabletop response exercise, a 2-day recovery exercise took place involving three scenarios: rural contamination of crops and livestock, contamination of the urban transit infrastructure, and disruption of the water supply. A recovery discussion following an RDD or IND response exercise has typically not occurred. This is because of the time needed to fully address the response objectives of the exercise, which are seen as a higher priority. The most recent RDD response exercise, based in Albany, New York, set aside 2 of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises. In addition, we attended the first full-scale recovery tabletop exercise— Empire09—based on an R DD incident scenario in Albany on June 16-17, 2009. intergovernmental coordination, such as setting environmental cleanup priorities and levels. It is uncertain whether federal capability is sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD or IND incidents. Some cities sought better guidance on monitoring radioactivity levels, acceptable cleanup standards, and management of radioactive waste. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning interactions with the federal government and more exercises to test recovery plans. In addition to this RDD recovery exercise, the National Exercise Schedule has listed two planned IND response exercises in 2010 that are to have some recovery components. response phase, a Strategic Coordinating Group, which manages this phase of the process. The Recovery Advisory Group would be charged with identifying immediate and high-level strategic objectives for recovery early in the response phase. The Science and Technology Advisory Cell would include experts to advise on health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring. On transition to the recovery phase of an incident, the Strategic coordination group would be replaced by a Strategic Recovery Coordinating group. The subgroups would include ones for finance and legal, communications, business and economic recovery, and health and Welfare. and inhabited areas, including identifying options for the restoration and cleanup of the physical infrastructure and natural environment. The guidance suggests that this subgroup consider forming task groups to, among other things, address waste management and disposal, criteria to determine when remediation can cease, evaluate feasibility, and recommend remediation options for defined affected areas. The templates would be referred to throughout the recovery to ensure that the work of the Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group is focused and on track. In addition to the person named above, individuals who made important contributions to this report were Dr. Timothy Persons (Chief Scientist), days (June 16-17, 2009) for federal, state, and local agencies to discuss operational recovery issues. One unresolved operational recovery issue discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the leadership of FRMAC from the initial analysis of the contaminated area to the later cleanup phase. For example, there are unresolved operational issues regarding the level and quality of the monitoring data necessary for EPA to accept the leadership from DOE. According to EPA officials, this transitional issue has been discussed in exercises dating back to the development of the Federal Government. exercise, participants looked at immediate cleanup issues, including resource priorities and management responsibilities. On day two, participants considered the longer-term issues of environmental contamination, monitoring strategies, and financial considerations. The use of a real radioactive isotope within the exercise scenario ensured that participants were able to investigate their own and wider mechanisms for obtaining scientific advice. A scientific advisory group was put in place to expedite the recovery process by helping to manage scientific input into the decision-making process. An after-action report was prepared following this exercise to capture lessons learned. Device (RDD) and improvised nuclear device (IND) incidents. What is known about the federal government’s capability to effectively clean up areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD and IND incidents. Suggestions from government emergency management officials for improving federal preparedness to help cities and states recover from such incidents. In addition, we are providing information on actions taken in the U.K. to prepare for recovering from R DD and IND incidents and are providing suggestions for improving such preparedness. Emergency management officials in the cities and states we surveyed confused about which federal agency to turn to for assistance. Many federal regional office officials we surveyed were not certain about which environmental cleanup methods and technologies would be the most successful in removing radioactive materials. As the United States moves forward in recovery preparation, some insights might be gained from the actions already taken by the United Kingdom to increase its preparedness to recover from acts of nuclear and radiological terrorism, many of which are similar to those suggested by the city. to recovery shortened with more effective decontamination, mitigation, and rapid recovery operations. FEMA has not developed a national disaster recovery strategy, as required by law, which would help guide RDD and IND recovery planning. Federal agencies have also included only a few recovery discussions in the response exercises to these incidents. The lack of clearly communicated guidance on federal responsibilities and activities state, and federal emergency management officials we surveyed for improving federal preparedness to recover from R DD and IND incidents. To better prepare federal agencies to coordinate with state and local governments on the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials following RDD or IND incidents, we recommend that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator to prepare a national recovery strategy. additional guidance was needed on the distribution of government responsibilities for the recovery phase of RDD or IND incidents. Many of the federal regional office respondents mentioned the need to conduct recovery exercises that involve state and local governments. The United Kingdom has actual experience with recovery from a radiological incident in an urban area and was suggested to us by EPA officials as a country that is one of the leaders in recovery planning. We also reviewed past GAO reports and other documents that addressed areas for improvement in federal preparedness. The lack of a national disaster recovery strategy is problematic, the authors say. Most localities would count on the federal government being prepared to carry out analysis and cleanup, they say. The confusion could hamper the timely recovery from these incidents, they write. The authors say the EPA and FEMA need to reach out and involve state and local governments in developing this recovery strategy. recovery strategy was needed to address overlaps and gaps in current government responsibilities in the context of RDD and IND incidents. Almost all of the EPA regional offices (6 of 10) and FEMA regional offices said this was needed. Be due, in part, to the relatively low priority given to preparing for them by city and state emergency management officials. For example, the majority of city respondents indicated that natural disasters, such as severe weather and infrastructure failure, were the most significant risks facing their jurisdictions. Federal agencies and local jurisdictions have used existing federal guidance as a basis for planning RDD and IND response exercises and, to a much lesser extent, recovery exercises to test the adequacy of their plans and level of preparedness. Emergency management officials representing all 13 cities and their states in our survey indicated that while their jurisdictions had prepared emergency response and recovery plans for domestic incidents, few of these plans specifically addressed RDD and IND recovery activities. Few city respondents (3 of 13) indicated that their recovery plans included preparations for an RDD incident. In regard to IND preparation, all city respondents informed us that recovery planning was still important despite the magnitude of such events, but none of them had prepared such plans. The lack of recovery planning for R DD and IND incidents may may be a problem. We reviewed existing planning documents for domestic incidents to determine the extent to which they addressed recovery issues, particularly from RDD and IND incidents. We included questions about the potential use of these approaches in our semistructured phone survey of federal, state, and city emergency management officials. We conducted a content analysis of these questions to identify patterns in the responses, that is, what types of questions were asked. We found limited discussion of recovery planning for these incidents in various annexes to the National Response Framework. Liberty RadEx will take place April 26-30, 2010, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The exercise is to focus on a few technical recovery issues involving forward to the lessons to be learned from the upcoming Liberty RadEx exercise in 2010. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help state and local governments address the interim storage and eventual disposal of the radioactive waste that would arise from RDD or IND incidents. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report found gaps in our nation's capabilities to effectively remove and dispose of radioactive debris. all analysis and environmental cleanup activities associated with recovering from an RDD or IND incidents of the magnitude described in the national planning scenarios. Most of these officials reported that they believe they could adequately address a smaller RDD incident, such as one that is confined to a city block or inside a building. GAO provided DHS, DOE, and EPA with a draft of this report for their review and comment. DHS and FEMA concurred with the recommendations in the report. DOE, through NNSA, because federal agencies have only carried out environmental cleanup of localized areas of radioactive materials. Some limitations exist in federal capabilities to help address the magnitude of the cleanup that would follow these incidents. There are some limitations in the capability of federal agencies to efficiently characterize the full extent of the areas contaminated with radioactive materials in the event of RDD or IND incidents. For example, DOE has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in research, development, and that would be associated with RDD and IND incidents, the authors say. Residue from an RDD or other radiological incidents can have significant impacts on cleanup costs and restoration timelines. Concerns about limitations in these federal capabilities were expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials who responded to our survey. EPA officials informed us that its Office of Research and Development is currently developing a suite of decision support tools for the management of waste and debris from a variety of different events, including Radiological incidents. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report also found that cities and states would need to rely heavily on a strong federal response to a radiological incident. Almost half of the respondents from the cities (6 of 13) indicated that these activities should be primarily a federal responsibility. The others stressed the need for shared responsibilities with the federal government. When asked to identify which federal agencies they would turn to for help in the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents, they provided inconsistent responses and frequently listed several federal agencies for the same activity. These responses seem to indicate that federal responsibility is the most appropriate course of action. This register provides information on the risks facing the country, including malicious attacks such as with an RDD. This threat information was previously held confidential by the government. The government reported that the release of this information is intended to encourage public debate on security. This register is designed to complement community risk registers that have been published by local emergency planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. The community risk register is based on local judgments of risks, and is published by the local emergency planning agency. address specific risks identified by representatives from local emergency services and public, private, and voluntary organizations. Local resilience forums are required to develop and maintain these registers that include a description of potential outcomes, likelihoods, impacts, and ratings for various risk categories and subcategories of events. One of the risk categories is an actual terrorist attack using an explosive device. The national government does not expect communities to directly track these risks, but rather to improve their own preparedness based on information from the national risk assessment. The United Kingdom has developed a comprehensive program to ensure an effective response to a range of disruptive emergencies. The country uses the term “resilience” as the ability of organizations, like individuals, to withstand or recover easily and quickly from hardships, such as major flooding or a terrorist attack. Community risk registers have been published by local emergency management planners since passage of the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act. These community risk registers are designed to help people plan and prepare for potential emergencies. register, which is based on this classified assessment and discusses the likelihood and potential impacts of a range of risks facing the country. This national risk register contains information that was previously held confidential within government but was published to encourage public debate on security and to help organizations, individuals, families, and communities prepare for encountering threats. The government reports that while there have been very few examples of attacks such as the 1995 release of Sarin gas in a Tokyo subway, it still recognizes the need to prepare and plan. was a responsibility of the local government. The national government has established ways to help cover the costs of such incidents. For large commercial concerns, the insurance industry offers terrorist insurance that is underwritten by the government. For smaller companies, terrorist insurance is offered for an additional 20 percent surcharge on an existing policy. Other funding is available for local governments if such an event would overwhelm their financial resources, such as applying for grants from the national government or European Union. In regard to its framework of specialized FEMA regional offices and almost all EPA regional offices expressed concerns about the capabilities of federal agencies. Respondents from several cities told us that they were concerned about how rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance. This is despite the strengthening of some capabilities since the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001. For example, one state was particularly concerned about the ability of the government to provide the assistance needed to complete the necessary analysis and environmental clean up activities in the event of RDD or IND incidents. All EPA and FEMA regional offices responded to our survey, except FEMA region 8. FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule database was used to identify the location and types of exercises. We tabulated the yes and no responses to each pertinent question from the city, state, and federal surveys. We conducted a content analysis of the explanatory statements accompanying many of the questions. We also visited EPA regional offices in San Francisco and Denver, and the FEMA regional office in Oakland, to develop questions to survey. We originally selected 13 high- and medium-risk cities and their 11 states to cover the mostly likely target cities for a terrorist attack. The cities included Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, and St. Louis. While Washington, D.C., is considered a high-risk city, we excluded it from our survey because it is unlike other cities in its reliance on emergency management officials on government responsibilities and plans to fulfill them. the federal government and the agencies that would take over analysis and environmental remediation activities. Emergency management officials representing these cities and their states responded to our survey. After repeated attempts to include this city and the two states in our survey, we decided to drop them. We replaced Atlanta with Miami and the state of Florida, which are in the same federal region. We decided to retain Boston despite receiving no response from Massachusetts, and we ended up with 10 states in the survey. The survey is open to all U.S. citizens. The current predictive capability of various plume models is not sufficient, and may never be sufficient to reduce the time necessary to fully characterize the extent of contaminated areas after RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior official at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center (IMAAC), the predictive capabilities of existing plumes models are not at the resolution necessary to produce this added value for urban areas. This official told us while there are data about debris dispersal from building.incidents. demolition and weapons testing, there is little research data on the likely dispersal patterns of concrete, asphalt, and glass that would result from use of an RDD or IND. Some federal agency officials question the need to improve the predictive capabilities of these plume models. NNSA officials informed us they are working with FEMA on a multiyear program to improve federal capabilities to model the release of material. The current state-of-the-art and plume modeling approach is sufficient for its primary purpose in directing the protective actions of first responders. during a radiological or nuclear incident. However, they contend that plume modeling will never replace the need for actual measurements for radioactive contamination. EPA agreed that characterization of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents would be challenging because existing plume models are not entirely applicable to urban areas. Other types of contamination, such as in the drinking water and wastewater infrastructure, would also involve very complex systems that would be difficult to model. There are some limitations in federal capabilities to complete laboratory validation. meeting the laboratory evaluation needs for an RDD scenario. In addition, while EPA did not conduct a detailed assessment of the national planning scenario for an IND incident, it determined that such an incident could contaminate 3,000 square miles and require potentially millions of samples for laboratory analysis. According to EPA documentation, the gap in laboratory capacity would result in the lack of timely, reliable, and interpretable data. EPA has documented that it is currently establishing an all-media Environmental Response Laboratory Network. generally agreed with our report findings and provided technical comments. EPA did not agree or disagree with the report findings, but offered technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. The report will be sent to the appropriate congressional committees as well as to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Energy; the Administrators of NNSA and EPA; and other interested parties. Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King, Thomas Laetz, Jay Smale, Vasiliki Theodoropoulos, and Keo Vongvanith are on the board of directors. The board is made up of seven members: the directors, the executive directors, and the chief operating officers. For more information on the Board of Directors, visit the board's website at: http://www.cnn.com/cnn/2013/01/29/politics/top-stories/topstories/stories/kennel-cnn-kenneline-kenny-lennon.html#storylink=cpy.