utilities officials, and others; congressional and other oversight of the hundreds of millions of dollars DOE is spending on these technologies; and policymakers’ ability to assess the maturity of CCS. The agency recently issued a improve coal plant efficiency and asked them a set of standard questions. During these interviews, we asked stakeholders to describe the mature of technologies in terms of a scale we developed, based on Technology Readiness Levels (TRL). TRLs are a tool developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Technology Readiness Assessment Guide lays out three key steps to conducting technology readiness assessments during the contracting process. Although use of the Guide is not mandatory, DOE’s Office of Environmental Management uses the Guide as part of managing its procurement activities. The Office of Nuclear Energy has begun using TRLs to measure and communicate risks associated with nuclear technology. The Guide is a result of a GAO recommendation and is available for download on the Department of Energy's website at: http://www.doe.gov/technologyreadinessassessment. Using TRLs we developed for these technologies, we found consensus among stakeholders that CCS is less mature than efficiency technologies. We found that DOE’s Office of Fossil Energy does not systematically assess the maturity of key coal technologies as they progress toward commercialization. The lack of such benchmarks or an assessment of the maturity and whether they are achieving planned or desired results limits the ability of DOE to provide a clear picture of these technologies to policymakers, the authors say. The authors say the lack of benchmarks limits DOE's ability to provide an accurate picture to policymakers. In the absence of an assessment from DOE, we asked stakeholders to gauge the maturity of coal technologies using a scale we developed based on TRLs. For example, ultrasupercritical plants ranging from 600 to more than 1,000 MW have been built or are under construction in and used by various federal agencies to rate the extent to which technologies have been demonstrated to work as intended. We applied these benchmarks to a coal power plant that has already been demonstrated commercially. However, this plant does not produce electricity. Assistant Secretary concurred with our recommendation, stating that DOE could improve its process for providing a clearer picture of technology maturity. EPA and NERC provided technical comments, which we have incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the offices of the Assistant Secretary for Energy and the Secretary of the Department of Energy. Neither the proposed rule nor the final rule will address liability for unintended releases of stored CO emissions in lieu of more efficient coal plants. Some higher efficiency plant designs also face technical challenges in that they require more advanced materials than are currently available. For example, “advanced” ultrasupercritical plants require development of metal alloys to withstand steam temperatures that could be 300 to 500 degrees Fahrenheit higher than today’s ultrasu percritical plants. Most stakeholders reported that making efficiency upgrades to the existing fleet of coal power plants was limited by legal issues. commercial scale power plant, which we defined as 500 megawatts (MW) and emitting about 3 millions tons of carbon dioxide (CO) annually. We based this definition on some of the key reports we reviewed, which used 500 MW as a standard power plant. Such a plant would emit about 3 million tons of CO emissions from a power plant can vary based on a variety of factors. We also reviewed available data on the use of key coal technologies compiled by IEA and the Global CCS. Commercial deployment of CCS within 10 to 15 years is possible according to DOE and other stakeholders. Many technologies to improve plant efficiency have been used and are available for commercial use now, but still face challenges. There are five IGCC plants in operation around the world, including two in the U.S.Europe and Asia, and there are four IGCCs in operation in North America and two in South America. Injections of hazardous wastes, industrial nonhazardous wastes, municipal wastewater can be permitted as Class I or Class V wells. Most stakeholders told us that CCS would increase electricity prices, and key reports raise similar concerns. MIT estimated that plants with post-combustion capture have 61 percent higher cost of electricity. DOE has also raised concerns about CCS and water consumption. Some utility officials also said CCS could lead to a decline in the ability of individual plants to operate reliably because a power plant might need to shut down if any of the three components (capture, transport, and storage) of CCS became unavailable. IEA estimated that CCS technologies could meet 20 percent of reductions needed to reduce global CO. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) researchers called CCS the “critical enabling technology” to reduce CO emissions while allowing continued use of coal in the future. In 2009, NAS reported that if C CS technologies are not demonstrated commercially in the next decade, the electricity sector could move more.in greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, CCS could allow coal to remain part of the nation’s diverse fuel mix. projects involving advanced coal technologies. To identify stakeholders’ views on these technologies, we conducted initial scoping interviews with power plant operators, technology vendors, and federal officials. We selected a group of 19 stakeholders with expertise in carbon capture and storage (CCS) or technologies to participate in the project. We reviewed key reports including those from the Department of Energy’s (DOE) national laboratories, the National Academy of Sciences, International Energy Agency (IEA), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Global CCS Institute. electricity sources would need to make up for the higher parasitic load associated with CCS. The National Coal Council has also reported temporary declines in reliability during past deployments of new coal technologies. We provided a draft of our report to the Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of EPA for review and comment. We received written comments from DOE’s Assistant Secretary of the Office of Fossil Energy, which are reproduced in appendix III. We also provided selected slides on reliability of electricity supply to NERC for comment. the prospect of triggering the Clean Air Act’s New Source Review (NSR) requirements. Technologies to improve plant efficiency offer potential near-term reductions, but also raise some concerns. According to key reports and stakeholders, the successful deployment of CCS technologies is critical to helping the United States meet potential Limits to Emissions. The U.S. is the largest producer of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the world, followed by Germany, France, Italy, Spain and the Netherlands. this report to the appropriate congressional committees, Secretary of Energy, Administrator of EPA, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. all U.S. emissions of COCO2 is the most prevalent greenhouse gas (GHG) program. If you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. GAO responds to Department of Energy's letter dated June 4, 2010. GAO's comments are based on the department's letter to the U.S. Energy Department. The report was written by Jon Ludwigson, Chloe Brown, Scott Heacock, Alison O’Neill, Kiki Theodoropoulos, and Jarrod West. It was also edited by Chuck Bausell, Nirmal Chaudhary, Cindy Gilbert, Madhav Panwar, and Jeanette Soares. and interviewed senior DOE staff on these Visited coal power plants and research facilities in three selected states—AL, MD, and WV4 We conducted this performance audit from July 2009 through May 2010, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We selected this nonprobability sample of states because they contained a large number of coal-fired power plants, research facilities and other facilities. Well operators will only be liable under the SDWA if they violate or fail to comply with EPA orders in situations where an imminent and substantial endangerment to health is posed by a contaminant that is in or likely to enter an underground source of drinking water. EPA plans to finalize the geologic sequestration rule in fall. The rule will apply to well operators who meet all the closure and post-closure requirements and EPA approves site closure of the well. In the U.S., the rule applies to wells that have been in operation for at least five years.