NIH funds seven loan repayment programs for researchers. Three of these are intramural programs that provide educational loan repayment benefits to researchers in exchange for undertaking research while employed by NIH. NIH also funds four programs to assist in the repayment of extramural researchers' educational loans. Researchers may receive up to $35,000 per year in loan repay benefits under each of these programs. The regulations that govern the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment program regarding participant participation are available on the NIH website. Under current law, appropriations for loan repayments remain available until the end of the second fiscal year after they are appropriated. S. 2014 would increase loan repayment amounts to a maximum of $50,000 per year. It would prohibit the NIH Director from entering into a loan repayment contract with individuals unless they have substantial amounts of educational loans relative to income. The provision would also retain authorization for current topics eligible for extramural loan repayment (contraception and infertility, pediatric research, minority health disparities, clinical research and clinical research conducted by individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds) H.R. 6 would authorize a new extramural NIH loan repayment program. The bill would also increase the amounts that could be repaid under existing loan repayment programs from $35,000 to $50,000. Section 402(b)(5) of the PHSA specifies that the NIH Director "shall ensure that scientifically based strategic planning" is carried out by the NIH. The NIH Director must also report to Congress on NIH efforts "to attract, retain and develop emerging scientists, including women and other minorities" loan repayment as scientific and workforce priorities change. This provision would repeal existing authorizations for NIH loan repayment programs. GAO report, not later than 18 months after enactment, that would report on NIH efforts to attract, retain, and develop emerging scientists, including underrepresented individuals in the sciences. Report on the research areas where individuals are receiving increased loan repayment amounts. The report would analyze the impact of changes included in this act on addressing workforce shortages. Subtitle C of H.R. 6 titled "Supporting Young Emerging Scientists" into consideration recommendations made by NAS in its study on the next generation of researchers. Not later than two years after completion of the NAS study, the NIH Director would be required to submit a report to specified congressional committees regarding any actions taken by NIH with respect to the NAS recommendations. Section 3 of S. 2014 would amend PHSA Section 487A to consolidate existing NIH intramural and extramural loan repayment programs. Section 5(a) also would add a new PHSASection 404M, "Research Related to Sexual and Gender Minority Populations" Section 10 of S. 2742 would amend Section 405 of the PHSA. It would require that Directors of ICs be appointed by the NIH Director. The term of office for the director of an IC would be five years. There would be no limit to the number of terms served. The Director of the National Cancer Institute would continue to beappointed by the President. The director of the NIH would be reappointed at the end of a five-year term. The National Institute on Nursing Research biennial report. It would require that, if the office of a director of an IC becomes vacant before the end of a five-year term, the director appointed to fill the vacancy begin a new five- year term. The compensation limitations in Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993, would be removed. Each current IC Director would be deemed to be appointed for a five year term as of the date of enactment, and the NIH Director could terminate the appointment prior to end of the term. related to time-limited appointments of consultants and individual scientists, would not apply to directors appointed under this new authority. The Reducing Administrative Burdens of Researchers provision in H.R. 6 Section 1023 is comparable to Section 3 of S. 2742. Not later than two years following enactment, the NIH Director would be required to submit a report to Congress on the measures that have been implemented to reduce the administrative burden on NIH-funded researchers. Although they use slightly different language, they achieve the same goals. the President and the Directors of the other NIH Institutes are appointed by the Secretary. Each NIH Institute Director reports directly to the NIH Director. Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993 ( P.L. 102-394 ), states at the end of the section that the payment of compensation to consultants or individual scientists appointed for limited periods of time is "not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions," which is not less than 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15. the NIH National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities "should include within its strategic plan ways to increase representation of underrepresented communities in clinical trials" S. 2742 contains several provisions aimed at streamlining and improving administrative matters at NIH. Title IV of the PHSA establishes numerous reporting requirements for the NIH Director related to the activities of the agency. Section 2 would replace the biennial reporting requirement of the NIH director with a triennial requirement. The section would add new, and clarify existing, reporting requirements, including a description of intra-NIH activities. least one other IC. This information would be included in the triennial report required by Section 403(a) as amended by Section 2 of S. 2742. Section 5 also would (1) eliminate an annual reporting requirement regarding the number of experts and consultants whose services are used by NIH; (2) make a minor modification to the doctoral degree reporting requirement; and (3) change the NCATS annual report to a biennial report. The report on Centers of Excellence would also be eliminated. and 43% of their time in completing pre- and post-award requirements. The most commonly experienced administrative responsibilities included those related to federal project finances, personnel, and effort reporting. For researchers engaged in projects that required human or animal subjects, the related Institutional Review Board (IRB) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) requirements were by far the most time-consuming. Other areas viewed as particularly time- consuming were those involving clinical trials, subcontracts, and cross-agency differences. to avoid duplication of effort and minimize burden to funding recipients. Within two years of enactment, the Secretary would have to complete a review of regulations and policies for the care and use of laboratory animals. The Secretary would be required to clarify the applicability of OMB Uniform Guidance requirements regarding documentation of personnel expenses for entities receiving HHS grants. Finally, within one year of enacting the bill, the OMB Director would be needed to establish a system for documenting personnel expenses in the federal government. technology innovation and successful partnering with the federal government. The HHS Secretary acting through the BARDA Director would provide the entity with the government needs and requirements and a description of the work to be done under the agreement. The entity would be required to provide regular reports on the spending of funds provided by HHS and on progress meeting the identified needs. The bill would require the Government Accountability Office to evaluate this partnership four years after enactment. This authority would sunset on September 30, 2022. Section 6 would remove the current need for the President to approve use of the funds. Section 8 would require the Secretary, not later than 90 days after enactment, to establish a Task Force on Research Specific to Pregnant and Lactating Women. It would also require the Director of NIH to issue a report to the Secretary and Congress regarding the recommendations and any subsequent policy changes. The bill would also update regulations and guidance, as appropriate, regarding the inclusion of pregnant women and lactating women in research. It also would require a working group established under Section 7 of this bill to develop policies for basic research. a Research Policy Board, consisting of up to10 federal and 9 to 12 non-federal members, as specified. The board would have to make recommendations on harmonizing regulations and policies to minimize administrative burden across federal research agencies. Within four years of enactment, GAO would be required to conduct an evaluation of board activities regarding its purpose and responsibilities and submit a report to Congress. Section 5 would modify or eliminate a number of different NIH reporting requirements. It would sunset on September 30, 2020. FDA, $5 million to ONC, and the remaining $300 million to NIH. Precision medicine research efforts rely on the collection of large amounts of health data. Access to this data may be a concern in the context of this type of research. FOIA, however, protects investigators from being compelled to disclose information that would identify research subjects in any civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceeding. This requirement can help promote participation in research by adding an additional layer of privacy protection. Exemption 3 allows agencies to withhold applicable records if the data are specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than FOIA. These types of Exemption 3 statutes are often referred to as b(3) exemptions. As a mechanism for addressing compelled disclosure of research data, NIH currently issues Certificates of Confidentiality pursuant to §301(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. §241(d)) at the request of an investigator. A Certificate is an official document issued by the National Institutes of Health. Section 5 would amend Part A of Title IV of the PHSA, adding a new Section 404M, "Research Related to Sexual and Gender Minority Populations" Section 6 would amend Section 464z-3 of the PHS Act, adding that the Director of the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities may foster partnerships between the ICs. The Secretary would have to continue to support research for the development of appropriate measures related to reporting health information of sexual and gender minority populations. conduct outreach in developing (and updating) the policies, among other requirements. With respect to clinical research involving women and minorities, the section would require the Director of NIH to update the guidelines. Section 1029 of H.R. 6 is broadly comparable to Sections 3 through 6 of S. 2745. The House provision would express the sense of Congress that Congress that includes underrepresented communities in clinical trials. It would also improve adherence to the requirements of Section 492B of the PHSA. include women and minorities in NIH-funded clinical research and to conduct or support outreach to recruit minorities and women into clinical research. The data would have to be disaggregated by research area, condition, and disease categories and made publically available on the NIH website. The NIH Director also would be required to foster collaboration between the ICs that conduct research on human subjects, allow for an increase in the number of subjects studied, and utilize a diverse study population with special consideration of the determinants that contribute to health disparities. Be required to ensure that maintaining the biomedical workforce, including the participation of scientists from traditionally underrepresented groups, would remain a priority. Minorities traditionally have been underrepresented in clinical trials. The initial strategic plan would be completed not later than 270 days after enactment. The NIH Director, in consultation with the IC Directors, would be required to conduct annual progress reviews for each strategic focus area in the IC plans. The plans would be reviewed and updated every five years, and would need to be updated every three years. only 5% of clinical trial participants and Hispanics make up 16% of the population but only 1% ofclinical trial participants. There can be biological differences in how people process or respond to medical products, based on, for example, genetic differences. This could make a treatment less effective or perhaps more toxic for individuals with specific genotypes. Therefore, it is important to study in clinical trials the safety and effectiveness of medical products in a broadly representative sample of people who will likely use the products following FDA approval. The focus of NIH research, and to some extent its organizational structure, has been criticized. U.S. health care spending is more than 2.5 times the OECD average. Life expectancy is ranked 24th of the 30 countries in the OECD. "An agency devoted to current health would do well to focus on tobacco control, exercise, nutrition, sanitation, and more cost-effective delivery of health care," the authors say. "Despite its name, NIH's mission has not generally been current health, per se," they say. The NIH Strategic Plan would identify research priorities, such as advancement of treatment, cure and prevention of health conditions. The research strategy would address the disease burden in the United States, including rare diseases, and the many factors that contribute to health disparities. Rare and pediatric diseases would remain a priority. The IC plans would have a common template and identify strategic focus areas. Mission Priority Focus Areas would be identified that best serve the goals of preventing or eliminating the burden of a disease and scientifically merit focused research over the next five years. The Senate bill would amend Section 402 of the PHS Act by adding a new subsection (m), which describes a strategic plan for NIH. Every five years, beginning in 2016, the NIH Director, along with the IC Directors, researchers, patient advocacy groups, and industry leaders, would be required to develop a biomedical research strategic plan. The NIH Research Strategic Plan provision in H.R. 6 Section 1021 is comparable to S. 2745 . The House provision would add a new subsections (m) to Section 402. the PHSA by adding a new Section 404M to establish within the office of the NIH Director the Next Generation of Researchers Initiative (the Initiative) Through the Initiative, the NIH director would be required to coordinate all NIH policies and programs focused on promoting and providing opportunities for new researchers. Among other things, the director would have to coordinate with relevant agencies, professional associations, and academic institutions to improve and update information on the biomedical workforce in order to inform training, recruitment, and retention programs of biomedical researchers. (b)(3) specified biomedical information that identifies an individual or that has an associated risk that the information may be reidentified. The Secretary would be required to make each such exemption available in writing and to the public, upon request (§4). Amend PHSA Section 402(b) to allow the Secretary to require recipients of NIH grants or agreements to share data generated from such NIH grants in a manner consistent with all applicable federal law (§5) Add a new PHSA section to allow NIH Director to approve requests by institute and center directors to engage in transactions other than other transactions. other federal agencies. The bill would direct the Secretary, within two years of enactment, to lead a review by research funding agencies of all financial conflict-of-interest regulations and policies. Second, it would require the NIH Director to implement measures to reduce the administrative burdens experienced by primary NIH grant awardees related to monitoring grant sub-recipients. Third, the Secretary would be required to evaluate financial expenditure reporting procedures and requirements for NIH funding recipients and take appropriate action. federal agencies would be reviewed by the Secretary. The NIH Common Fund, within the Office of the NIH Director, supports the High-Risk, High-Reward Research Program. This program has "four unique funding opportunities for exceptionally creative scientists who propose highly innovative approaches to major challenges in biomedical research" If investigators fail to submit the required data, NIH may withhold funding. These awards are intended "to encourage creative, potentially high-reward, research.subsequent research," according to the program's website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. Congress has had a long-standing interest in developing the future biomedical research workforce. Recent concerns have focused on ways to reduce the time between when young investigators complete their training and when they receive their first independent NIH research grant. Section 8 of this bill would require GAO to report on the effectiveness of the priority review voucher program. There is no comparable provision in the House bill. The NIH has created a number of initiatives that strive to shorten this time, in part to attempt to better retain young investigators in biomedical research. the one year anniversary of the initiative's launch, first announced in the 2015 State of the Union address. The PMI's three key agencies—National Institutes of Health (NIH), Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)—began work in this area. The FY2017 President's budget requests a total of $309 million for the PMI: $4 million to ONC and $3 million to NIH. of biomedical and behavioral research, and details of all the research activities conducted or supported by the ICs of NIH. The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP) is "a cooperative initiative among 10 federal agencies and 119 institutional recipients of federal funds" In 2005 and 2012, FDP conducted surveys of principal investigators of federally funded projects to determine the impact of federal regulations and requirements on the research process. In both surveys, researchers reported spending 57% of their time engaged in research. The National Academies sponsored the FDP. FDA released a mobile medical apps. FDA has regulatory authority over software that meets the statutory definition of a medical device. The agency provided examples of mobile apps that do not meet that definition. These apps pose a significant risk to patient safety if they do not function as intended, the agency says. The FDA says it does not intend to apply regulatory oversight because the apps pose minimal risk to the public and pose no risk to patients if they work as intended. apps that help asthmatics track inhaler usage and asthma episodes; apps that give patients a portal into their own EHR. The number of health-related mobile apps being developed, downloaded, and used is increasing at an almost exponential rate. Some apps simply access stored medical information, while others capture and input patient data into an electronic health record (EHR) Many apps now provide clinical decision support (CDS) using algorithms that use clinical information to generate customized (i.e., patient-specific) diagnosis and treatment recommendations. Regulators are particularly interested in mobile apps that could pose a risk to the health of patients. The updated guidance did not address regulation of CDS software. That topic remains under consideration. S. 1101 would exclude certain types of health software from the FFDCA definition of medical device. The exception would apply to EHR systems and software that simply creates, stores, transfers, and displays data, as well as CDS and other CDS tools. It would allow FDA to exercise regulatory authority if the agency determines that the use of the software "would be reasonably likely to have serious adverse health consequences" nonbinding guidance document on mobile medical apps in September 2013. FDA stated its intention to focus on the functionality of the mobile health product, not the mobile platform itself. In February 2015, FDA released updated guidance on its risk-based approach to regulating mobile apps. The agency does not plan to regulate smartphone or tablet manufacturers, according to the new guidance. It will apply its regulatory oversight to "only those mobile apps that are medical devices," the agency said in the guidance. The guidance was released in response to a request for comment from CNN. H.R. 6 would exclude various types of software applications from FDA's regulatory oversight. Excluded applications include products that provide administrative and health management functions. The House bill also would establish a risk-based exception allowing FDA to exert regulatory authority. This risk- based approach broadly reflects the agency's current guidance on regulating mobile medical apps. The health software provisions in the bill are similar to those in S. 1101 . Like the Senate bill, the House bill would exclude some software applications. ONC released a report to Congress on health information blocking in April 2015. ONC is taking, in coordination with other federal agencies, to address information blocking. The report identified gaps in authority that limit the ability of ONC to effectively target, deter, and remedy such conduct. MACRA requires eligible hospitals and hospitals and other health care providers to share electronic health information with the federal government. It also requires the government to make sure that the information is accurate and up-to-date.  ONC would be authorized to refer instances of information blocking to the Office for Civil Rights if a HIPAA privacy consultation would resolve the matter. Developers, exchanges, and networks found to have engaged in information blocking would be subject to civil monetary penalties. Health care providers found to be blocking information would besubject to incentives and disincentives to change their behavior. (§4) S. 2511 would require ONC to convene stakeholders to develop a trusted exchange framework and to investigate and penalize information-blocking practices. a common agreement among existing networks to exchange electronic health information (i.e., a "network of networks") The Secretary would be required to establish a digital contact directory for health care professionals, practices, and facilities. S. 2511 would require certified HIT to be capable of transmitting data to, and receiving data from, clinician-led (and other) registries. And it would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. information networks, health care providers, and other stakeholders to offer access through secure, user-friendly software. ONC would have to ensure that HIT standards and certification support patients' access to their electronic health information. (§7) S. 2511 would require GAO to conduct a review of the methods used to provide patient access to electronic health records. Onc and OCR would be required to develop policies that support dynamic technology solutions for promoting patient access. OnC would also have to help educate individuals and providers on patients' rights under HIPAA.  MACRA declared it a national objective to achieve widespread interoperability of certified EHR technology by the end of 2018. The law defines interoperability as the ability of health information systems to not only exchange clinical information but to also use the information based on common standards in order to improve care and patient outcomes. If that objective is not met by December 31, 2018, the Secretary will have until December 31 of 2019, to submit a report to Congress identifying the barriers toidespread interoperability. The Secretary will also have until July 1, 2016, to establish interoperability metrics to measure progress toward achieving that objective. 18-month period with input from numerous stakeholders—to coordinate efforts around achieving HIT interoperability. ONC expects the roadmap to evolve in partnership with the public and private sectors as technology and policy dictate. 2017 set as the deadline for individuals and health care providers along the care continuum to be able to send, receive, find, and use core clinical data. The roadmap discusses the payment and regulatory drivers for promoting interoperability, as well as the central policy and technical components of a fully interoperable nationwide health information infrastructure. H.R. 6 would create a narrower exception for CDS software that "poses a significant risk to patient safety" The law authorized Medicare and Medicaid incentive payments to acute-care hospitals and physicians who attest to being meaningful users of certified electronic health record (EHR) technology. The law instructed the Secretary to make the measures of meaningful use more stringent over time, which CMS has done in stages. Stage 1 ofmeaning use requires eligible hospitals to have certified EHR technology, CMS says. CMS eliminated several clinical documentation objectives, and instead focused on a few objectives that capture more advanced uses of the technology. CMS also published an accompanying final rule (the 2015 Edition final rule) that expands the certification program. In addition to certifying the next generation of EHR technology that hospitals and physicians need to achieve meaningful use Stage 3, the program will be able to certify health information technology (HIT) products with a different combination of capabilities and functionalities that meet the needs of other types of patients. patient data during transitions of care (e.g., a hospital discharge to a rehabilitation facility, or a physician referral) Beginning in 2015, hospitals and physicians that are not meaningful EHR users are subject to a Medicare payment adjustment (i.e., penalty) unless they qualify for a hardship exception. CMS published a final rule in October 2015 modifying the meaningful use Stage 2 objectives and establishing the objectives for Stage 3, which hospitals and Physicians must meet by 2018. The agency made significant changes to themeaning use program in response to the concerns of health care providers. of health care providers and settings that are not eligible to participate in the EHR incentive program. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program established new transparency requirements for HIT developers. It also seeks to improve interoperability, for example, by requiring certified HIT products to adopt new and updated vocabulary and content standards for structured health information. ONC released a national interoperability roadmap in October 2015. It was developed over an period of time over the course of a few years, ONC says.  ONC released a report on patient identification and matching (i.e., linking patient records with the correct individual) in February 2014. It recommended standardizing patient attributes for the purpose of information exchange. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program requires EHR developers to publish programming instructions to enable other software application developers to produce apps giving individuals access to their clinical data. It also introduces EHR certification criteria for capturing patient identification standards. For more information, visit ONC's Patient Identification and Matching website. and physicians to use EHR technology to meet a series of meaningful use objectives that generally involve capturing and storing structured patient data. Providers must use technology that has been tested and certified as having the capability to perform these functions. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule gives individuals the right of access to inspect, obtain a copy of, and transmit to a third party a copies of their health information. beginning April 2016, hospitals and physicians must indicate through meaningful use attestation that they have not knowingly and willfully taken any action to limit or restrict the interoperability of their certified EHRTechnology. rule for the HIT certification program. Certified EHR systems must be able to create a summary-of-care document that includes the following standardized patient data: first name; last name; previous name; middle name (including middle initial); suffix; date of birth (year, month, and day are required fields; hours and minutes are optional); address; phone numbers (home, business, cell) S. 2511 includes multiple provisions to promote HIT interoperability, penalize information blocking, reduce the administrative and other burdens of using EHR technology. and industry; holding meetings and publishing information and data for use by FDA and others; and taking action to obtain patents and licensing of inventions. It is led by a Board of Directors, four of whom are ex officio members, and nine from candidates provided by the National Academy of Sciences. Section 770 specifies the number of members to be appointed representing each type of group, and requires that the ex-officio members ensure specific expertise among the members. The group is made up of members from patient and consumer advocacy groups, professional scientific and medical societies, and trade organizations. provision would amend FFDCA Section 770 to change the membership of the Board of Directors. It would limit to 30% of the membership "representatives of the general pharmaceutical, device, food, cosmetic, and biotechnology industries" The obligation to ensure specific expertise among the members would be broadened to rest with all members of the board, not only ex officio appointees. That broader group would also decide the size of theBoard of Directors and who gets to appoint new members. a new FFDCA Section 569C "Patient Participation in Medical Product Discussion," facilitating increased involvement of patients earlier in the regulatory process for medical product review. The Secretary is directed to develop and implement strategies to solicit the views of patients during the medical product development process and consider the perspectives of patients. The patient representative may serve as a special government employee in appropriate agency meetings with medical product sponsors and investigators. The secretary is also directed to explore means to provide for identification of patient representatives who do not have any, or have none. other technical workers, for whom federal agencies such as FDA compete with the private sector and nonfederal public employers. For example, FFDCA Section 714 authorizes the Secretary to appoint employees to positions in FDA to perform, administer, or support activities related to review of medical device applications and human generic drugs. The House bill contains a comparable provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2285, "Hiring Authority for Scientific, Technical, and Professional Personnel" professional positions that support the development, review, and regulation of medical products" within the competitive service. The FDA Commissioner would be allowed to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA workforce. The provision also would require GAO to conduct a review of the FDA's workforce planning process and hiring practices. the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems to offset the number in the Service. Title 5 of the U.S. Code provides the broad framework of requirements under which many federal employees are hired. Some subsets of employees are hire under alternative government-wide or agency-specific authorities. Numerous hiring authorities target scientists and other qualified experts. The House bill would require the Secretary to report on the HHS website regarding the changes to the Service and whether they "have improved the ability of the [FDA] to hire and retain qualified experts" positions" in the competitive service "without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code" The House provision specifies that these positions would be within FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Like the Senate bill, the House provision would allow the HHS Secretary to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees, notwithstanding certain General Schedule pay rate requirements. The provision would also allow the Secretary to set the salary for certain positions. not required to reduce the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems. The provision would require the Secretary to appoint experts to agencies within HHS. It also would authorize the appointment of persons who hold "a master's level degree in engineering, bioinformatics, or a related or emerging field" It would increase the upper pay rate limit to that of the President (currently $400,000 per year) but would eliminate the authority to reduce other HHS employees' jobs. It would also broaden the current requirement for doctoral-level members. that for Level I of the Executive Schedule (currently about $206,000 per year) unless approved by the President. The Secretary may contribute up to 10% of a Service member's pay to that person's already established retirement system. The provision would rename the SBRS as the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (the Service) It would increase the number of authorized members to 2,000, and would add "biomedical product assessment" as a desired field of expertise. to contribute to a member's preexisting retirement system. The House bill contains a similar provision (Section 2281) that would also rename the SBRS the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service. Unlike the Senate bill, the House bill would eliminate the mention of a specific number of authorized Servicemembers. Finally, the provision would require GAO to study the changes to the Service and their effects on HHS departments and agencies. SBRS is a special hiring mechanism used by the HHS Secretary to attract and retain accomplished scientists to work in Public Health Service (PHS) agencies. It is not subject to civil service requirements under Title 5 of the U.S. Code. SBRS requirements are as prescribed in law and regulation (42 C.F.R. Part 24). Currently, SBRS is limited to 500 members, who are accomplished doctoral-level scientists in biomedical research or clinical research evaluation. The rate of pay may not exceed $100,000. Each board member's term of office would last for four years. Initially appointed board members' terms would expire on a staggered basis, as determined by the ex officio members. The provision would remove the salary cap of the foundation's Executive Director, which is now set at the compensation of the Executive Director. The provisions would also add that for the additional board members appointed pursuant to S. 2700 , Section 6, the terms of office for the initially appointed persons can expire onA staggered basis. No comparable provision in H.R. 6 is being implemented. This provision also would allow the Secretary to terminate any such institute if the Secretary determines that it is no longer benefitting the public health. Following allegations of misspent funds during a 2010 General Services Administration meeting held in Las Vegas, the Office of Management and Budget imposed restrictions on conference travel for federal employees. The memorandum directed agencies, beginning in FY2013, to spend at least 30% less than what was spent in FY2010 on travel expenses. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), then the meetings would not be considered to be conferences for the purposes of federal reporting requirements. Each HHS operating division would be required to post on their website an annual report on scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year. The NIH travel (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1025) and the enabling FDA scientific engagement (Title II, Sub Title P, Section 2282) provisions in H.R. 6 would be included. Senior-level agency approval is required for all conferences sponsored by an agency where the conference expenses to the agency exceed $100,000. Agencies are prohibited from spending more than $500,000 on a single conference. However, this restriction may be waived if the agency head "determines that exceptional circumstances exist" Under the Senate provision, if attendance at a scientific meeting is directly related to the professional duties of scientific or medical professionals of the agency.level of spending each year through FY 2016. the carrying out of the PMI as well as identifying requirements of the initiative (§2) Amend PHSA Section 301(d) to require the Secretary to issue a Certificate of Confidentiality to research investigators of federally funded research in which sensitive, identifiable information is collected to protect the privacy of research participants. The provision would prohibit the individual with the certificate from disclosing sensitive information about the research participants, with certain exceptions, as specified, and would make this type of information immune from the legal process. 12-month period. PRA does not apply to certain types of scientific research, including collections that are neither sponsored nor conducted by the agency. The Exemption for the National Institutes of Health from the Paperwork Reduction Act Requirements provision (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1024) is comparable to S. 2700. It would amend 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35 to exempt the NIH from the PRA requirements for certain scientific research collections during the conduct of NIH research. 1980 and amended in 1995, established the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) Congress required that agencies seek OIRA permission before collecting information from the public. The PRA requires that federal agencies receive clearance from OIra before requesting most types of information. PRA clearance is required when standardized information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a period of time. The first of 11 stated purposes was to "minimize the paperwork burden for individuals ... and other persons resulting from the collection of information by and for the Federal Government" health emergency, which in turn authorizes certain further actions to enhance response flexibility, such as waivers of requirements for grant-making and hiring. Section 17 would add an additional provision to PHSA Section 319 to waive requirements for voluntary data collection under the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) when a public health emergency declaration is in effect. Among other things, the PRA requires review and pre-clearance of federal data collection proposals by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) The PRA ensures that federal agencies do not overburden the public. Secretary would be required to issue draft guidance, no later than 12 months after enactment. Draft guidance would update the October 4, 2002, final guidance on the least burdensome provisions. The House provision amending FFDCA Section 515(c) would not require that postmarket information be considered in determining a reasonable assurance of device safety and effectiveness. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . PHSA Section 319 authorizes the HHS Secretary to determine the existence of a public. latter includes showing that a test's accuracy is comparable to a method whose accuracy has already been established and documented. S. 1622 Section 3 would require the Secretary to publish draft guidance that revises Section V of the current guidance. Not later than one year after the comment period for the draft guidance closes, the Secretary would be required to publish the guidance. The draft guidance would provide clarification on the appropriate use of comparable performance between a waived and moderately complex laboratory user to demonstrate accuracy. It would also address approaches to demonstrating accuracy. with the Secretary to discuss the information and requirements necessary to make the plan acceptable. A denied plan would be allowed to be resubmitted. With respect to an accepted plan, in whole or part, the Secretary would be required to accept the plan if the Secretary determines the data to be collected are appropriate for premarket approval. A plan that has been accepted would be needed to remain in effect except with written agreement of the Secretary and the sponsor or pursuant to a decision by the reviewing primary agency center director. the Center, the Coordinating Committee, and the Advisory Board—is required to develop, and periodically revise and update, a comprehensive plan for medical rehabilitation research. The research plan would have to include goals and objectives for such research. Within 30 days of revising and updating the plan, the Director of the Center would be required to transmit the plan to the President, the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. In addition, S. 800 would require the Secretary, with the other federal agencies, to review their medical rehabilitationResearch programs and take action to avoid duplication. Section 452 of the PHSA established the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research (the Center) within the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (the Institute) at NIH. It also required the NIH Director to create a Medical rehabilitation Coordinating Committee and a National Advisory Board on Medical rehabilitation Research. The Director of the Institute—in collaboration with the Director of NIH—conducts and disseminates research, and disseminate information, on the rehabilitation of individuals with physical disabilities. The exception is for treatment of a rare disease or condition through the end of Phase III. Diseases." It would authorize the HHS Secretary to improve the collection of data on neurological diseases. The Secretary would be explicitly authorized to establish a new registry, using existing data sources. In doing so, the Secretary would have to focus on up to five of the most prevalent or burdensome diseases. It would be required to include information on demographics, relevant risk factors, and diagnostic and progression, and to consult with specified experts. The HHS Secretary would also have to collect and manage information in order to facilitate research. The bill also would authorize the Secretary to furnish grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements with public or private nonprofit entities to implement this provision. The Secretary would be required to make information and analysis obtained from the system available to other federal health agencies and state and local agencies. Optional data elements would include information about the epidemiology, natural history, prevention, detection, management, and treatment approaches for the diseases. The bill would also provide information on the development of outcomes measures; and any additional matters identified by stakeholders. S. 849 would add a new PHSA Section 399S-1, "Advancing Research for Neurological to Congress" H.R. 6 would define medical rehabilitation research as "the science of mechanisms and interventions that prevent, improve, restore, or replace lost, underdeveloped, or deteriorating function" The PHSA does not explicitly authorize or require surveillance of neurological diseases in general, although the Secretary may conduct such activities under general authorities in PHSA Title III. The bill does not include an authorization of appropriations. National Neurological Diseases Surveillance System to track the epidemiology of neurological diseases, including multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease. Required and optional data elements are the same as in the Senate bill. The Secretary would be required to make information and analysis in the surveillance system available, subject to HIPAA privacy and security protections, to the public, including researchers. The provision would authorize the appropriation of $5 million for each of fiscal years 2016 through 2020. The Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research Service. In November 2014, HHS published a proposed rule to clarify and expand requirements for the submission of clinical trial registration and results information to ClinicalTrials.gov. Section 8 of S. 2742 would amend Section 402(j)(2)(D) of the PHSA, regarding posting of data, by adding new language requiring the NIH Director to inform responsible parties of the option to request that information for a medical device clinical trial be publically posted before the date of clearance or approval. A clinical trial for a combination product would be considered a drug clinical trial, if the Secretary determines. Under Section 402(j) of the PHS Act, those responsible for specified clinical trials of FDA-regulated products have been required to submit registration information to ClinicalTrials.gov since December 2007. The Secretary is required, by rulemaking, to expand the requirements for submission of summary results information. Section 1101 and Section 1121 of H.R. 6 are comparable to S. 2742 in that they would require the Secretary to submit an initial report not later than two years after the compliance date of the final rule. S. 2742 focuses on compliance with the reporting requirements. House provisions address public access to, and research on, the information in ClinicalTrials.gov. Section 1101 of H.R. 6 would add new language to Section 402(j) of the PHS Act ("Expanded Clinical Trial Registry Data Bank") It would require the NIH Director to ensure that the registry and results data bank is easily used by the public. It would also require that information is submitted in a standardized format, including certain specified data. This streamlined approach would result in more uncertainty about potential risks posed by the product, and therefore a greater need for post-market scrutiny. Section 2 would amend PHSA Section 319E to require the HHS Secretary to encourage and assist in reporting of antibacterial drug use, drug resistance, and antibiotic stewardship programs in health care facilities of the Indian Health Service, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and Department of Defense (DOD) The Secretary would be required to make summaries of data from this system publicly available. Section 4 would amend Section 301(a) of the Public Health Service through the Secretary of Health and Human Services. It requires the Secretary to "conduct in the Service, and encourage, cooperate with, and render assistance to other appropriate public authorities, scientific institutions, and scientists" As part of these authorities, the Secretary is authorized to make available substances and living organisms for biomedical and behavioral research. Section 4 would also amend Section 302(a), which would make the Secretary responsible for the National Institutes of Health. that the primary mode of action of the product is that of a drug or biological product, or a device clinical trial. Section 9 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary, acting through the NIH Director and not later than two years after enactment, to submit to Congress a report that "describes education and outreach, guidance, enforcement, and other activities undertaken to encourage compliance with Section 402(j) of the PHSA" This section also would requiring the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on the activities undertaken by the NIH. Section 7 of S. 2742 does not explicitly require that CDC personnel meet with vaccine developers. The stated purpose is for CDC to share with developers information about epidemiology and related matters that could inform the sponsor's vaccine research and development plan. Section 2142 would require the CDC Director to review ACIP processes, evaluation criteria, and consistency in issuing recommendations, and to publish a report on such review not later than 18 months after enactment. H.R. 6 also includes a provision (Section 2141) that would expedite ACIP's consideration of certain vaccines. The list of covered vaccine types and associated compensable injuries and time frames (called the "Injury Table") was provided in law. In 2013, the Advisory Commission on Childhood Vaccines (ACCV) informed the Secretary that current VICP authority may discourage the growing use of vaccines for pregnant women. Section 6 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary to incorporate into the list ofcovered vaccines any vaccine recommended by CDC for routine use in pregnant women, using the rulemaking process to establish covered injuries and related matters. the PHSA to allow the Secretary, where research substances and living organisms are made available to researchers through contractors, to direct the contractors to collect payments. These amounts would be credited to the appropriations accounts that incurred the costs of making the substances and organisms available. In 1986, in order to stabilize the pediatric vaccine market, Congress waived the liability of manufacturers (in most cases) and established the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6. that both the woman and a child or children in utero when the vaccine was administered would be eligible for compensation. A vaccine may be both a commercial product and a public good. Congress has established several federal payment mechanisms and health insurance coverage requirements to support the production and use of vaccines in the United States. Some of these incentives are tied to recommendations of CDC and/or its Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) In contrast to FDA, which licenses vaccines when they are shown to be safe and include the following: S. 1878, The Advancing Hope Act of 2015; S. 1622, The FDA Device Accountability Act of2015;. S. 2503, Preventing Superbugs and Protecting Patients Act; and S. 2030, The. Advancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act of 2016. Also S. 800, The Enhancing the Stature and. Visibility of Medical Rehabilitation Research at NIH Act; S., 849, Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases Act. The Senate's medical innovation package is that chamber's companion effort to the House's 21 st Century Cures initiative. The package includes the Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2015; S. 1767, The Combination Products Innovation Act, and S. 2700, FDA and NIH Workforce Authorities Modernization Act. It also includes the Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 and the Promoting Biomedical Research and Public Health for Patients Act. The bill also includes S. 185, Promise for Antibiotics and Therapeutics for Health Act; and S 2745, Advancing NIH Strategic Planning and Representation in Medical Research Act. medical research at NIH and change some aspects of how the FDA executes its regulatory oversight mission. This section would require the NIH institute directors to establish programs to pursue innovative approaches to major contemporary challenges in biomedical research. The Senate bill would not require the allocation of a certain percentage of funding for this research. This report provides for each of the 18 bills in the Senate medical innovation package: (1) background on the issue, or issues, addressed by the bill; (2) a summary of the bill's provisions; and (3) where applicable, identification of comparable provisions in H.R. 6. Both the House and the Senate are considering legislation to support medical innovation. Reforms to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and changes to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Both NIH and FDA are agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Senators Lamar Alexander and Patty Murray, chairman and ranking Member of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments, devices and cures to patients and the public" roles of the [FDA] and the [NIH] in that process." This initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the Senate Health, Labor, Education, and Pensions (HELP) Committee. One of these 19 bills, The Adding Zika Virus to the FDA Priority Review Voucher Program Act (S. 2512), subsequently was passed by both chambers and signed into law on April 19, 2016 (P.L. 114-146) The Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 would codify the President's Precision Medicine Initiative. It would also protect identifiable, sensitive information from release under FOIA. The act would also require the sharing of NIH-supported research data in certain circumstances. The bill would also support high-risk, high-reward research in the U.S. and around the world. It was introduced in the Senate on September 14, 2015. It has been referred to as the Advancing precision medicine act of 2016. than a contract, grant, or agreement with respect to projects for high-impact, cutting-edge research, as specified. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress evaluating the activities under this new subsection by September 30, 2020. Title II, Subtitle C, Section 2041, of H.R. 6 addresses precision medicine but is not comparable to S. 2713 in its approach. It would also, for a precision drug or biological product, issue and periodically update guidance. The House provision also would require that GAO study the voucher program and report to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions. Precision medicine is a relatively new term for what has traditionally been called personalized medicine (or targeted medicine), the idea of providing health care to a specific group of people. The Senate provision would require the GAO to report by December 31, 2017, on the program's effectiveness as an incentive for developing drugs that treat or prevent pediatric diseases. Precision medicine is the idea of providing health care to individuals based on specific patient characteristics. Currently, medical care is generally provided in a "trial and error" manner, with treatment adjusted based on real-time patient response. Precision medicine would tailor medical treatment to individual patients, thus aiming to improve health outcomes and save health care costs. On February 25, 2016, the White House hosted a Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) Summit to mark the launch of PMI in the U.S. Some groups have suggested that such pilots could also be done in other areas (e.g., cardiology, neurology, and infectious disease) This provision would add a new FFDCA Section 1014, "Food and Drug Administration Intercenter Institutes" This would require the Secretary to establish one or more "Intercenter Institutes," for a major disease area(s) The proposal is specific to cancer, but there has arguably also been an increase in the number and complexity of diagnostics and therapeutics for other diseases. Such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to specific disease area(s) H.R. 2700 would require the Secretary to establish at least one institute within one year of enactment of the bill. It would also require a public comment period while each institute is established. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the first quarter of 2014. It is currently under consideration in the Senate and the House of Representatives, both of which are expected to vote on the bill this week. The Obama Administration has proposed an Oncology Center of Excellence to streamline collaboration across FDA's Human Drugs, Biologics, and Devices and Radiological Health programs. According to the FY2017 Congressional Justification, "With the continued development of companion diagnostic tests and the use of combinations of drugs and biologics to treat cancer using methods developed through the science of precision medicine, to most benefit those affected, FDA needs to take an integrated approach" The Center for Devices andRadiological Health reviews premarket approval applications for approval and 510(k) notifications. S. 2511 would require ONC to reduce the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology. ONC also would be required to encourage the certification of HIT for use in medical specialties and sites of service. The rating program's methodology and criteria would be posted online, as would each HIT product's star rating. Each developer of an HIT product that received a one-star rating would have to develop and implement a plan to improve the rating, or risk having the product decertified. H.R. 6 would require HIT developers to attest to a series of requirements as a condition of product certification. They include not taking any action (including business, technical, or organizations practices) that constitutes information blocking. The bill also would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. And it would allow the Department of Health and Human Services to investigate claims of HIT developers engaged in information blocking, among other things. The Senate bill's star rating program for certified HIT products does not include this requirement. Senate bill, H.R. 6 would not establish a star rating program for certified HIT products. Bill would not address patient access to electronic health information, patient record matching, the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology, or the development of trusted relationships between existing HIT networks. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ), the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA, the Act was passed after the terrorist attacks of 2001. Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, by January 31, 2022, on the program's effectiveness. H.R. 6 contains a comparable provision (Section 2152, Reauthorization of Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher Incentive Program), which would extend the authority to award rare pediatric disease priority review vouchers until December 31, 2018. A new drug application or a biologics license application submitted to the FDA after the enactment of H.r. 6 and before December would be eligible for vouchers. patient preferences with respect to treatment of such disease or condition. S. 1597 would require the Secretary, acting through the FDA Commissioner, to publish, no later than June 1, 2021, 2026, and 2031, on the FDA website. H.R. 6 also contains a provision related to patient experience data (Title II, Subtitle A, Section 2001, "Development and Use of Patient Experience Data to Enhance Structured Risk-Benefit Assessment Framework" The bill is expected to become law in the next few weeks. H.R. 6 is the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the House Energy and Commerce Committee dating back to spring 2014. The hearings androundtables focused on a broad range of topics, including modernizing clinical trials, incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes, precision/personalized medicine, digital health care, and more. The bill was passed on July 10, 2015, on a vote of 344 to 77. While consisting of many different provisions, the bill is primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in medical research. for secure patient matching and report its findings to Congress within two years. (§8) Section 3001 of the 21 st Century Cures Act ("Ensuring Interoperability of Health Information Technology") includes a series of HIT interoperability provisions. Like S. 2511 , the House bill would give the HHS Office of Inspector General new enforcement authority. Other provisions in H.R. 6 have no counterpart in the Senate bill. Similarly, several of the topics addressed in S.2511 are not covered in the HouseBill. H.R. 6 addresses a number of areas not covered by the Senate bill. It would eliminate the HIT Standards Committee and require the Secretary to contract directly with standards development organizations. Beginning in 2020, hospitals and physicians demonstrating EHR meaningful use would have to attest that they are not engaged in information blocking. Unlike the Senate version, the House bill would repeal the interoperability provisions in MACRA. It also would require ONC to publish guidance on the HIPAA privacy rule and its relationship to informationblocking. an entirely different way. In other cases, the House and Senate legislation address the topic in a similar way but with key substantive differences. For a summary of all the provisions in H.R. 6 , as passed by the House, see CRS Report R44071, H.r. 6: The 21st Century Cures Act. The HHS Human Subject Regulations are a core set of federal standards for protecting human subjects in HHS-sponsored research. These regulations are the basis for the bill. report to "appropriate committees of Congress" within "30 days" when the amount available for Project BioShield procurements falls below $1.5 billion. This bill would change that requirement to specify the recipients of the report as the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Appropriations. Section 3 would move contracting authority for ProjectBioShield and BARDA advanced development from the Senate and House Appropriations committees to the Department of Health and Human Services. This report would be required by "March 1 of each year in which" the amount of money is available to be spent. of the Project BioShield special reserve fund. The Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense recommended this change to streamline the ProjectBioShield contracting process. Other than the provisions relating to Food and Drug Administration priority review, the 21 st Century Cures Act contains no comparable provisions to S. 2055 as reported. This section would also specify the congressional committees that HHS must notify of a decision to use Project Bio Shield funds as the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. contracts with companies to develop and commercialize potential countermeasures. These contracts specify development activities for the company to perform and may extend multiple years. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ) established a special process and funding mechanism through which the HHS Secretary may obligate funds to procure countermeasures that still need up to 10 more years of development. Up to half of the total amount of the Project Bio Shield contract may be paid out for theCompany meeting specified developmental milestones. An HDE application is similar to a PMA, but it is exempt from the effectiveness requirements. Such devices may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved their use in that facility. The provision would amend Section 520(g) of the FFDCA, regarding IDEs, by removing the word "local" in all references to local IRBs, including in the stipulation that the device be used only in emergency situations. It would also remove the word 'local' from all reference to the facility. that an approved humanitarian use device may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved such use, except in certain emergency situations. The use of non-local IRBs for review of IDEs and HDEs provision in H.R. 6 (i.e., Title II, Subtitle O, Section 2262) is comparable to S. 1622. The provision would also require the Secretary, within 12 months of enactment, to revise or issue regulations or guidance, as necessary, to carry out these amendments. Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 ( P.L. 113-5 ) requires the ASPR to develop an annual "coordinated 5-year budget plan" for countermeasure basic and advanced research, development, and procurement activities. Act established the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) to develop and procure medical countermeasures against CBRN agents, pandemic influenza, and emerging infectious diseases. BARDA is part of the National Institutes of Health. ASPR to BARDA. Such a move was recommended by the Blue Ribbon Panel on Biodefense to "reduce unnecessary bureaucratic delays, improve efficiency and decision making" Section 4 would require ASPR to provide additional information in its "coordinated 5-year budget plan" and require that it be made publically available in "a manner that does not compromise national security" The budget plan would also need to consider the development of countermeasures and products for emerging infectious diseases that may present "a threat to the nation" Interagency working group, the Public Health and Emergency Medical Countermeasure Enterprise (PHEMCE), is responsible for coordinating these activities. The PHEMCE is headed by the HHS Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) and includes representatives from the HHS, CDC, FDA, and other agencies. The federal countermeasure strategy requires coordinated activities by several separate agencies. It is designed to ensure federal countermasure needs are addressed efficiently. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2016 would change the manner in which the federal government supports the development and procurement of medical countermeasures against CBRN agents. Section 2 of S. 2055 would require the HHS Secretary to provide "timely and accurate recommended" guidelines for using the medical countermeasure in the Strategic National Stockpile. Currently, HHS has two separate mechanisms to support CBRNcountermeasure advanced development and commercialization: (1) countermeasures advanced development contracts and (2) Project BioShield acquisition contracts. allowing the HHS Secretary to more easily investigate outbreaks or other circumstances germane to the emergency response. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . There are no comparable provisions in the Senate version of the bill that would allow the Secretary to conduct an investigation of an outbreak or other emergency situation in the event of a national emergency. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. It would allow for the Secretary of Health and Human Services to investigate outbreaks and other circumstances that are relevant to an emergency. the FDA Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). FDA refers to such cells as HCT/Ps, which stands for human cells, tissue, and cellular and tissue-based products. CBER held a public workshop on standards development for cellular therapies and regenerative medicine products in March 2014. This section would amend the FFDCA by adding a new Section 506G, "Standards for Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Therapies" It would require the Secretary, in consultation with the National Institute of Standards and Technology and specified stakeholders, to facilitate the development of standards. therapies through a transparent public process. After the development of such standards, the Secretary would update relevant regulations and guidance. The term "regenerative medicine and advanced therapies" is defined as including cell therapy, gene therapy and gene-modified cell therapy. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Rules (or regulations) generally start with an act of Congress, and they are the means by which statutes are implemented and specific requirements are established. In lieu of or in  Regenerative medicine is defined by NIH as "the process of creating living, functional tissues to repair or replace tissue or organ function lost due to age, disease, damage, or congenital defects" The regulation of cells or tissues intended for implantation or infusion into a human patient is the responsibility of NIH. The six-month extension would not be available for a drug that had already received a six- months extension under this provision. The drug would be required to notify the Secretary "of any discontinuance of the production of the drug for solely commercial reasons at least one year before such discontinuances" specified conditions, to a sponsor of an approved new human drug product application. This section defines a "material threat medical countermeasure application" as a human drug application "to prevent or treat harm from a biological, chemical, radiological, or nuclear agent identified as a material threat" under the Public Health Service Act. It can be used for the priority review of another application, among other things, to prevent "adverse health consequences or death and may be caused by administering a drug, or biological product" individuals, whichever is later, a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for the drug. The FDAAA also named the risk-management process "risk evaluation and mitigation strategies" (REMS) A REMS may include "an elements to assure safe use" (ETASU), which is a restriction on distribution or use that is intended to allow access to those who could benefit from the drug while minimizing their risk of adverse events. The FDA has expanded its risk- management authority. Other transaction (OT) authority is a special vehicle used by certain federal agencies for obtaining or advancing research and development (R&D) An OT is not a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, and there is no statutory or regulatory definition of "other transaction" Only those agencies that have been provided OT authority may engage in other transactions. Generally, OT authority is created because the government needs to obtain leading-edge R&D from commercial sources, but some companies are unwilling or unable to comply with the government's procurement regulations. "an independent, non-profit entity" to "foster and accelerate the development of medical countermeasures" This partner could provide business advice and use venture capital practices to invest in companies developing medical counter Measures. The U.S. intelligence community has successfully used a similar strategic investor model to address its unmet technology needs through In-Q-Tel. This bill would establish certain criteria for the partner, including prior experience in the intelligence community. The bill would also address unmet public health needs such as novel antimicrobials for multidrug resistant organisms. S. 1767 would amend Section 503(g) of the FFDCA to require the Secretary to assign a primary center for the regulation of combination products. The bill would require the secretary to determine the primary mode of action for a combination product—defined as a combination of two or more products. A manufacturer whose product is assigned to CDER will have a higher standard of evidence, a potentially higher requirement for supporting data, a higher user fee, and probably a longer premarket review time period. persons are designated in each primary agency center as points of contact for the sponsors of combination products. The bill would require the Secretary, not later than four years after enactment, to issue final guidance on the combination product review process, as specified. It would add reporting requirements to the annual report to Congress on the activities of OCP as specified, and would amend FFDCA Section 520(h)(4) to prohibit the use of information contained in an application. It also would require OCP to provide additional duties related to communication; facilitating meetings between the agency and the sponsors; and dispute resolution. Congress directed FDA to establish an Office of Combination Products (OCP) to facilitate the timely review and regulation of combination products. Both drugs and devices are defined in the FFDCA as products intended to diagnose, prevent, or treat disease, or otherwise affect the structure or any structure. The OCP reviews drug applications for approval and 510(k) notifications for clearance. It also reviews biologics license applications for licensure, and the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) reviews premarket approval applications. An application for a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent would be considered a 505(b)(2) application. The bill would not prohibit a sponsor from submitting separate applications for the constituent parts of a combination products. It would further require OCP to help coordinate timely review of combination products across relevant agency centers and to ensure that they are reviewed in a timely manner. It also would require the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services to review combination products that are approved by the FDA. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 503(g)(4)(C) to require that the Secretary "issue final guidance" on combination products. Increasingly, health care facilities are using computer systems for routine administrative and financial transactions. One area that is undergoing especially rapid growth and innovation is mobile health. This term refers to electronic health records, patient scheduling and claims processing.as needed. The bill would take a different approach than the Senate legislation. It would require the Secretary to issue final guidance that describes the responsibilities of each agency center. the approved constituent parts. For premarket review of a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent, the applicant would be permitted to rely upon investigational studies not conducted by the applicant and for which the applicant has not obtained a right of reference. The applicant would also be required to give notice to the holder of the approved application and patent owner that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. In relying upon these studies, the applicants would need to certify any patents that claim the approved drug or claim use of it. for premarket approval of a class III device from being used in an application for premarket. approval. The bill would also require the Secretary to identify, not later than 18 months after enactment, types of combination products that the Secretary proposes may adopt different good manufacturing practices. This list would be required to be published in the Federal Register and updated after 18 months, the bill says. It also would require a patent certification and notifies the holder of the approved application and patent owner that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. be able to propose and, subject to an agreement with the Secretary, conduct additional studies to establish the relevance of any chemical action. At any time following the Secretary's determination of the product's primary mode of action, the sponsor would be permitted to submit a proposed combination product review plan. The Secretary would be required to provide a written response to the sponsor indicating whether the plan was accepted, accepted in part, or denied. The bill would allow the sponsor, if the plan were to be denied, to request a meeting. as the single mode of action expected to make the greatest contribution to the overall intended therapeutic effects of the product. If the sponsor of a combination product disagreed with the Secretary's determination and requested an explanation, the Secretary would be required to provide a substantive scientific rationale for the determination. The Secretary would not be permitted to determine that the primary mode ofaction is that of a drug or biologic solely because the combination product has any chemical action within or on the body. In addition, the sponsor would have to provide an explanation. function of the body. OCP is required to determine the primary mode of action of a combination product and regulate it based on that determination. Unlike a drug, however, a device "does not achieve its primary intended purposes through chemical action within or on the body ... and is not dependent upon being metabolized for the achievement of itsprimary intended purposes" OCP treats a drug-device combination product as a drug unless the manufacturer can prove that it satisfies the device exclusionary clause; i.e., the product does not rely on chemical action to achieve itsPrimary intended purpose. The expedited review process for a medical device that has received a priority review designation relies on the use of surrogate endpoints and the collection of postmarket data. The "Expedited Access PMA" (EAP) program features "earlier and more interactive engagement with FDA staff," according to FDA. The EAP program includes the involvement of senior management and a collaboratively developed plan for collecting the scientific and clinical data to be used in the PMA application, according to the FDA. support approval—features that, taken together, should provide these patients with earlier access to safe and effective medical devices. As part of the EAP program, FDA intends to impose postmarket requirements, including requiring post-approval studies as a condition of approval for devices subject to a PMA when applicable. The extent to which FDA will accept certain data to be collected for an EAP Device in the future will be determined by the FDA. FDA will withdraw approval for a device if the sponsor fails to adhere to the postmarket requirement. FDA "estimates that, at least in the early stages, on average, about six devices a year may qualify for the program," a media source says. The estimated six devices would represent about 15% of FDA's total PMA applications in one year. Other comments on the FDA draft guidance questioned whether FDA has sufficient resources to dedicate to the EAP program. S. 1077.product approval if the necessary data are not promptly collected or suggest that the product benefits do not outweigh risks. FDA issued final guidance on April 13, 2015. The guidance focuses on balancing risks versus benefits for patients. Comments on the April 2014 FDA draft guidance questioned FDA's ability to enforce postmarket study requirements. The agency and Congress "to evaluate whether FDA has sufficient authorities to promptly withdraw" PMA approval for marketed devices for which FDA later determines that there is a lack of a showing of reasonable assurance that the device is safe or effective under the conditions of use prescribed, as well as by the current capabilities of FDA's medical device surveillance system. in a widespread recall, and the hazards posed by particles shed from [DePuy] metal-on-metal hip replacements were not predictable based on engineering insights or in vitro studies. The 2002 FDA guidance states, "[r]eliance on postmarket controls ... should be considered as a mechanism to reduce the premarket burden for 510(k)s and PMAs" However, the FDA's authority to require postmarket studies of medical devices is limited. A September 2015 GAO study found that of the 392 postmarket surveillance studies ordered by FDA, only 38 were ordered by the FDA. All clinical evaluations of investigational devices (unless exempt) must have an investigational device exemption (IDE) before the clinical study is initiated. An IDE allows an unapproved device (most commonly an invasive or life-sustaining device) to be used in a clinical study to collect the data required to support a premarket approval (PMA) submission. A device can be shipped lawfully for investigation of the device without requiring that the manufacturer comply with other requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) such as registration and listing. The two provisions are as follows: Section 513(a)(3)(D)(ii) Any clinical data, including one or more well-controlled investigations, specified in writing by the Secretary for demonstrating a reasonable assurance of device effectiveness shall be specified. The Secretary shall consider, in consultation with the applicant, the least burdensome appropriate means of evaluating device effectiveness that would have a reasonable likelihood of resulting in approval. Whenever the Secretary requests information to demonstrate that devices with differing technological characteristics are substantially equivalent, the Secretary may use this information. such requirements, including employee training. Under the Senate bill, 18 months after enactment, the FDA ombudsman responsible for device premarket review would be required to conduct an audit of the least burdensome training, including the effectiveness of the training. The audit would be needed to include "interviews of persons who are representatives of the industry regarding their experience" and a list of the measurement tools used to assess the implementation. A summary of the audit findings would berequired to be submitted to the Senate HELP Committee and the Senate. manufacturers to consider study designs to shorten the length of the study. Such study designs include the use of "surrogate endpoints and statistical methods, such as Bayesian analyses" The absence of problems in laboratory testing may not always predict what happens to a device over time in the human body. For example, "the malfunction of [Medtronic and St. Jude Medical] implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads, which resulted in the death of one patient" Section 604 of FDASIA also required a report to House and Senate committees on when a 510(k) notification should be submitted for a modification or change to a legally marketed device. Final guidance (or regulation) could not be issued until one year after the committees had received the report. There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6 . Under FFDCA Section 515(d)(5), the Secretary shall provide review priority for devices that represent breakthrough technologies for which no approved alternatives exist. Under Section 604 of the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA), the Secretary was required to withdraw draft guidance, issued by FDA in July 2011. The prior guidance issued in 1997 is still in effect. Although patient and consumer groups have called for the guidance to be withdrawn, the FDA says it will remain in effect until a new set of guidelines is issued. The guidance will be issued by the FDA in January 2013. The FDA will then issue a new guidance on the 510(k) device. summary of any decision made by CDRH on the least burdensome requirements. FFDCA Section 510(k) requires medical device manufacturers to register with the Secretary and, at least 90 days prior to introducing a device intended for human use into interstate commerce. S. 2503 would add a new subsection (q), "Reusable Medical Devices," which would require the Secretary to identify and publish a list of reusable device types. Reports issued after the publication of this list would be required to include instructions for use and validation data. Reusable medical devices are those devices that may be reprocessed and used on multiple patients. In March of 2015, FDA released final guidance on the reprocessing of reusable medical devices: Reprocessing Medical Devices in Health Care Settings: Validation Methods and Labeling. This guidance states that, among other things, a new device must be substantially equivalent to a device already on the market (a predicate device) Substantial equivalence is determined by comparing the performance characteristics of a new. device with those of a predicate device. would add a new Section 515B, "Priority Review for Breakthrough Devices," to Chapter V of the FFDCA. The section would require the Secretary in 60 days to determine whether the request for priority review would be granted. Such requests would be evaluated by a team of experienced FDA staff and senior managers. The provision in H.R. 6 regarding priority review for breakthrough devices (Title II, Subtitle L, Sections 2201) is comparable to S. 1077. criteria (i.e., no approved alternatives exist, offer significant advantages over existing approved or cleared alternatives) no longer being met. Each priority review device would be assigned a team of staff, "including a team leader with appropriate subject matter expertise and experience" Senior FDA personnel would oversee each team to facilitate the efficient development and review of the device. Among other things, the Secretary would be required to "provide for interactive communication with the device sponsor during the review process," and expedite "the Secretary's review of manufacturing and quality" FDA published final guidance on the least burdensome provisions on October 4, 2002. Under the guidance, FDA may allow the use of non-clinical data in place of clinical data for the approval of PMA devices. In certain circumstances, such as "devices or modifications of approved devices for which scientifically valid information is available in the public domain," FDA may use such data in the PMA approval process. When clinical data are needed, FDA allows for non- clinical data to be used. and review of the device through utilization of timely postmarket data collection" with regard to PMA applications. Agreements on clinical protocols would be considered binding, but may be subject to change under certain circumstances. The provision specifies that both the agreement and subsequent changes to the clinical protocol must be agreed to in writing. The Secretary would be required to issue, not later than one year after enactment, guidance on the implementation of the new Section 515B of the FFDCA. In addition to a report, on January 1, 2017, to the Senate Health, Education, Section 205 of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA, P.L. 105-115 ) amended Section 513 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) S. 1622 would amend FFDCA Section 515(c), adding a new paragraph that would require the Secretary to "consider the least burdensome appropriate means necessary to demonstrate device safety and effectiveness" Section 2228 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle M) is substantively identical to the Senate legislation. between May 1, 2008, and February 24, 2015, 88% were inactive, 10% were ongoing, and 2% were complete. Activities related to implementing the least burdensome provision, including training for staff and advisory panels, are posted on FDA's website. S. 1622 , Section 4, would amend FFDCA Section 513 by adding a new subsection (j), "Training and Oversight of Least Burdensome Requirements" The Secretary would be required to ensure that each FDA employee involved in the review of premarket submissions, including supervisors, receives training. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) added a new FFDCA Section 529, creating the pediatric priority review voucher program. The purpose of the priority review drug voucher programs is to incentivize development of new treatment for diseases that may otherwise not attract development interest from companies due to cost or lack of market opportunities. The House provision does not specify that the agreement on clinical protocols and any subsequent changes must be agreed to in writing. There is no deadline on the requirement for FDA guidance on Section 515B. Under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 (PDUFA), FDA agreed to specific goals for improving the drug review time. FDA created a two-tiered system of review times: Standard Review and Priority Review. Compared with the amount of time standard review generally takes (approximately 10 months), a Priority Review designation means FDA's goal is to take action on an application within 6 months. Currently, FDA has two authorized priority review voucher programs (the rare pediatric diseasepriority review program, and the tropical disease priority review program) S. 1878 would amend FFDCA Section 529(b)(4) by adding the requirement that the sponsor of a rare pediatric disease product application that intends to request a voucher notify the Secretary of 31, 2018. The House provision also would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" The bill also would add to the list of characteristics of a pediatric rare disease product applications that the House would consider adding to the bill's definition of the disease by adding italics to the words "serious or life-threatening" The term "rare pediatric disease" refers to a disease that affects fewer than 200,000 persons in the United States. FDASIA terminated the authority to award such vouchers one year after the Secretary of Health and Human Services made the decision. There is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making the drug available in the US will be recovered from U.S. sales. The drug or biological product for a rare pediatric disease to be used for the priority review of another application. such intent upon submission of the rare pediatric disease product application. The bill would extend the authority to award such priority review vouchers until September 30, 2022. A new drug application or a biologics license application submitted to FDA after the enactment of S. 1878 would remain eligible to receive a priority review voucher even if approval comes after September 30,. 2022, provided the application is approved before September. 30, 2027, and is designated as a drug for a rare pediatric. disease. S.1878 also would require that GAO study the voucher program and report to the Senate. FDA awarded the third voucher in March 2015, triggering the March 2016 sunset of this authority. This authority was extended until September 30, 2016, by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016 ( P.L. 114-113 ). S. 1878 would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" in FFDCA Section 529(a) by adding the following words in italics: "The disease is rare pediatric disease." The bill would also require the GAO to study and then report on the effectiveness of the voucher program. guidance, over a period of five years, regarding the collection of patient experience data and the use of such data in drug development. This section describes the content of those required guidance documents. "patient experience data" is data that are collected by any persons (including patients, family members and caregivers of patients, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, researchers, and drug manufacturers) and are intended to provide information about patients' experiences with a disease or condition, including the impact of such disease or Condition on Patients' lives. "patient experience data" would be defined as data collected by patients, parents, caregivers, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, medical researchers, research sponsors, or other parties determined appropriate by the Secretary. The new subsection would also require the Secretary to issue implementation guidance after holding several methodological workshops and a public meeting. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), each year in the United States, at least 2,000 people die of cancer. and nonmanufacturer groups. minimal, financial interests in the medical products industry. S. 1597 would amend FFDCA Section 569C by adding a new subsection (b) "Statement of Patient Experience" would require the Secretary, upon approval of a new drug application, to make public any patient experience data and related information submitted and reviewed as part of the application. "Data and information" refers to patient experiencedata, information on patient-focused drug development tools, and other relevant information, as determined by the Secretary. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505 by deleting a clause from Section 505(d) and adding new subsections (x) and (y) The new 505(x) would restate the deleted 505(D) requirement for the Secretary to "implement a structured risk-benefit assessment framework in the new drug approval process" The new505(y) would require the secretary to "establish and implement processes under which" entities "seeking to develop patient experience data" could submit ideas and data. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505(c) to permit the Secretary to rely upon "qualified data summaries" to support the approval of the supplemental NDA. The Senate provision does not include treating cancer in its definition of "qualified indication" The House provision would add a new Section 505H, which, like the Senate bill, would address the data requirements in a supplemental Nda that a sponsor of an approved drug would submit when seeking to add to the approval a new indication. the Secretary regarding the safety of the drug developed for one or more indications" of the approved drug. The definition of "qualified data summary" in the House provision is similar to the Senate bill: "a summary of clinical data intended to demonstrate safety and effectiveness with respect to a qualified indication for use of a drug" The House provision would require the sponsor to submit the full data sets used to develop the qualified data summaries. The Senate bill adds the exception "unless the Secretary determines that the fullData sets are not not" USP develops and publishes standards for drug substances, drug products, and excipients. USP standards "play a role in the adulteration and misbranding provisions of the FFDCA" The Senate bill would amend Section 351(j) of the PHS Act by adding that the provisions of that section would not apply to biological products regulated under the Act. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . FDA regulates the U.S. sale of drugs. This provision would also amend FFDCA Section 505-1(f)(5)(B), which would change the requirement that the committee evaluate the ETASU for one or more drugs from "annually" to "periodically" There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Biological products must be licensed by FDA, pursuant to PHSA Section 351, before they can be marketed in the United States. The U.S. Pharmacopeia Convention (USP) is a "scientific nonprofit organization that sets standards for drug safety" block access to those for whom the potential harm would outweigh potential benefit. This provision would amend FFDCA Section 505(k)(5) to require the Secretary to conduct regular screenings of the FAERS database instead of the bi-weekly screenings required by current law. It would also remove the requirement that the Secretary prepare a summary analysis of the adverse event signals. And it would require the FDA to post guidelines on the FDA website, with input from experts, that detail best practices for drug safety surveillance using FAERS. drug reaction reports received for a drug "by 18 months after approval" This provision also would amend FFDCA Section 505-1(f)(5)(A), which would expand the authority to evaluate the ETASU. This provision would require that the Secretary make publicly available on the FDA website "best practices for drug safety surveillance activities" for drugs newly approved under this section or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. It would also require the Secretary to include "or other advisory committee," compared with current law, which designates this responsibility to the Secretary. how it informs the public, expert committees, and others about agency actions and plans. The law required biweekly screening of the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database and quarterly reporting on the FAERS website. The FDAAA also required the development and maintenance of a website with extensive drug safety information, and required the Secretary to "prepare, by 18 months after approval of a drug or after use of the drug, by 10,000 by the end of the year" Other amendments to the FFDCA have imposed additional requirements upon the Secretary or the FDA. Section 505 and accompanying regulations provide the framework for FDA's approval of sponsors' drug marketing applications. Section 523(d), which required the Secretary, not later than January 10, 2007, to conduct a study related to devices, as specified, and to submit the findings of this study in a report to Congress. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 .FFDCA Section 505 provides the framework. H.R. 6 and S. 2700 express a sense of Congress that participation in or sponsorship of scientific conferences and meetings is essential to the mission of NIH and FDA. FFDCA Section 770, as added by the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ), created the Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food & Drug Administration. Its duties cover activities such as identifying and then prioritizing unmet needs; awarding grants or entering into other agreements with scientists. Congress has required the Secretary to submit specified reports to Congress or to contract with other entities (e.g., the Institute of Medicine [IOM]), to conduct specified studies. For example, the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to take several actions regarding how it informs the public, expert committees, and others about agency actions and plans, as well as information the agency has developed or gathered about drug safety and effectiveness. FDA issues more than 100 guidances each year. Some Members of Congress have expressed concern with FDA's use of guidance documents in lieu of the rulemaking process in certain instances. FFDCA Section 701(a) provides FDA with the authority to promulgate regulations for the enforcement of the FFD CA. The agency prepares guidance documents "primarily for industry, but also for other stakeholders and its own staff," according to FDA's website, and uses them to address such matters as the design, manufacturing, and testing of regulated products. commonly referred to as the Common Rule because the same requirements have been adopted by many other federal departments and agencies. Research protocols must be approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) to ensure that the rights and welfare of research subjects are protected. FDA has issued its own set of Human Subject Regulations, which are similar, but not identical, to the Common rule. FDA applies these regulations to all the research it regulates, including clinical trials of new drugs and medical devices, regardless of the source. FDA regulatory authority over medical product safety and effectiveness covers drugs, biological products, and medical devices. The agency generally divides responsibilities for the review of marketing applications in its product-centered offices. The House provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA. Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision wouldn't require a GAO study with regards to FDA workforce. The Senate bill would not require aGAO study on FDA workforce planning. required." Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision would state a sense of Congress that the new streamlined data review program "should enable the Food and Drug Administration to make approval decisions for certain supplemental applications" The provision would require that the FDA Commissioner issue implementation guidance for the new program. The House provision also would allow the Commissioner to issue regulations for implementation. The Food and drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to take several actions regarding the program. Current requirement is that funds received from the Treasury be held in separate accounts. The provision would change the requirement, so that funds would be "managed as individual programmatic funds, according to best accounting practices" The House bill provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2283, "Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration") is the same as the Senate bill. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35) was enacted in 1986. determination of the safety and efficacy of a limited population antibacterial drug "reflects the benefit-risk profile of the drug in the intended limited population" Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use for a limited and specific population of patients. Sponsors must submit promotional materials to FDA for review 30 days prior to dissemination. This provision should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices (such as off-label prescribing). Other elements of the review pathway were found only in the House provision. million people become infected with bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics, and at least 23,000 of them die from these infections. Addressing barriers to antibiotic drug approval may help counter this problem. One such proposal is the so-called Limited Population Antibacterial Drug (LPAD) approval pathway for new antibacterial drugs. Such a pathway would involve smaller clinical trials in a limited population of patients that have serious or life-threatening infections and unmet medical needs due to the lack of an effective approved antibiotic. biologics) intended for use in limited, defined populations of patients that have severe, life-threatening infections. Some elements of the review pathway proposed in the House bill are comparable to those in the Senate bill, for example. The Secretary could consider limited data sets and non-clinical data as substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness, recognizing the smaller populations available for study of an LPAD drug, and the different balance of benefit and harm. The bill would require the Secretary to report back to Congress by the end of the year. Section 3 would create new FFDCA Section 506(g), "Limited population pathway for antibacterial drugs" This review pathway would allow the Secretary to approve an antibacterial drug as an LPAD drug if certain conditions are met. Section 4 states that S. 185 should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices. The House bill contains a comparable provision (Title II, Subtitle G, Section 2121, "Approval of Certain Drugs for Use in a Limited Population of Patients" of limited population antibacterial drugs." It would also require the Secretary to provide advice to the sponsor regarding the approval of an LPAD drug. Section 3 would require the secretary to report to Congress at least every two years on the number of requests for approval. It also would require GAO to report on the coordination of monitoring activities required by S. 185. The legislation would allow the Secretary of Health and Human Services to remove any post-marketing conditions (e.g., labeling requirements) S. 2030 would define genetically targeted drugs, genetically targeted technology, and variant protein-targeted drugs. New Section 529A should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission of the other sponsor. H.R. 6 would add a new Subchapter J, Precision Medicine, to Chapter V of the FFDCA; this subchapter would include a new Section 592, "Precision medicine" drugs to address an unmet medical need in one or more patient subgroups, including subgroups of patients with different mutations of a gene. This legislation would authorize the Secretary to allow the sponsor of a new drug application for a genetically targeted drug or a variant protein-targeted drug to rely on data and information that has been previously developed and submitted, either by the same or a different sponsor (with permission) for a drug that incorporates or utilizes the same genetically targeted technology or for a similar drug. individuals based on specific patient characteristics. This approach relies on companion diagnostics to target drugs and biological products to specific subsets of patients. Rare diseases often have genetic origins, and advances in medicine have resulted in the development of new treatments that work by targeting genetic mutations that cause the disease. It is inherently difficult to develop drugs for rare diseases because of the small patient population available to conduct clinical trials, so targeted therapies are generally first developed for patients with the most frequent disease-causing mutations. additional targeted therapies would need to be developed. Targeted therapies, because they may be treating small subsets of patients, sometimes qualify as "orphan drugs" Such drugs are called orphan drugs because firms may lack the financial incentives to sponsor products to treat small patient populations. Orphan drugs receive their designation pursuant to FFDCA Section 526(a), a designation that was created by the Orphan Drug Act ( P.L. 97-414 ) to encourage firms to develop pharmaceuticals to treat rare diseases and conditions. States. Since the law's passage, FDA has approved over 400 new orphan drugs and biological products. Incentives for sponsors of orphan drugs include seven years of market exclusivity, tax credits for clinical trial expenses, user fee waivers, and federal grants to cover costs of qualified clinical testing expenses. The FFDCA contains provisions to grant market exclusives for statutorily defined time periods (in months or years) to the holder of the NDA for a product that is used in the treatment of a rare disease or condition. Section 5 of the Orphan Drug Act (21 U.S.C. 360ee) allows the Secretary to make grants to assist in "defraying the costs of qualified clinical testing expenses incurred in connection with the development of drugs for rare diseases and conditions" This provision would expand the definition of qualified testing to include "prospectively planned and designed observational studies and other analyses" H.R. 6 would also expand the use of grants to include but not be limited to qualified testing expenses. The Orphan Drug Act of 1983 ( P.L. 97-414 ) was signed into law to incentivize development of drugs to treat rare diseases. The House bill contains an identical provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle E, Section 2083, "Finalizing Draft Guidance on Expanded Access"). The provision would require that the final guidance "clearly define how the Secretary of Health and Human Services interprets and uses adverse drug event data reported by investigators" condition under section 505(i) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (or regulations issued under such section); (ii) which occurs after the date such drug is designated under section 526 of such Act, and before the date on which an application with respect to such drugs is submitted under such Act; and (B) preclinical testing involving a drug. Preclinical testing involves a drug that has not been approved for use in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration. Contains a related provision (Section 2151. Extension of Exclusivity Periods for a Drug Approved for a New Indication for a Rare Disease or Condition) Unlike the Senate bill which would broaden the use of grants for development of rare diseases, the House provision would add a new FFDCA Section 505I. This would add six months to the exclusivity period of an approved drug already on the market when FDA approves a supplemental application for that drug for a new indication to prevent, diagnose, or treat a rare disease or condition. The new FFDCA Section 592 would allow the Secretary to do two things. The Secretary would be allowed to rely on information about a drug or biological product that has been previously submitted. Section 1028 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle B) addresses high-risk, high-reward research. But it would not establish OT authority, nor would it would would it establish expedited-approval-programs (OTs) or rely on previously submitted information. of an application. This may be for either a new product, or for a different indication for an existing product. Second, in contrast to the Senate bill, it would allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs, including accelerated approval. Similar to S. 2030 , new Section 592 should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) expanded FDA's authorities and strengthened the agency's ability to safeguard and advance public health. For a drug whose active ingredient has never been FDA-approved, the law requires the sponsor to submit a new drug application. FDA requires that the manufacturer submit a supplemental NDA each time the manufacturer wants to change the labeling, the manufacturing process, or the dosing, or when it wants to add a new indication (a new intended use) of the drug. For more information, visit 21 C.F.R. Regulations at 21C.FR.Regulations.org.  Phase II trials include more participants (about 100-300) who have the disease or condition that the product potentially could treat. In Phase III trials, the drug is studied in a larger number of participants with the disease (approximately 1,000-3,000) This phase further tests the product's effectiveness, monitors side effects and, in some cases, compares the drug's effects to a standard treatment, if one is already available. As more and more participants are tested over longer periods of time, the less common side effects are more likely to be revealed. National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) may develop and provide infrastructure and resources for all phases of clinical trials research. NCATS may support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIB for a treatment for a rare disease or condition if it gives public notice. Section 11 of S. 2742 would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trials through the start of Phase III. The Senate passed the bill on a vote of 50-0, with one Democrat joining the Republicans. bill would add material to the NCATS annual/biennial report regarding methods and tools developed since the last report. The next NCATS report, following enactment, would include a complete list of all such tools developed by research supported by NCATS. The NDCATS Phase IIB Restriction provision in H.R. 6 Section 1027 is comparable to S. 2742 . The House provision would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIA. CLIA requires laboratories to receive certification before they are allowed to carry out clinical laboratory testing on a human sample. CLIA certification is based on the level of complexity of testing that a laboratory is performing, graded as low, moderate, or high. Laboratories that perform only low-complexity tests (called waived tests ) receive a certificate of waiver (COW) from CMS. Conversely, only laboratories certified to do so may may test on human samples. FDA is responsible for categorizing clinical laboratory tests according to theirlevel of complexity. FDA determines whether a test is waived (i.e., low-complexity) or not based on information submitted by the manufacturer. Under current law, waived tests are those "that have been approved by FDA for home use or that have an insignificant risk of an erroneous result" The guidance recommends ways to demonstrate that atest is both "simple" and has "an insignificant risk" of an "erroneous" result. Demonstrating the test is simple is one way to prove that it is not too complex. reconsidered if reconsideration is requested within 30 days of the denial and other specified criteria are met. The House provision does not specify the number of business days in which FDA would "disclose to the sponsor" in advance of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device. The provision adds specific details regarding efficient clinical trial design, such as "the adoption of shorter or smaller clinical trials, application of surrogate endpoints, and use of adaptive trial," according to the House provision. It also adds details regarding "the use ofadaptive trial design" FDA may enter into written agreement with the sponsor to define the process and data needed to review the limited population use application. The process must adhere to existing goals and procedures agreed upon by sponsors and FDA in the Prescription Drug User Fee Amendments of 2012 ( P.L. 112-144 , Title I). The House provision would require the Secretary to conduct and publish an assessment of the program within 48 months of enactment, and to seek public input. It also would allow the secretary to allow the public to participate in the process. systems compliance." The Secretary would be required to "disclose to the sponsor, not less than 5 business days in advance the topics of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device" The secretary would be allowed to, as appropriate, "coordinate with the sponsor regarding early agreement on a data development plan" The Secretary also would be able to ensure that clinical trial design is as efficient as practicable and would be can facilitate "expedited and efficient development" of new drugs and treatments for cancer and other conditions. terminologies and code sets are used, to the extent possible, to facilitate electronic data matching. Within 90 days of enactment, the Secretary would be required to seek the advice of relevant stakeholders and experts on enhancements to the clinical trial registry data bank that are necessary to implement the provision. Section 1121 of H.R. 6 would instruct the Secretary to enter into a seven-year cooperative agreement, contract, or grant—the Clinical Trial Data System Agreement—with one or more. The Secretary wouldbe required to begin implementation of the provision within 18 months of enactment. expanded access is limited by an important factor: whether the manufacturer agrees to provide the drug, which cannot be obtained otherwise. FDA does not have the authority to compel a manufacturer to participate. Manufacturers may consider several factors in deciding whether to provide an investigational drug, such as available supply, perceived liability risk, limited staff and facility resources, and need for data to assess safety and effectiveness. The provision would add a new FFDCA Section 561A, "Expanded Access Policy Required for Investigational Drugs" would become effective on the later of the date that is 60 days after the enactment of S. 2700 or "the first initiation of a phase 2 or phase 3 study ... with respect to such investigational drug" The House bill contains a comparable provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle E, Section 2082, "Expanded Access Policy"). FFDCA Section 561(b) allows a person, acting through a licensed physician, to request a manufacturer or distributor of an investigational product to provide that product. Under certain circumstances, FDA may permit the sponsor to provide an unapproved or unlicensed product to patients outside that standard regulatory framework. One such mechanism is expanded access to investigational drugs, commonly referred to as "compassionate use" If excluded from a clinical trial because of its enrollment limitations, a person, acting through a physician, may request access to an investigational new drug outside of the trial. The widespread use of drugs and biological products is expected to continue for years to come. Policy would include contact information for the manufacturer or distributor of the drug, request procedures, and anticipated time to acknowledge request receipts. New section would state that posting of policy would not guarantee patients access to an investigational drug. The provision would also allow a manufacturer or Distributor to revise its policy at any time. This provision would require a manufacturer to make its policies on responding to compassionate use requests publicly available. It would also require the manufacturer to provide a list of criteria it will use to evaluate such requests for individual patients. of the eligible entity to ensure that registered users disseminate the results of their research; and evidence demonstrating that the eligible entities has a proven track record of protecting confidential data. FDA uses the data from clinical trials to determine whether to approve a manufacturer's application for marketing a medical product. Clinical trials are conducted in three phases. Phase I trials try to determine dosing, document how a drug is metabolized. Phase II trials document how the drug is administered. Phase III trials document the drug's effects on the body. Sections 314.50 and 314.54 describe the required contents of those applications. Regarding clinical data, the regulations direct the applicant to submit, in addition to descriptions and analysis of controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies, (iv) A description and analysis. of any other data or information relevant to an evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of the drug product obtained or otherwise received by the applicant from any source, foreign or domestic, including information derived from clinical investigations, including controlled and controlled studies of uses other than those proposed in the application. eligible entities (i.e., tax-exempt academic institutions) to implement a pilot program to enable registered users to conduct further research on reported clinical trial data. Eligible entities seeking funding would have to submit an application that contains certain specified information, including a description of the system the eligible entity will use to store and maintain such data. The eligible entity must also prove that it will allow onlyregistered users to access and use de-identified clinical trialData. The application must also include evidence demonstrating the ability to compile clinical trial Data in standardized formats.