$1 billion and $2 billion. Based on our review of design documents as well as interviews with cognizant agency staff, there has been substantial improvement in this area since our last review. Both the grants and procurement portions of the pilot showed substantial improvements in the extent to which they reflect leading practices for pilot design. We found that HHS’s March 2016 revised design for the these pilots at OMB, HHS, and General Services Administration. We determined that the design met the criteria when we saw evidence that all aspects of a leading practice were met. grants portion of the pilot partly reflects all five of the leading practices for effective pilot design. OMB and HHS developed a plan to analyze survey and other data prior to the start of data analysis. HHS also added a sampling plan and information on participant outreach efforts to the design of the grants portion ofThe pilot is now in its second year. The pilot is expected to be completed by the end of the year and will be used to assess the effectiveness of the program. The program is being funded by the Department of Health and Human Services. HHS has engaged in a number of outreach efforts to recruit participants for its test models. Officials have attended an estimated 70 events since 2015 to discuss the grants pilot. As of August 2016, HHS officials reported e-mailing almost 8,000 potential participants. They plan on implementing the design of the grants portion of the pilot by the end of the first quarter of 2017. The program will be funded by a combination of federal and state grants. It will be rolled out in phases over the next few years. grants and procurement portions of the Section 5 Pilot. We determined that the updated design for both parts of the pilot meets the statutory requirements for the pilot established under the DATA Act. We recommend that the Director of OMB clearly document in the pilot’s design how data collected will be used. By addressing issues such as this and continuing to focus on implementing the act, the administration greatly increases the likelihood of creating a system that will achieve the goals of the act. The goal is to increase the transparency of financial information and improve the usefulness of that data. We reviewed Section 5 of the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006, as amended by the DATA Act. We met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to providing technical guidance. We reviewed the draft design documents to assess OMB’s plans for meeting these requirements. To supplement our review of those plans, we also spoke with cognizant staff implementing. and DATA Act implementation team members. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. determined that the design partially met the criteria. When we saw no evidence of a leading practice, or if we identified a critical gap or shortcoming related to the practice, we determined that the criteria were not met. In continuation of our constructive engagement approach for working with agencies implementing the DATA Act, we provided HHS and OMB with feedback on the design of the grants and procurement portions of the pilot. These officials generally accepted our feedback as useful and, in some instances, noted that they have or planned to make changes to their design. effective pilot design. Compared to the previous version, dated November 2015, we identified progress in several areas. The revised design includes a data-analysis plan that describes how OMB will collect, track, and analyze data produced by the pilot. We found some areas where the revised procurement design does not fully reflect leading leading practices in the area of contract management and oversight for Davis Bacon requirements. It also provides additional detail about how potential findings could be scalable from the experiences of the individual pilot participants to the larger population of contractors. decisions about scalability and whether, how, and when to integrate pilot activities into overall efforts. Develop a detailed data-analysis plan to track the pilot program’s implementation and performance and evaluate the final results of the project. Ensure appropriate two-way stakeholder communication and input at all stages of the pilot project, including design, implementation, data gathering, and assessment. The July 2016 revision of the design of the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot also showed substantial improvements in reflecting the leading practices for procurement. program, known as the Section 5 Pilot, aimed at developing recommendations for reducing reporting burden for grantees and contractors. OMB partnered with HHS to design and implement the grants portion of the pilot and with the General Services Administration (GSA) to implement the procurement portion. HHS developed six “test models” to evaluate different approaches to potentially reducing grantee reporting burden. O MB’s Office of Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP) worked on the procurement portions of the program. types of FAR-required reporting and the revised design briefly mentions other FAR requirements such as those for service contracts and affirmative action plans. The absence of an assessment methodology and an approach to test the scalability of the design is inconsistent with leading practices for pilot design. The pilot design will meet its stated objective of reducing procurement reporting burden more broadly. HHS has taken a number of steps to reduce the reporting burden on the federal government, including the creation of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) as a result of our input. We also met with OMB to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to the design of the pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. We conducted the work upon which this report is based from May 2016 to December 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. OMB staff said that despite the security-related delay, they still plan on collecting 12 months of data through the procurement pilot as required by the act. In order to meet the act’s requirement that OMB deliver a report to Congress on ways to reduce recipient reporting burden by August 2017, OMB staff told us that they plan to only include data collected up to June or July 2017. Across the federal government, agencies have efforts under way to implement the DATA Act by the May 2017 deadline. practices for effective pilot design. OMB intends to broaden the pilot’s initial focus on centralizing certified payroll reporting to other types of FAR-required reporting. Despite advances in several areas, the current design remains limited by its lack of specifics regarding how a pilot focused on assessing contractors’ experiences with a centralized portal designed for certified payroll Reporting. The plan does not take the next step of clearly describing and documenting how findings related to centralized certified payroll. reporting will be more broadly applicable to the many other type of required reporting. beyond citing general concepts such as data pre-population and system integration. More specifically, the current design lacks a plan for testing the assumption that the experiences contractors have with centralized certified payroll reporting will be similar when they use the system to meet different reporting requirements and other databases. This is of particular concern given the diversity of reporting requirements contained in the FAR. OMB staff have identified over 100 different types of FAR reporting requirements with different reporting frequencies, mechanisms, and required information. O MB staff told us that they expect to test the centralized portal on other platforms. through the centralized certified payroll reporting portal will be used to test hypotheses related to reducing reporting burden involving other procurement reporting requirements. This should include documenting the extent to which recommendations based on data collected would be scalable to other FAR- required reporting. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation of National and the CEO of the National Association of Manufacturers. We also provided additional details about the methodology that would be used in the future. with GSA’s 18F to develop and test a proof of concept reporting portal for reports required by the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) GSA is piloting it with the centralized reporting of certified payroll by contractors working construction projects in the United States. GSA completed a prototype for the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot at the end of May 2016 and presented it to OMB in June 2016. In August 2016, GSA awarded NuAxis the contract to build the prototype from information obtained as a result of the 18F prototype process. NuAxis began developing a web-based reporting interface that will allow users to centrally enter and submit certified payroll data. They plan to make this interface compatible with other existing systems, such as the System for Award Management (SAM) and Wage Determination Online (WDOL) In late November 2016, OMB staff and GSA officials informed us that they decided to delay launching the portal to conduct the procurement portion of the pilot in order to ensure that security procedures designed to protect personally identifiable information (PII) were in place. GSA officials said the centralized reporting portal that would be used to collect data on certified payroll did not receive the required Authority to Operate. The portal did not include necessary security measures to protect the PII, officials said. GSA officials expect to be able to begin the pilot program in the next few weeks, they said. The pilot program will be limited to contractors participating in the pilot, the GSA said, and it will be funded through a federal contract with a private company.  Complex validations perform tasks such as checking data against other sources or using calculation rules to verify whether certain data elements sum up to each other. Treasury has configured these complex validation rules so that if a rule is not met, the broker can either produce a warning message while still accepting the data for submission or produce a fatal error. As of September 30, 2016, data uploaded to the broker needs to successfully meet less than a quarter of these complexvalidation checks in order to be accepted for submission to Treasury. Treasury released the first version of the broker in spring 2016. Treasury continues to develop the system’s capabilities through 2-week software development cycles, called sprints. On September 30, 2016, Treasury released a version of. the broker, which it stated was fully. functional. The broker will assist reporting agencies in validating their data prior to submitting it to Treasury. See figure 1 for a depiction of how Treasury expects the broker to operate and how it will be used. Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendation related to the provision of policy guidance. To examine the technical structure and specifications for reporting, we assessed Treasury’s processes for developing technical guidance. We reviewed the broker made available by Treasury through open source code posted on a public website (GitHub repositories associated with the DATA Act) In addition, we observed several demonstrations of how agencies submit their data to a prototype of the broker. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The broker is capable of performing the key functions of extracting and validating agency data. Treasury officials told us that although they plan to continue to refine the broker, they have no plans to alter these key functions. Agencies may use the broker to verify the data files the agency plans to submit to Treasury. The broker uses validation rules to test the completeness and accuracy of the data elements and linkages between financial and award data. If data does not pass validation (see Step 6), the broker will update information and systems. As of October 2016, 21 of 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had begun testing their data files in the broker. Only the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had completed testing the broker and revised its data files accordingly. Treasury also collects data from the four shared service providers that are helping to manage data submissions for their agency clients. As of October2016, two of these shared service provider reported to Treasury that they have completed testing all of their files in their broker. The broker is available to agencies so they can begin testing theirData. officials (SAO) certification and reporting non-financial data. One agency reported that its SAO may be unable to certify the quality of data if OMB’s guidance for the SAO certification cannot be supported by existing processes. Another agency reported concerns with the burden of reconciling account data with financial and award data. OMB staff and Treasury officials said that they are reconsidering this position and are exploring ways that agencies can submit data with qualifications and how these qualifications can be conveyed to the public.  Memorandum No. 2016-03 directs agencies to leverage existing procedures for providing assurances of the quality of their DATA Act data submissions. OMB expects SAO assurance of the data through this process would mean that data submitted to Treasury by May 2017 complies that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the agency account-level and award-level data. Currently, if SAOs are not able to provide this assurance, their agency will be prevented from submitting the files and their data will not be included in the data reporting. Treasury implemented additional validation checks on the file containing agency financial assistance award information through its source system, the Award Submission Portal. These checks include verifying that required information is present and formatted correctly. Treasury officials told us that the responsibility for ensuring the accuracy of these files lies with the DATA Act SAO at each agency. For example, OMB Management Procedures Memorandum 2016-03 specifies that SAOs must provide reasonable assurance that the files will be accurate and complete. September and early October 2016. provide error details to the agency. The agency should then reference the authoritative data sources and address the discrepancies. Step 8: Submit Data. Once the data is linked, validated, and standardized, agencies are to submit the data to Treasury for posting on USASpending.gov or a successor system. Agency senior accountable officials (SAO) are to provide reasonable assurance that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the agency account-level and award-level data they submit to Treasury.  ERP vendors are developing patches that will extract data to help their clients develop files that comply with DATA Act requirements. Patches will help link an agency’s financial and award systems, create additional fields in existing systems to report new data elements, and extract data files formatted for submission to Treasury. Two agencies reported in their implementation plan updates that a delay in the release of the patches could jeopardize complete and timely data submission for May 2017. Treasury officials told us that agencies should still be able to create and submit the required files to the broker without these patches. The release of one of these patches has been delayed. Oracle, one of the ERP vendors developing these patches, had planned to release a patch that would allow award attributes to be captured in their clients’ core purchasing systems and general ledger journals in August 2016. The release was delayed until September 13, 2016. Representatives from SAP, another such ERP vendor, said that they were able to deliver one of those needed patches to their clients in August 2015 and in September 2016, respectively. they developed plans for interim solutions to construct these files until the patches can be developed, tested, and configured. Some of these interim solutions rely on manual processing, which can be burdensome and increase the risk for errors. For example, USDA officials said that the effort to create an interim solution has been very resource intensive. This process involved surveying USDA’s bureaus to identify how their systems are configured and using that information to modify the financial system. HHS has also developed an interim reporting solution that can generate the required files without depending on a patch. officials said this interim solution is complex and their processes cannot be fully automated until the Oracle patch is released. Since these processes are not fully automated, they carry a risk of errors being introduced though human error. Agencies that are developing interim solutions will only have until May 2017 to test the data before the reporting deadline. An OMB document commended these agencies for developing robust contingency plans since this will better position them for timely implementation. Long-term reporting solutions are still needed. As required by the DATA Act, OMB is conducting a pilot. ability to comply with the May 2017 reporting deadline could be affected. Some agencies also reported concerns about the requirement for SAOs to certify the data reported quarterly. For example, one agency reported that if guidance clarifying certification procedures is delayed, it may not have time to implement appropriate validation steps needed to give assurance over the data. Because of the lack of timely and consistent guidance, agencies may need to continuously update or change their processes, which could adversely affect their ability to meet the DATA Act requirements. in their implementation plan updates indicates that some agencies are at increased risk of not meeting the May 2017 reporting deadline. In addition, inspectors general for some agencies, such as the Departments of Labor and Housing and Urban Development, have issued readiness review reports. As discussed further below, the technical software requirements for agency reporting are still evolving, so any changes to the technical requirements over the next few months could also affect agencies’ abilities to meet the reporting deadline, as well as the April 2017 deadline. with existing controls for ensuring the data quality. However, our prior work has shown that relying on these quality assurance processes is not sufficient to address the accuracy and completeness challenges that we have previously identified. Offices of Inspector General, which are required to assess the completeness, timeliness, quality, and accuracy of data submitted under the act, have expressed concerns about agencies' abilities to provide assurances of the quality of their data. The inspectors general are particularly concerned about their agencies’ ability to provide quality assurances for data that are not directly provided. warnings rather than fatal errors would provide agency officials with the flexibility to correct issues flagged by the broker. For example, for some of the programs, grants award-level information may not be reported for security reasons. In addition to assisting agencies in collecting and validating agency- generated data, the broker also extracts award and sub-award information from existing government-wide award reporting systems. This function was added during software development efforts in late 2012. The broker also helps ensure these files are in the standard format. The lack of properly integrated systems increases the risk that agencies may have difficulty compiling and validating the information they are required to report under the DATA Act. Fourteen of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported challenges related to staffing issues or funding constraints. The lack of sufficient resources, including staff expertise and proper funding, increases the chance that agencies will have difficulty taking all the actions needed in a timely manner to fully implement the requirements of the Data Act. The data quality and their ability to report all the required data elements in their initial DATA Act submissions are also concerns. Nineteen of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported challenges related to systems integration. These include concerns with systems limitations, modernization efforts, and timing. One agency reported that validation presents challenges because its financial systems are not properly integrated with procurement and grant systems. Similarly, several of its components are undergoing grant, procurement, or financial system improvements that coincide with implementing the DATA Act. If the improvements are delayed, they could pose a risk to timely DATA Act implementation if they are not completed in time. 19 of the 24 CFO Act agencies continue to face challenges in their efforts to implement the DATA Act. OMB identified four overarching categories of challenges reported by agencies that may impede their ability to effectively and efficiently implement the Data Act. These include systems integration issues, lack of resources, evolving and complex reporting requirements, and inadequate guidance. See appendix III for more details about the information that OMB required C FO Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates and remaining actions to implement Playbook 2.0. to agency data submissions, and 13 CFO Act agencies did not include information about testing linkages of program and financial data. Without such information in agencies’ updates, it may be more difficult for OMB and Treasury to determine where to target their monitoring and assistance efforts. A lack of complete and accurate agency data increases the risk that agencies may not be able to meet the DATA Act reporting requirements within the mandated timeframes. Eleven of the 24 C FO Act agencies reported ongoing challenges related to the timely issuance of, and ongoing changes to, OMB policy and Treasury guidance. Total estimated costs for full DATA Act implementation ranged from approximately $1.0 million to $59.1 million, for a total of about $202.4 million. This total estimated cost reported by CFO Act agencies to implement the DATA Act includes costs for systems integration and modernization. One agency reported future estimated costs, but did not report costs to date. Two agencies did not provide any cost estimates. It is important to note that the estimated total costs reported by the 22 agencies for implementing the Data Act are not final. of the updates included most of the OMB required information. Some of the CFO Act agencies did not include information about some of the remaining actions to implement the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0. For example, 5 of the 24 CFO. Act agencies didn't include information. about testing for completeness and accuracy of data elements submitted to Treasury. 11 C FO Act agencies don't include. information about workflows for addressing validation errors and revisions needed. For. example, 11 CFO act agencies don’t include information on workflows. for addressingvalidation errors and revise needed. a minimum, that data reported are based on appropriate internal controls and risk management strategies identified in OMB Circular A-123. Five CFO Act agencies reported challenges in each of the five categories of challenges reported by 19 of the 24 agencies in their implementation plan updates. OMB required agencies to include information on remaining actions the agencies should take to implement suggested steps 5 through 8 in Playbook 2.0, and the number of agencies that included the information in their updates. Five agencies reported problems in each category of challenges. May 2015 request. Each agency was to (1) update its timeline and milestones and explain the agency’s progress to date and the remaining actions it would take to implement the act. As of October 2016, only 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had completed all steps 1 through 4. For example, there were four agencies reporting they had not completed their inventory of data and identified the gaps in systems and processes for data elements (step 3). DATA Act Implementation Playbook (Version 1.0) indicated that agencies would be working on steps 5 through 8 throughout fiscal years 2016 and 2017. expanded guidance on actions to be included in steps 5 through 8. Playbook 2.0 did not include expected timeframes for agencies to complete each step. Instead, it referred agencies to Treasury’s implementation roadmap, which includes high level milestones for Treasury's technical deliverables. Step 5: Prepare Data for Submission to the Broker. This step involves reviewing the schema version 1.0, extracting data from source systems, mapping agency data to the schema and submitting it to the broker. August 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB established procedures for reviewing and using agency implementation plan updates that include procedures for identifying ongoing challenges. OMB will also be monitoring progress toward the statutory deadline and setting up meetings with any of the 24 CFO Act agencies that OMB identifies as being at risk of not meeting the implementation deadline. To help address their challenges, 16 of the24 CFO. Act agencies have reached out to OMB to help address the challenges they are experiencing. analyzed the agency-reported challenges and mitigating strategies and categorized them. We compared the categories of challenges reported by the CFO Act agencies in their implementation plan updates to the challenges that had been reported in their initial implementation plans in 2015. We interviewed cognizant OMB and Treasury officials and obtained any supporting documentation to further understand the implementation challenges. We also met with O MBM and Treasury to obtain the supporting documentation and processes and controls for reviewing the updated implementation information and monitoring agencies’ progress. Act agencies reported that they use certain mitigating strategies in their implementation plan updates. The most commonly reported categories of mitigating strategies were changing internal policies and procedures and leveraging existing resources. These strategies, as a whole, were similar to the mitigating strategies reported by agencies in their initial implementation plans, the report says. The report says these strategies include using external resources, continuing communications, employing manual and temporary workarounds, monitoring and developing guidance, and enhancing existing systems. It says the strategies are similar to those used in initial plans. Act agencies did not identify any challenges in their implementation plan updates. Table 5 describes the mitigating strategies reported by 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies. The number of agencies reporting mitigating strategies in each category is listed in Table 5. The agency contacts included: Peter Del Toro, Michael LaForge, Kathleen Drennan, Diane Morris, Shirley Hwang, Aaron Colsher, Katherine Morris, Sophia Tan, Thomas Hackney, Charles Jones, Laura Pacheco, Maria Belaval. response, engaged a contractor to interview key stakeholders and develop a set of potential next steps. The Data Standards Committee held its inaugural meeting on September 15, 2016, and will meet on a monthly basis. The committee has also drafted a charter that will delineate the scope of the committee’s work, as well as a proposal for a new Office of Management and Budget (OMB) budget. The first of these steps was to establish a new Data Standards committee that will be responsible for maintaining established standards and developing new data elements. well as the composition and responsibilities of its members. Members include representatives from a range of federal communities including the grants, procurement, financial management and human resources communities. OMB staff told us that the committee will focus on clarifying existing data standard definitions, including the definition of predominant place of performance, and identifying new standards that may be needed going forward. In October 2016, according to O MB staff, the charter was under review by the DATA Act, and the committee's composition was being considered. In June 2016, OMB directed the 24 CFO Act agencies to update their initial DATA Act implementation plans that they submitted in response to OMB’s structure. The absence of a robust and institutionalized data governance structure presents additional potential risks regarding the integrity of data standards over time. In the event that priorities shift with the incoming administration or momentum is lost, delays and missed deadlines can occur. Such transitions may disrupt the momentum for meeting implementation timeframes or cause the government to fail to continue to build on previous accomplishments. key practices. For example, processes have not been developed to both approve new standards and ensure that already established standards are consistently applied and enforced across the federal government. The transition to a new administration presents one such situation. We have previously reported that, given the importance of continuity when implementing complex, government-wide initiatives, the potential for gaps in leadership that can occur as administrations change can impact the effectiveness and efficiency of such efforts. One reason why having a robust, institutionalized data governance structure is important is to provide consistent data management during times of change and transition. To identify key practices for data governance we reviewed our past reports to identify applicable laws, regulations, and guidance. We selected a range of organizations, including domestic and international standards-setting organizations, industry groups or associations, and federal agencies. All of the organizations we identified endorse establishing and using a governance structure to oversee how data standards, digital content, and other data assets are developed, managed and implemented. We drew on work from the following organizations to help us identify data governance key practices across several domains. In July 2015, we reported that OMB and Treasury had not yet established a formal framework for providing data governance. Such a framework is key for ensuring that the integrity of data standards is maintained over time. A common set of key practices endorsed by standards setting organizations recommend that data governance structures should include the key practices shown in the text box below. We have shared these key practices with O MB and Treasury. OMB has made progress but still need to fully address the recommendations we have made in our previous reports. Community Service received comments from OMB, Treasury, CNCS, HHS, and GSA. USDA had no comments. OMB provided an overview of their implementation efforts since the passage of the DATA Act. These efforts include issuing three memoranda providing implementation guidance to federal agencies and finalizing 57 data standards for use on USASpending.gov. The data standards committee also established the Data Standards Committee to establish standards for the use of data on the federal government’s website. factors, we chose the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) Although the information obtained from these three agencies is not generalizable to all agencies, they illustrate a range of conditions under which agencies are implementing the act. These are the same three agencies we selected for our January 2016 and August 2016 reports. This allowed us to assess progress in DATA Act implementation at these agencies since our last review. Signed into law on May 9, 2014, the DATA Act expanded on previous federal transparency legislation. The act requires government- wide reporting on a greater variety of federal funds. It also calls for the federal government to set government-wide data standards, identify ways to reduce reporting burdens for grantees and contractors (Section 5 Pilot) and regularly review data quality to help improve the data quality. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on May 8, 2014. It will take effect on July 1, 2015. This review is part of an ongoing effort to provide interim reports on the progress being made in implementing the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of our report. This report examines: (1) steps taken to establish a clear data governance; and (2) the progress made in meeting the reporting requirements for us mandated by the act. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. iterative approach enabled agencies and other key stakeholders to provide feedback and contribute to improving the technical guidance and the public website. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation of National and Community Service; the Administrator of the General Services Administration; as well as interested congressional committees and other interested parties. This report will be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. major contributions to this report. Additional members of GAO’s DATA Act Internal Working Group also contributed to the development of the report. The report was compiled by the GAO and the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Inspector General for the Office of Management and Budget. For more information, go to GAO.gov and the Office for the Inspector general for the Health Care Professionals, or go to http://www.gao.gov/. For more on the Data Act, click here. 11 of the 24 CFO Act agencies highlighted challenges related to the guidance provided by OMB and Treasury in their implementation plan updates. One of the commonly cited challenges concerned complications arising due to the iterative nature or late release of the guidance. For example, one agency reported that developing its implementation plan was highly dependent upon the concurrent development of the schema version 1.0 and technical guidance being developed by Treasury. This agency stated that any delays or changes to these components will significantly affect its solution design, development and testing schedule, and cost estimate. Treasury released the schema version 1.0 on April 29, 2016. It is intended to standardize the way financial assistance awards, contracts, and other financial data will be collected and reported under the DATA Act. Under the act, agencies must report data in compliance with established standards by May 2017. OMB and Treasury have directed agencies to begin submitting data by the beginning of the second quarter of fiscal year 2017 (January 2017) with the goal of reporting by the end of the year. reviewed over 200 comments on the draft guidance. The final guidance, OMB M-17-04, was issued on November 4, 2016. OMB has made some progress with these efforts, but other data definitions lack clarity. These challenges, as well as the challenges identified by agencies, underscore the need for OMB and Treasury to fully address our prior recommendation to provide agencies with additional guidance to address potential clarity issues, the authors say. The newly established Data Standards Committee will be working with OMB to address these issues. develop and maintain standards for federal spending; and developing and executing the Section 5 pilot. OMB and Treasury met with each of the 24 CFO Act agencies to discuss their implementation timelines, risks, and mitigation strategies, and took steps to address issues that could affect successful implementation. Through these meetings, OMB staff learned that 19 of the 22 agencies expect that they will fully meet the May 2017 deadline for DATA Act implementation. In their written response, Treasury provided an overview of the steps to be taken. transparency and accountability of federal spending data. OMB and Treasury have taken significant steps toward implementing the act’s various requirements. We have previously reported on these efforts and others and have identified a number of ongoing challenges that will need to be addressed in order to successfully meet the act's requirements. In May 2015, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directed federal agencies to submit Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014 (DATA Act) implementation plans. In June 2016, OMB directed Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) to develop recommendations to reduce recipient reporting burden. timely feedback and have made a number of recommendations that, if addressed, could help ensure the full and effective implementation of the act. OMB and Treasury have made progress implementing 5 of our recommendations related to DATA Act implementation. However, additional effort is needed to address 11 previous GAO recommendations that remain open. See appendix II for a list of our previous recommendations relating to the DATA Act and their implementation status. O MB and Treasury are developing a governance structure, but more work will be needed to ensure that this structure is consistent with key practices for developing and maintaining the Act. Treasury says it is using an iterative approach to provide incremental technical guidance to agencies. According to Treasury, among other things, this includes the DATA Act Implementation Playbook, version 2.0, and the Data Act Information Model Schema version 1.0. The Treasury response also noted that as a result of the aggressive implementation timelines specified in the act and the complexity associated with linking hundreds of disconnected data elements across the federal government, they made the decision to use an iteration approach to help agencies. In January 2016 we reported that ensuring that data definitions are generally consistent with leading practices is important. We also reported that although the standardized data element definitions issued by OMB largely adhered to leading practices for establishing data definitions, several definitions had limitations that could lead to inconsistent reporting. In May 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB released additional guidance on reporting financial and award information required under the act. See table 5 in appendix III for descriptions of the categories of mitigating strategies and the number of CFO Act agencies that report using strategies from each category. OMB and Treasury officials intended to assess agency implementation status. Among other challenges, agencies indicated the need for additional guidance on reporting intergovernmental transfers, providing assurances over their data. OMB staff told us that they received feedback from 30 different agencies and information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendations related to agency implementation plans. For example, officials from USDA, one of our case example agencies, said they are waiting for guidance on insurance and indemnity reporting, but no guidance has been issued. by the agency, such as data submitted by non-federal entities who receive federal awards. OMB released draft guidance in August 2016 that specifies DATA Act reporting responsibilities when an intragovernmental transfer is involved. The guidance explains how to report financial assistance awards with personally identifiable information (PII) and clarifies the SAO assurance process over the data submitted to the broker. It was drafted in response to questions and concerns reported by agencies in their implementation plan updates, as well in meetings with senior OMB staff. the broker and the feedback produced by the system regarding data verification. We interviewed knowledgeable officials from OMB, Treasury, and selected federal agencies and inspectors general. We also interviewed enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors assisting federal agencies with technical implementation. Based on these selection, we selected three agencies based on whether they were in compliance with existing federal requirements for federal financial management systems, and the type of federal funding provided (such as grants, loans, or procurements), and their status as a federal shared service provider for financial management.