programmers, and support specialists], which generally possess higher educational requirements. Blinder also took an occupational approach and created an index of offshorability for hundreds of blue-collar, white-collar and service occupations. He considered the two categories, which included 22.2% of U.S. workers in 2004, too conservative an estimate of potentially offshorable jobs in light of technological and other advances expected to arise in the coming years. He added to the conservative estimate those occupations in category III he ranked as most susceptible to being offshored. Out of 515 service occupations, BLS estimated that 160 may be susceptible to transfer offshore. In 2007, there were some 30 million jobs in these offshorable service-providing occupations. Despite their vulnerability to being offshored, employment in these occupations grew slightly faster than overall service- Providing employment in the 2001-2007 period. The 33 service-Providing occupations found to be most susceptible to offshoring experienced below average employment and wage growth during the period, according to BLS. include whether the job requires face-to-face contact with others, is telecommutable or involves an IT-enabled work process. Computer and mathematical; architecture and engineering; legal; life, physical, and social sciences; business and financial operations; and office/administrative support. Jensen and Kletzer's most offshorable category accounted for 27.4% of all employment in services occupations in 2005. They also found that a service occupation's relative degree of offshorability was positively associated with its level of educational attainment. More offshorable occupations are not low-end jobs, whether measured by wages or by education. The correlation between skill and offshorability is almost zero. Blinder and Krueger used three alternative survey methods to try to determine how many of the jobs that workers held in 2008 were vulnerable to being moved overseas. All three methods found that about one in four U.S. jobs are potentially Offshorable. This is about the same as Blinder's moderate estimate based on an entirely different approach. 9.4% of total U.S. employment in 2000 was found to be in offshorable industries. Both manufacturing and professional services industries were estimated to have above-average percentages of vulnerability to offshoring. Over 12% of employment in the case of manufacturing, and almost 14% in theCase of professional services. They examined the task content of 457 service occupations to rank their relative vulnerability to being offshored. The measures of task content they used were used to rank the relative vulnerability of occupations. and a destination country having few language, institutional, and cultural barriers. The occupational groups identified as being vulnerable to offshoring include office support, auditors and tax preparers, computer programmers and software engineers. They are concentrated in such industries within the service sector as information, finance and insurance, and professional and business services. A study released by the Brookings Institution built upon the work of Bardhan and Kroll, Forrester Research, and others to develop projections of the share of jobs in 246 metropolitan areas that might be lost. Just 2.2% of the jobs in these 246 areas likely to be offshored between 2004 and 2015. Five metro areas might lose somewhat more jobs (between 3.1% and 4.3%) by 2015. Boulder, CO; Lowell, MA; San Francisco, CA; San Jose, CA. and Stamford, CT. Another 23 areas might have between 2.6% and 3.0% of their jobs offshoring. Those metropolitan areas estimated to be most vulnerable to services offsh outsourcing tend to be very populous. having 1 million or more inhabitants. They tend to be located in the Northeast (e.g., Bergen-Passaic, NJ; Boston, MA; and Hartford, CT) and West. They generally have high concentrations of IT jobs or IT-enabled back-office jobs such as data-entry keyers and telemarketers. Jensen and Kletzer developed a different geographically based approach to estimate the share of tradable and nontradable (nonoffshorable) jobs in manufacturing and manufacturing. the movement of work and that less than 1% of these workers had their jobs moved to another country. Forrester Research, Inc. was the source of perhaps the first and most commonly cited statistics on offshoring of service sector jobs. According to its forecast that appears to have been based on discussions with experts, a total of 3.4 million service-sector jobs might move abroad between 2003 and 2015. Half of the total (1.7 million) will be in the service sector. was projected to be relocated outside the United States within the first 7 years of the 12-year period, and half over the following 5 years. Although 3.4 million jobs may sound like a large number, Forrester's forecasted loss of some 300,000 jobs per year on average through 2015 represents a very small share of the jobs typically created and destroyed each year in the U.S. Researchers have mostly focused on determining which jobs are susceptible to being moved abroad and then moving them back. Factory workers have predominantly had less than 12 years of schooling or attained at most a high school diploma. Administrative support and professional workers much more often have taken some college courses or obtained at least a bachelor's degree. The change in the skill (educational) level of jobs being moved abroad has led some to wonder about the impact on the U.S.economy. Still others note that the movement of services jobs to other countries may have different implications for the labor market and public policy. English is the language of the computer industry worldwide. With English, IT services can be provided from many non-English-speaking, comparatively low-wage nations. In some cases, the number of persons with IT and accounting skills reportedly exceeded the immediate needs of their local economies. The number of programmers in China, Eastern Europe, India, and the Philippines is estimated to be in the hundreds of thousands. The domestic firms that utilized these programmers reportedly were pleased with the quality of their work. They were able to make the code fixes needed to avert problems with computer systems when the year 2000 arrived. Recent decades. Technological change and deunionization appear to have accounted for relatively more of the so-called polarization of wages that occurred during the 1980s and 1990s. No database exists that provides a comprehensive answer to the question of how many workers have lost their jobs to offshoring. The only data available on jobs lost to the out-of-country relocation of work come from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS's) series on extended mass layoffs. Short- and long-run labor market implications of offshore outsourcing remain unclear. Some observers claimed that the business practice explained much of the "jobless recovery" from the 2001 recession. Some within the public policy community have again asserted that offshoring is contributing to the slow rebound of the labor market from the 2007-2009 recession. While acknowledging that trade and other forms of globalization can cause painful dislocations for those workers who must adjust to changes in the nation's employment structure, many economists agree that it can be beneficial. whether the offshoring of service, unlike production, activities will result in a dwindling supply of entry-level jobs. They also question whether the existing trade adjustment assistance programs can satisfactorily meet the needs of comparatively well-educated office workers. Congress historically has tried to promote U.S. job growth and assist workers who lose jobs through no fault of their own, whether job losses are caused by economic downturns (i.e., cyclical unemployment) or by shifts in the composition of jobs. The extension of offshoring from U.S. manufacturers to service providers has heightened public policy concerns about the extent of job loss and foregone employment opportunities. The overseas relocation of manufacturing work predates by decades the recent wave of services Offshoring. The report synthesizes the information (both empirical and anecdotal) released since the early 2000s on offshore outsourcing's impact on U.s. employment to help policymakers evaluate the adequacy of the nation's retraining and income support programs for workers displaced by greater global economic integration. More than 14 million jobs in 49 service occupations have attributes that could allow them to be sent overseas. No in-person customer servicing required; an IT-enabled work process that can be accomplished via telecommuting. A fairly wide gap between a job's pay in the United States compared to in a destination country; a comprehensive regularly collected data series does not exist on the number of U.S. workers who have lost their jobs to offshore outsourcing. This approach may overstate the. number of jobs that have been or will be lost to offshoring because it does not. consider other factors that may affect employers' decisions. Deloitte Consulting concluded that outsourcing will lose "holy grail" status. In the future, companies will not outsource because it is the latest management fad. Organizations will carefully define core, strategic, and "thought-leadership" functions and will keep those inhouse to retain knowledge, confidentiality, and control over key functions. Some organizations will decide to outsource only short-term. Some, therefore, are cautious about the future pace of moving abroad potentially vulnerable U.S. jobs. benefits the nation as a whole by enabling firms to sell a greater variety of higher quality products to U.S. consumers at lower prices. Some question whether this scenario applies to services offshoring, however. Milberg et al. suggest that companies engaged in Offshoring of service activities may be its chief beneficiaries. They use the profits gained from lower input costs to increase dividends to shareholders, raise stock prices through buybacks, and undertake more mergers and acquisitions rather than reinvesting and promoting growth in the United States. performed in the United States (i.e., structural unemployment) The notion that offshoring depresses job growth in the U.S. appears to underlie support among some policymakers for measures. Some members of the public policy community also support the adoption by other countries of trade and labor policies intended to level the playing field. Still others advocate for limited government intervention as the best means of promoting economic growth. This report does not attempt to sort through all the conflicting views on this issue. Low-wage nations (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Jordan, Lithuania, Mexico, Slovenia, Russia, and Ukraine) Taken together, these developments have allowed U.S.-based companies to increasingly fragment tasks across borders in both manufacturing and information and business services. Relatedly, research suggests that the extension of task fragmentation to service activities accounts for the greater relative contribution of offshoring to increased wage dispersion (inequality) in the United States. Software companies are placing more of their clients' work in a variety of countries, including the "near-shore" markets of Canada and Mexico. Some individual U.S. employers reportedly believe that moving work to nearby Canada, which has fewer cultural differences with the United States than India or the Philippines, reduces their customers' potential antipathy to offshoring. And, despite the cost of labor rising in some Asian nations (e.g., India), there are many others whose low wages continue to draw U.N. jobs. The 2001 recession prompted U.S. employers to achieve further efficiencies by taking advantage of technological innovations. The persistence of these changes over time indicates that domestic outsourcing of formerly in-house functions is a permanent reorganization of how work is performed in the United States. The now widespread dissemination of technologies that enable relatively low cost, good quality, and high speed transmission of voice and data communications has allowed U.s. firms to extend offshoring beyond the jobs of workers that produce goods. Many organizations will also engage in large scale re-insourcing thereby further eroding the outsourcing market. Dell, for example, returned some help services to the United States due to customer dissatisfaction. Some have credited "reshoring" for part of the sector's employment rebound since the 2007-2009 recession's end. Other companies have begun returning call center operations and legal support work to the U.S., specifically to firms located in rural low-cost areas. The outsourcing market is expected to continue to grow. responding to heightened competition from Japanese and European multinational corporations, opened facilities abroad during the 1970s and 1980s. U.S. companies reacted to the back-to-back recessions of the early 1980s by focusing on their core missions and contracting out activities that specialized domestic enterprises could perform more efficiently. Firms also restructured their operations by outsourcing jobs to employees of temporary help agencies, professional and business services establishments (e.g., accounting firms), and independent contractors located located in the United States. provide services (e.g., writers of software code, processors of credit-card receipts, interpreters of CT scans of U.S. hospital patients) Jobs at risk of being offshored thus are both those held by information technology (IT) workers and IT-enabled workers. Events also transpired in other countries that enhanced their ability to export services to the United States and other developed countries. One such event was addressing the so-called Y2K crisis: U.K. firms, in response to a tight supply of computer programmers, turned to companies principally located in India. Despite 9/11, U.S. airline carriers have continued their outsourcing of maintenance jobs overseas. Concern periodically has arisen among U.s. outsourcers over unrest in some regions (e.g., disputes between India and Pakistan) The outsourcing of airline maintenance jobs has increased in places like Singapore, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, and the Philippines, says the report. The report concludes that offshoring in the United States has increased over the past 10 years, but not as much as it did in the early 2000s. Perry: About one-fifth of U.S. companies brought production back from overseas in 2011. He attributed what he regards as a nascent trend to "China's shrinking manufacturing wage and cost advantages" Caterpillar, National Cash Register, Wham-O, Otis Elevator, and Buck Knives are examples of those that have returned production and jobs to the United States, he says. He provides more than 10 companies as examples of Those that have Returned Production and Jobs to The United States.