its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretaries of Homeland Security, Agriculture, Army, and Defense and interested Congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me on (202) 512-9142. for the quarter does not exceed $10,000. No payment is required for imported cargo that is entitled to be entered under informal entry procedures. Jessica Nierenberg, Kathleen Padulchick, and Amy Rosewarne made key contributions to all aspects of the report. Jay Cherlow, Chelsa Gurkin, Terrance N. Horner, Alessandra Rivera, and Jack Warner also provided assistance. In addition, Pedro Briones and Carlos Diz provided legal support and Donna Miller developed the report’s graphics. outside of GAO, with CBP and Corps officials, and with outside stakeholders, in order to choose ports. We also considered travel costs in selecting the site visits. In light of the significant amount of ongoing audit work in the Gulf region, and because other ports in our selection are representative, we also considered other sites in the region as well. We chose ports that varied in their type and volume of trade and commerce (including cruise lines, container ships, petroleum products, and liquefied natural gas) The ports we selected include medium and large ports, natural deepwater ports, and those that require frequent dredging. We visited the ports of Boston, Massachusetts; Charleston, South Carolina; Newark, New Jersey/New York, New York; Baltimore, Maryland; Miami, Florida; Port Everglades, Florida. At these ports, we observed passenger, vessel, and cargo inspections, and interviewed officials from CBP and Corps field offices. At each port, we spoke with each port official. Some Corps and CBP officials have established successful, two-way communication practices at the local level. For example, some Corps division offices publicly post survey results and maps showing the controlling depth reports for local harbors and channels. One local Corps official said this practice encourages more dialogue with stakeholders, noting that they will e-mail the office to find out when highlighted areas will be dredged. Several of the CBP field offices hold regular meetings with port stakeholders to share information and address stakeholder concerns. found that the authorized depth was available in the middle of the channel only approximately 35 percent of the time in fiscal year 2005. Although ships continue to use these channels and harbors, not maintaining them to their justified design dimensions can cause problems. For example, according to Corps officials in one port we visited, some vessels are delayed because they have to wait for high tide in order to pass through the channels. They also reported instances where ships skipped a port of call altogether if such a delay was reported. The authorized depth of the Port of Georgetown is 27 feet, but the channel has silted in to 25 feet on numerous occasions over the past several years. With the channel at only 25 feet, a company bringing in rock for the regional construction industry can only bring in about 24,000 tons per vessel. They said that this “light-loading” of vessels significantly drives up its operating cost and impacts construction costs. The 2007 CMTS report found that channel at 27 feet was safe. would have caused the ship to miss its scheduled appointment at the Panama Canal. These types of disruptions affect both regional commerce and port profits. A 2007 report by the U.S. Committee on the Marine Transportation System (CMTS) found that vessels often deal with the challenges of poorly dredged and maintained channels and harbors by “light loading,” i.e., loading less cargo than their full capacity. This in turn increases shipping costs. If a port is not well maintained, it may lack the capacity to handle increasingly larger vessels and therefore lose business. limitations may lead to unsafe conditions and interaction with other vessels. A full oil tanker ran aground in East Rockaway, New York, in 2006 due in part to a lack of maintenance. Corps officials said the Corps now uses a performance-based budgeting model to set harbor maintenance priorities. As part of this effort, the Corps is developing a national estimate of the cost to make the 59 busiest channels available to commercial vessels and other vessels in the U.S., officials said. The cost of making the channels available is expected to be in the region of $1 billion. Ineffective and outdated collection methods for vessel inspection fees increase administrative costs for both agencies and payers. Lack of coordination between the Corps and CBP inhibits oversight of HMF payments for passenger vessels, domestic shipments, and shipments into foreign trade zones. CBP accepts electronic payment for these fees along with customs duties, which are typically paid by a customs broker on behalf of an importer. Treasury’s Financial Management Service has made it a priority to increase the use of electronic collection methods. Customs brokers say the system works well, is efficient, and imposes minimal administrative costs. It is less costly for the government and payers of the fee for CBP to collect the fee as part of the formal entry process than it would be for the Corps or another entity to establish a new collections process. CBP already values cargo for the assessment of duties, so there is no duplication of effort. Further, when CBP conducts audits on the value of cargo to determine if the declared value of the goods is. itself to delayed remittance and potential errors that can result in revenue losses. The extent and nature of the link between HMF collections and expenditures are policy choices only Congress can make. Unless agencies present a comprehensive picture of the customs, immigration, and AQI fees, including the full scope of inspection activities and their costs, Congress will continue to lack a complete picture of whether the fees work in concert or conflict with each other, could hamper oversight. Furthermore, agencies will be less able to develop and maintain the partnerships necessary to collect and distribute the fees. Officials say they are taking steps to begin collecting interest on past and future late payments. They estimate interest collections for last year to be about $182,000; they do not yet have an estimate for annual penalties. CBP’s Regulatory Audits division has not conducted any audits specific to the HMF since 1996; rather, the fee is audited incidentally during the course of audits related to other fees or duties. Although the fee has not been audited since 1996, it has been in existence for more than 20 years. that monthly payments would increase the administrative costs to the cruise lines, but that if a steadier supply of funding helped CBP to provide better service, it would be worthwhile. Insufficient coordination between CBP and the Corps inhibits CBP’s ability to ensure that certain HMF payments are properly made. Without this information CBP cannot verify compliance with the fee. According to Corps officials, the Corps gathers information on domestic vessel movements. CBP could provide this information to the Corps. does not systematically review late or improper HMF payments for passenger vessels, domestic shippers, and shipments into foreign trade zones. CBP reviewed recent payment history and found that 42 percent of payments—representing approximately 18 percent of the total dollar value—were late. According to CBP officials said that CBP should be tracking and assessing interest and penalties on these late payments. The CBP’s Revenue Division does not track whether theseHMF payments are paid on time or late. correct, CBP also determines if the correct amount was paid for HMF and MPF. Because these are ad valorem fees, if the value of the goods is understated, additional HMF or MPF fees may be due. All of the fees we reviewed suffer from some misalignment, which affects how the fees are used. Similar to the airline passenger inspection fees, not all authorized, reimbursable activities for the sea passenger and vessel inspection customs fees are associated with these fees. CBP does not request and the Corps does not share information with CBP on these types of domestic freight movements. An official from CBP’s Revenue Division said if CBP had information on freight movements it could reconcile them to HMF payments. The Revenue Division receives this type of “front-end reporting” for other, similar fees, the official said. It is one of the best ways to establish a receivable and ensure proper payment, he said. The official said CBP could monitor compliance rather than relying on self-reported payer information. date, the commercial vessel fees may still only be paid in person by check or cash. Payers must retain each paper payment receipt and present them at each entry so that CBP can determine whether that particular vessel has reached the annual fee cap. If a payer misplaces the receipt proving that the vessel has reach the fee cap, the fee must be paid. The payer may request a refund if the receipt is later found, although several stakeholders told us this process is lengthy and burdensome. Some stakeholders and CBP field office staff expressed frustration. that although the ad valorem structure of the HMF makes it relatively easy to administer, it raises concerns about equity. They noted there is no link between the value of their cargo and the depth or width of the harbor needed by the ship on which it is carried. For example, importers of high-value goods, such as natural gas and pharmaceuticals, told us they essentially pay a much greater share of dredging costs. Stakeholders said that a ship’s size and draft combined with harbor conditions drive harbor maintenance costs. Some stakeholders say the HMF fee structure does not reflect the individual dredging needs of ports. Other stakeholders noted that a benefit of the ad valorem structure is that it may better reflect the users’ ability to pay. The overall cost of moving goods through the nation’s marine transportation system is artificially high. On the other hand, applying the fee equally could reduce the cost of shipping goods through U.S. ports by as much as 50 percent, according to some estimates. to all eligible ports offers a relatively simple collection mechanism and helps to create a level playing field for all ports. Even so, officials from ports located near international borders told us the HMF disadvantages them relative to nearby foreign ports. For example, Seattle Port Authority officials consider theHMF to be a “punitive assessment” because they said it decreases Seattle’s competitiveness against Canadian ports (which do not charge the fee). These officials said that the Port of Vancouver actively promotes itself as not charging the HMf. Whether the fee is based on the value of the cargo (ad valorem) or on the size and draft of the ship is a separate decision from whether fees should vary by the dredging needs and condition of a given port. Congress could decide to impose a uniform fee structure at all ports even if it chooses to change the design of that fee from ad valorem to one based on a ship’s size or draft. Stakeholders expect that inspections will be conducted at all U.S. ports. Total collections grew 101 percent from $704 million to $1.416 billion from 2001 to 2007. Corps officials told us this was driven by the ad valorem nature of the fee. Annual harbor maintenance project expenditures, which are subject to annual appropriation, grew by more than 20 percent from 2001-2007. In 2001 HMF collections exceeded expenditures by about $44 million, and by 2007 that gap had grown to over $506 million (see fig. 4). There are several reasons why growth in collections has outpaced growth in expenditures. more slowly—from $660 million in 2001 to $910 million in 2007 (38 percent) The difference between the amount collected and the amount expended has led to a growing balance in the HMTF. Since 1996, the President has included in his annual budget requests and Congress has appropriated $3 million from the HM TF. Between fiscal years 2001 and 2007, the balance grew from $1.8 billion to $3.7 billion. Corps officials told us they expect it to reach $8 billion in fiscal year 2011 (see fig. 5). Since 2003, HMF collections have significantly exceeded funds appropriated for harbor maintenance. This may be inconsistent with users’ expectations of the fee’s purpose. Congress should consider reviewing the link between the amount of the HMF and the amounts of expenditures for the harbor maintenance program. Such a framework could also provide the basis for future reviews of federal user fees as Congress works to ensure that user fee financing mechanisms remain relevant and up-to-date. It could help clarify and illuminate the tradeoffs associated with various policy choices available to Congress. to compensate CBP for costs associated with collecting the fee. CBP finance officials told us that they estimate the annual cost of collecting the HMF to be approximately $2 million. Officials at the Corps and CBP were unable to explain why the President’s budget request for this activity was higher than the estimated cost. The HMF is not assessed on domestic cargo valued at less than $1,000. quarterly payment is not required if the total value of all shipments for which a fee was assessed. Corps’ annual report to Congress on the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. Annual budget request for CBP-related salaries and expenses equal to, rather than in excess of, CBP’s actual costs associated with collecting the HMF. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Defense, and to the Acting Secretary of Agriculture for review. We received written comments from the Department of. Homeland Security (DHS), which are reprinted in appendix III, and oral comments from. Agriculture (USDA) and Defense (DOD). In addition, each agency provided technical comments, which we incorporated as offsetting changes elsewhere—will increase the federal deficit. Despite large and growing balances in the harbor maintenance trust fund, there is a backlog of harbor maintenance, which can result in costly delays. A recent Corps analysis of the 59 busiest commercial federal channels in the U.S. found that harbor maintenance was lacking in many of the busiest channels. decisions about changing the HMF should consider its continued relevance and relative priority within the context of reexamining the base of all major federal spending and tax programs. Fee, and Agricultural Quarantine Inspection (AQI) User Fees. In selecting the fees, we reviewed relevant policy and economic literature, interviewed user fee experts, and examined Office of Management and Budget data on user charges. We chose these fees because they are levied upon port users, and are related to maritime, safety, and homeland security programs. Additionally, we chose them because they vary in their key design characteristics, specifically in the way in which they are set, collected, used, and reviewed. implementation characteristics. We interviewed officials responsible for managing the selected user fees. To select the ports that we visited, we consulted with port security experts from within and outside of the U.S. We also spoke with officials from the Army Corps of Engineers and the Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) We also interviewed officials from Customs and Border Protection (CBP) offices in Washington, D.C. to get a sense of how the fees are managed. GAO examined the Harbor Maintenance Fee (HMF), Merchandise Processing Fee (MPF), Customs Inspection Fees, Immigration User Fees. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. Last page of this report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Congress does not have a comprehensive view of the vessel and passenger AQI, customs, and immigration inspection fees and how they work together, says GAO. GAO: Agencies with shared responsibilities for common outcomes or related functions should reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through common planning and reporting. DHS has acknowledged that the challenges described in our previous work extend beyond air passenger inspections to other fees managed by the agency, the GAO says. The GAO reviewed collections and cost data for each of the fees, data on balances in fee statutes required the establishment of advisory committees consisting of industry representatives to advise the agency on issues related to inspection services, including fee levels. The committee members represent entities subject to the fees, including airlines, airports, cruise lines, and industry associations. We recently reported that stakeholders felt that the advisory committee provided only limited opportunities for substantive two-way communication. As a result, they said they lack data to support their concerns. We are happy to clarify that the committee meets biannually and that the fees are subject to change. user fees supporting the sea passenger and vessel inspections processes. Further, we recommend that the Secretaries of Homeland Security and the Army direct CBP and the Corps to improve oversight of the HMF collections by working together to develop a method for the corps to provide information on domestic vessel movements to CBP. Information on CBP’s costs to collect and administer theHMF, for inclusion in the CBP Office of Regulatory Audit, should be considered in the context of CBP's risk-based system for selecting audit candidates. exceed funds appropriated for harbor maintenance, resulting in a large and growing surplus in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund (HMTF) Corps officials and port stakeholders assert that many federally managed channels are undermaintained. The customs inspection activities and the authorized uses for the customs passenger and vessel fee collections are misaligned. For example, under the customs authorizing statute, passenger inspection fee collections only available to reimburse appropriations for a limited, prioritized set of activities. The U.S. Customs Service is responsible for the inspection and processing of passengers and cargo at ports around the world. Customs inspection-related activities that occur while a CBP officer is earning overtime or premium pay, or during preclearance, can be funded by the user fees. The same activities conducted during regular time cannot be funding by the fee. Not all customs inspection activities are reimbursable (i.e., can be covered by funds from the user fee account). Moreover, use of the customs vessel and sea passenger fee collections is not restricted to vessel. It is not limited to vessel collections. formal vehicle for payers of the HMF and other port stakeholders to provide input to the Corps. The HMF authorizing legislation did not establish an HMF advisory committee, though it did establish an advisory committee for a similar program that funds new work construction and rehabilitation on inland waterways. The purpose of this Inland Waterways Users Board is to make recommendations on priorities and spending for inland waterway construction and Rehabilitation projects. As we have previously reported, both the customs and immigration passenger inspection programs are under review. advisory committee on the HMF and the activities that it funds, that includes payers of the fee. Develop a legislative proposal, in consultation with Congress, to harmonize the customs, immigration, and agricultural quarantine inspections fees. Raise the cap on customs inspection fees for commercial vessels, in line with the 2007 increase in this fee, so that the cap once again corresponds to a whole number, rather than a single number. eliminate the differences in the way charges for overtime inspections are assessed to commercial vessel operators. CBP officials said that since the events of September 11, 2001, the focus of merchandise processing has shifted toward security and away from the original focus on trade compliance. They said that certain activities associated with merchandise processing and performed by CBP officers are not reimbursable MPF activities. Rather, they may be used to reimburse authorized inspection activities conducted at air, sea, or land ports of entry. Similar alignment issues exist with the MPF. According to CBP officials, certain activities. including screening and inspecting conveyances (including nonintrusive searches), processing seized narcotics, and inspecting vessels and containers. owner/operators, although they may be charged for overtime immigration inspections of vessel crew at some ports. Because regular business hours vary by port, the hours during which an inspector might be working overtime vary. The amount charged depends on the number and pay grade(s) of the officer(s), adding to unpredictability and increasing DHS’s costs to administer the fee. CBP officials said that although charges for overtime inspections make sense, a consistent set of overtime charges for customs, immigration, and agriculture inspections would offer predictability and reduce confusion. Cruise lines, importers, and ships’ agents all said that delays for passenger and vessel inspections are costly to industry. One agent said that a 1-hour delay can cost a carrier $15,000 in longshoreman labor costs. Crew changes cannot occur until a vessel has cleared its immigration inspection. During this time, the ship must pay expenses for two crews. Stakeholders told us that when multiple ships arrive at multiple ports, delays are more likely to occur. In some ports, cargo cannot be unloaded until a ship is cleared. the same time, ships have waited up to 4 hours before being cleared. CBP officials told us that these types of inspection delays are generally caused by staff shortages, outdated or crowded facilities, clustered arrivals, or some combination of these factors. Although the need to address some of the user fee challenges presented in this report may appear obvious, how to accomplish this is less clear. Where appropriate, changes made to one fee should be designed to complement rather than conflict with the other fees. The separate, The passenger and vessel inspection processes in both the air and sea environments have been largely consolidated within CBP. The legacy fees supporting these inspections are still governed by separate, dissimilar authorizing legislation. Unless remedied, differences such as the way overtime charges are assessed for commercial vessel inspections will persist, causing confusion and raising equity concerns, says APHIS. Unless CBP automates its collection methods, requires monthly remittance, and aligns fee rate increases with the annual fee caps, CBP will continue to incur unnecessary administrative costs. than a fraction of payments; revising the customs passenger and vessel inspection fees so that the inspection activities the fees are authorized to fund are more closely aligned with actual inspection activities; and requiring monthly, rather than quarterly, collection of the customs and immigration inspection sea and air passenger fees. Direct CBP to automate its systems for collecting commercial vessel fees to reduce the reliance on paper receipts for tracking payments and to support electronic payments rather than payment by check or cash. DirectCBP to include in its biennial report on the Merchandise Processing Fee information on total program. authorized activities for various fees, CBP must track the time spent on these activities. Because the inspection processes have been largely combined but the separate distinct fees supporting these activities are not uniform, correctly tracking which activities can be reimbursed by which fees can be difficult. In general, the three fees are not levied uniformly, and sometimes involve cross-subsidization (see table 2). For example, although air passengers are charged an AQI fee, sea passengers (generally cruise ship passengers) are not. now structured differently than the AQI vessel fee. According to CBP officials, the quarterly remittance schedule for the passenger inspection fees contributes to a several month delay between the use of appropriated funds and receipt of reimbursement from the immigration and AQI user fee accounts. To address this challenge, CBP told us it has developed a legislative proposal that would, in part, require monthly instead of quarterly remittances. A representative of a cruise line industry association we spoke with noted that the cruise industry has a long-standing relationship with the CBP. In fiscal year 2006, commercial vessel customs inspections fee collections covered about 66 percent of related program costs. DHS does not know the portion of total immigration inspection costs covered by immigration fee collections. Since the fees can pay for only some inspection activities and only under certain circumstances, ensuring proper use of fee collections can require detailed cost data. For example, to be reimbursed for time spent on. immigration inspection and pre-inspection services as well as certain other expenses, at least one of which is not directly related to immigration inspections. immigration inspection fees are structured to recover partial costs. The two statutes actually prescribe an exact amount in law to be charged for their respective inspection services. The customs statute further restricts cost recovery by limiting the set of activities for which collections may reimburse appropriations. The immigration statute makes immigration user fee collections available to refund any appropriation for expenses incurred in the course of an inspection. The fees are not equal or be reasonably related to the cost of services, but they are set to a certain amount. They are meant to limit cost recovery to a sum certain. The AQI vessel fee is paid at the same time as the customs vessel inspection fee. The AQI fee is capped at an amount equaling 15 payments per year. Because the customs fee was increased but the cap was not, the cap is now equal to approximately 13.6 payments. CBP officers must be aware when processing payments that the 14th payment will be for a different amount than the typical fee rate, and that the fee cap is not set in stone. The fee cap for the AQI fees is equal to an amount equal to 15 payments. cruise ships routinely exceed the cap because they arrive in the U.S. far more than 15 times each year. The costs of inspecting sea passengers, fee-exempt vessels, and vessels that have met the annual fee cap are spread among all payers of the AQI vessel fees. As a general rule, the costs of crew inspection are not charged to vessel owners or operators. The cost data that CBP provides to APHIS does not indicate what portion of the $35 million is associated with inspecting cruise ships that have exceeded the fee cap. passengers or vessels. In 2007, APHIS and CBP further improved the AQI cost estimates by agreeing on a common set of assumptions used to forecast the cost of AQI activities. The fee rates are now set to recover all program costs except for certain indirect and imputed costs, such as employee retirement benefits. We recognize that imputed Costs may be more directly linked to the fee-based program. But more transparency in this area could better inform users of the full cost of the program. AQI fees are maintained with a reserve of approximately 3 months worth of program costs in case of emergency. According to APHIS, the reserve is necessary because the AQI program is funded solely through user fee collections. As with similar situations, deciding whether and how to link HMF collections with expenditures is complicated. On the one hand, there are good reasons to consider maintaining a positive balance in the trust fund. But on the other, it can be difficult to determine how to balance the fund. recommendation if it is deemed cost beneficial. We appreciate that DHS recognizes the importance of using cost-effective methods to collect fees. We believe USDA should seek additional authority from Congress consistent with our recommendation. DOD provided oral comments, and concurred with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the report related to the Army Corps’ Harbor Maintenance Fee. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce it, we will not be able to comment on the report’s findings or conclusions. Of the six recommendations directed at DHS, DHS concurred with five of them and partially concurring with the sixth. DHS characterized the report as balanced and accurate and agreed with the overall substance and findings of the report. The agency will analyze the feasibility of this approach and work to identify and obtain funding to implement the approach, the report says. We also provided portions of theReport to nonfederal stakeholders for their review and made technical corrections as appropriate.appropriate. The report is available on the DHS website. Without regular, substantive fee reviews, agencies, stakeholders, and Congress lack complete information about changing program costs. For example, CBP and APHIS report separately on the customs, immigration, and AQI vessel fees. CBP’s review of the MPF does not detail program costs and project fee collections, or provide enough information to determine if the amount, structure, or authorized uses of the fee administers. Although CBP includes theMPF in its biennial user fee review, there is no timeline for completing that study. In 2006 we reported that financial management issues at CBP and APHIS adversely affect the AQI program’s ability to perform border inspections. In fiscal years 2003 through 2005, user fees were not sufficient to cover program costs. We recommend that the Secretaries of Agriculture and Homeland Security conduct joint reviews of the customs, immigration, and agricultural quarantine inspection fees. We also recommend that CBP include in AQI fees the indirect and imputed costs currently not considered when setting AQI fee rates. federal regulatory process to propose rate increases. Congress has delegated to APHIS the authority and responsibility to set and adjust AQI fee rates to match program costs over time. In contrast, both the immigration and customs fee rates are set in statute. These fees can only recoup authorized program costs to the extent that total reimbursable program costs do not exceed the rate caps prescribed in statute, according to the AQI statute. The Secretary invites comments on its proposals and implementing regulations via a public notice and comment in the Federal Register. Collections relative to total program costs, over time, as well as any recommendations for updating the amount and authorized uses of the fee. Assess interest and penalties on late HMF payments for domestic shipments, shipments into foreign trade zones, and sea passengers. Improve the transparency of the regulatory process of setting the AQI fee rates by providing clearer information about how the rates for each of thefee types are determined. In accordance with OMB Circular No. A-25 guidance and U.S. Department of Agriculture guidance. on motor fuels, tires, and heavy vehicles accrue to the Highway Trust Fund, from which Congress appropriates funds for the interstate highway system, mass transit, and transportation projects. Similarly, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations are funded in part by excise taxes assessed on airline tickets, aviation fuel, and certain cargo. Both the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-25 provide that agencies review their user fees biennially. in automatically from earmarked taxes or fees and spending must be appropriated. In the 1990s the Highway Trust Fund also built up a surplus. At the time, Congress and the President modified the discretionary spending caps to provide for a separate cap on highway funding. In 1998, Congress specified a more automatic link between spending from the highway Trust Fund and receipts into the Trust Fund. The experience with these annual adjustments, known as Revenue Aligned Budget Authority (RABA), highlights some problems with such links. as the adjustments were positive—when receipts came in below estimated levels and would have resulted in an automatic cut in highway program funding levels, the cut was overridden. A different mechanism is used for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prescription drug user fee. If actual FDA fee collections are higher than the amount appropriated, FDA must adjust fee rates in a subsequent year to reduce its anticipated fee collections by that amount. Even if there were a tighter link between collections and expenditures, the HMTF should not necessarily aim for a zero balance. Critics say giving the pharmaceutical industry a role in setting program performance goals creates conflicts of interest. Agencies also need to ensure that all stakeholders are given the opportunity to engage substantively. Some smaller businesses have raised concerns that FAA only consults with selected major airlines and manufacturers, ignoring commuter airlines and smaller businesses also affected by FAA regulations. Many of the stakeholders we spoke with said they were concerned that FAA was not doing enough to consult with smaller businesses and commuter airlines, as well as other stakeholders. necessary to know whether the passenger inspection fees are set fairly or accurately, or are being spent on the appropriate activities. Federal advisory committees play an important role in shaping public policy by providing advice on a wide array of issues. Their advice can enhance the quality and credibility of federal decision making. Despite the strengths associated with the federal advisory committees as a means to facilitate effective stakeholder input, agencies also need to be careful to maintain their mission to promote the public interest and take measures to safeguard against actual or perceived agency misconduct. User financing is one approach to financing federal programs or activities. User fees assign part or all of the costs of the benefits and services derived from these programs and activities to readily identifiable recipients. Some excise taxes, however, can also be described as a form of user financing. For example, the excise taxes on tobacco products can be used to fund the federal government's health care program for the elderly, the disabled, and the elderly in nursing homes. The federal government can also use excise taxes to fund its health care programs. user fees represent a charge for a service or benefit received from a specific government program. Payers may expect a tight link between payments and services, including expectations about the quality of the related service. There are opportunities at the local level for payers to provide input on fees and the services they support. Ineffective communication may reduce stakeholder cooperation and support for the fees, contribute to misunderstandings and confusion about how the fees work and what activities they support, the report says.should be updated. could charge fees for any of its services, noting that if imposing such fees is prohibited or restricted by law, agencies will recommend legislative changes as appropriate. OMB encourages agencies to examine potential effects of design alternatives when reviewing and proposing changes to regulations, even when the regulations are mandated by statute. The user fees considered in this report, are assessed under specific statutory authority and levied on air and sea passengers, vessel operators, or shippers (see app. II for a summary of the fees by payer). The fees vary in the way they are Hand: aligning collections and expenditures can promote economic efficiency and enhance stakeholder support for the fee. On the other hand, increased spending on harbors or reduced fee collections would increase the federal deficit, unless spending in other areas was decreased or other collections or revenues were increased. Hand: Providing guaranteed funding levels to any one activity in the budget protects that activity from competition with other areas for scarce resources and limits Congressional discretion to make trade-offs in spending priorities. Regardless of the approach taken, a reduction in fee receipts or an increase in appropriations—absent a change in appropriations —would increase the deficit. funded activity and more easily calculated than seeking to allocate departmental and staff office costs. “full cost recovery” should be viewed from a governmentwide perspective. Even though USDA would have to deposit those portions of user fee collections as miscellaneous receipts in the general fund of the Treasury, it would still defray a cost that Congress determined should be paid for by the user fees. If USDA believes that the statutory authority does not permit it to cover such indirect and imputed costs, then we believe it should not. information provided is not sufficient to project fee collections or to provide assurance that the amount of the fee is aligned with program costs. CBP cannot reliably project future MPF collections because the agency has not estimated the effects of exemptions, entries made through foreign trade zones, or changes in import demographics. Since fiscal year 2004 collections have increased relative to program costs and in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 collections exceeded costs by a total of approximately $221 million (see fig. 6). CBP has reliable information on the extent to which MPF Collections cover the costs of related activities only for the past few years. CBP’s most recent biennial report notes that a detailed analysis of the current and projected effects of MPF exemptions and an accurate cost estimate for processing merchandise is needed. CBP officials told us that they plan to conduct a detailed review of the MPF in the second phase of a three- phases review of user fees. Agencies can accommodate stakeholder input in various ways. We have previously reported on both the need to accommodate stakeholders input and how agencies can accommodate them. efficiently and effectively as possible. The lack of complete, transparent cost and collections data for the MPF and AQI fees can prevent the agencies from addressing existing issues. If agencies cannot determine the extent to which these fees are recovering costs, Congress cannot be sure that resources are allocated to the activities it most values. The principles of effective user fee design discussed earlier in this report can both offer a framework for considering the implications of various statutory structures and can be used to develop new fee structures.