The Advisory Group on Public Diplomacy for the Arab and Muslim World reported that “hostility toward the U.S. makes achieving our policy goals far more difficult” Foreign leaders may seek to leverage anti-American sentiment in pursuit of their own political goals. As these leaders achieve personal political successes based on their opposition to the United States, they may then be less likely to support U.s. foreign policy going forward. The Council on Foreign Relations has argued that increasing hostility toward America in Muslim countries facilitates recruitment and support for extremism and terror. Anti-American sentiments may negatively affect American economic interests, U.S. foreign policy and military operations, and the security of Americans. According to Business for Diplomatic Action, anti-Americanism can cause boycotts of American products, a backlash against American brands, and increased security costs. A report from the Princeton-based Working Group on Anti-Americansism also found that anti-America sentiments have had a negative impact on U.s. security and foreign policy. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people. than in 2004 or 2005 in most of the industries it reports on. Threats to American private property and personnel working overseas have become constant in some regions, especially the Middle East. Anti-Americanism around the world may reduce the U.S.’s ability to pursue its foreign policy goals, including efforts to foster diplomatic relationships with other foreign leaders and to garner support for the global war on terror. For instance, in October 2003, the Defense Science Board, the Brookings Institution, and others, to 12 percent over the same time period in Turkey. Numerous experts, expert groups, policymakers, and business leaders have expressed concerns that anti-Americanism may harm U.S. interests in various ways. While individual opinion polls may reflect a snapshot in time, consistently negative polls may. reflect the development of more deeply seated sentiments about the United States. The Council on Foreign Relations has claimed that the loss of goodwill may harm the U.N.’s ability to influence world leaders. The Defense Science Board states that “damaging consequences for other elements of U.s. soft power are tactical manifestations of a pervasive atmosphere of hostility” cannot draw a direct causal link between anti-Americanism and specific outcomes in these areas. It is clear that growing negative foreign public opinion does not help the United States achieve its economic, foreign policy, and security goals. U.S. public diplomacy efforts, which seek to counter anti- Americanism sentiment, have a critical role to play in supporting U.s. interests throughout the world. Over the past 4 years, we have identified and made recommendations to State and the BBG on a number of issues related to a general lack of strategic planning. Other factors, such as the visibility of Americans overseas, particularly in Iraq; the role of the media in supporting anti-Americanism; and the absence of economic security may also contribute to this violence. While all of the topics discussed here represent areas in which anti- Americanism may have negative consequences, the empirical evidence to support direct relationships is limited. We cannot confirm any causal relationships between negative foreign public opinion and specific negative outcomes regarding U.S. interests. Despite the fact that we.interests in those areas, it does seem to play a role in fueling such violence in Iraq. The State Department’s 2003 report on Patterns of Global Terrorism recorded 67 attacks on American business facilities and 7 business casualties. In 2006, the Overseas Security Advisory Council noted that more threats against the private sector occurred in 2006. The Travel Business Roundtable has reported significant declines in the U.S. market share of the worldwide travel market and a decline in overseas visitors to the United States since 9/11.generally echoes the possibility that anti- Americanism may harm U.s. business interests in these same areas. 56 private U.S. citizens were killed as a result of terrorism incidents in 2005. The Working Group on Anti-Americanism suggests that there is some correlation between anti- Americanism and violence against Americans in the greater Middle East. The relationship is complex. For example, while increased anti-Americanist in Europe or Jordan has not led to violence against American or U.s. citizens, it has led to more violence in the region. The group notes that Americans face an increased risk of direct attack from individuals and small groups. Security concerns are particularly elevated in countries with significant Muslim populations. Threat level for terrorism is rated as “critical” or “high” in 80 percent of posts. Security and budgetary concerns have led to the closure of publicly accessible facilities around the world, such as the U.S. Embassy in Cairo. The U.N. has a responsibility to ensure the safety and well-being of its personnel and their families, and to protect its facilities and facilities from harm. The United Nations has a duty to protect the safety of its citizens and its facilities. as American Centers and Libraries. In Pakistan, for example, all American Centers have closed for security reasons; the last facility, in Islamabad, closed in February 2005. These same concerns have prevented establishing a U.S. presence elsewhere. As a result, embassies have had to find other venues for public diplomacy programs. Some activities have been moved onto embassy compounds, where precautions designed to improve security have had the ancillary effect of sending the message that the United States is unapproachable and distrustful. use of cell phones and pagers within the embassy. According to one official in Pakistan, visitors to the embassy’s reference library have declined to as few as one per day. Other public diplomacy programs have had to limit their publicity to reduce the risk of becoming a target. A recent joint USAID-State report concluded that “security concerns often require a ‘low profile’ approach during events, programs or other situations.” This constraint is a result of the U.S. decision to limit the use of pagers and cell phones in the embassy, the report said. particularly acute in Pakistan, where the embassy has had to reduce certain speaker and exchange programs. State has responded to security concerns and the loss of publicly accessible facilities through a variety of initiatives. American Corners are centers that provide information about the United States, hosted in local institutions and staffed by local employees. According to State data, there are currently 365American Corners throughout the world, including more than 200 in the Muslim world. However, two of the posts we visited in Pakistan were closed. U.S. Department of State: Staffing and Foreign Language Shortfalls Persist Despite Initiatives to Address Gaps. State Department Efforts to Engage Muslim Audiences Lack Certain Communication Elements and Face Significant Challenges. U.s. Public Diplomacy: State Department and Broadcasting Board of Governors Expand Efforts in the Middle East but Face Significant challenges. This is a work of the U.S., government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission. countries with significant Muslim populations. In Arabic language posts, about 36 percent of language- designated public diplomacy positions were filled by staff unable to speak Arabic at the designated level. State officials said that there are even fewer officers who are willing or able to speak on television or engage in public debate in Arabic. The information officer in Cairo stated that his office does not have enough Arabic speakers to engage the Egyptian media effectively. State has begun to address these language deficiencies by increasing its overall amount of language training. GAO: State Department continues to experience significant foreign language proficiency shortfalls in countries around the world. Report noted this problem was particularly acute at posts in the Muslim world where Arabic—classified as a “superhard” language by State—predominates. Officials at State said that the Management bureau is currently considering options for reducing the administrative burden on posts, including the development of centralized administrative capabilities offshore. In 2003, GAO recommended that the Secretary of State designate more administrative positions to overseas public affairs sections. State Department had 887 established public diplomacy positions (overseas and domestic) as of March 31, 2007, but 199, or roughly 22 percent, were vacant. Compounding this challenge is the loss of public diplomacy officers to temporary duty in Iraq, which, according to one State official, is a major problem. Several embassy officials stated that, with current staffing levels, they do not have the capacity to effectively utilize increased funds. The U.S. State Department has a responsibility to focus and direct its international broadcasting efforts. Staffing shortages may also limit the amount of training public diplomacy officers receive. Public diplomacy officers at posts are burdened with administrative tasks, and thus have less time to conduct public diplomacy outreach activities than they did previously. One senior State official said that administrative tasks have drawn down field officers even further. The number of field officers has remained the same in fiscal years 2004 and 2006, the State Department says. The State Department is repositioning several public diplomacy Officers as part of its transformational diplomacy initiative. duties, such as budget, personnel, and internal reporting, compete with officers’ public diplomacy responsibilities. Another official in Egypt stated that she rarely had enough time to strategize, plan, or evaluate her programs. These statements echo comments we heard during overseas fieldwork and in a survey for our 2003 report. In that survey, officers stated that, although they manage to attend public outreach and other functions within their host country capitals, it was particularly difficult to find time to travel outside the capitals to interact with other communities. The average length of tour at posts in the Muslim world is about 22 percent shorter than tour lengths elsewhere. Public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours, a senior official at State said. In our May 2006 report, we reported that the prevalence of 1-year tours in theMuslim world was high. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. To read the rest of the report, click here: http://www.cnn.org/2006/01/29/world/features/world-diplomat-tours-in-mideast. Secretary has issued limited guidance regarding the goal of countering extremism to 18 posts selected to participate in a pilot initiative focusing on this objective. We have recommended that State adopt strategic communication best practices (which we refer to as the “campaign-style approach” and develop country-specific communication plans that incorporate the key steps embodied in this approach. These steps include defining the core message, identifying and segmenting target audiences, developing detailed communication strategies and tactics, and using research and evaluation to inform and re-direct efforts as needed. report, our review of public diplomacy operations in Nigeria, Pakistan, and Egypt in 2006 found that this approach and corresponding communication plans were absent. Rather, post public diplomacy efforts constituted an ad hoc collection of activities designed to support such broad goals as promoting mutual understanding. In a recent development, 18 posts participating in the department’s pilot countries initiative have developed country-level plans focusing on the countering extremism goal. These plans were developed on the basis of a template issued by the Under Secretary that requires each post to provide a list of supporting objectives, a description of the media. environment, identification of key target audiences, and a list of supporting programs and activities. We reviewed most of the plans submitted in response to this guidance. Although useful as a high-level planning exercise, these plans do not adhere to the campaign-style approach. The plans omit basic elements, such as specific core messages and themes, or any substantive evidence that proposed communication programs were driven by detailed audience research. This requires a level of rigor and detail that normally exceeds the three- to four-page plans produced by pilot countries. some marking and publicity requirements in their policies, regulations, and guidelines. We identified some challenges to marking and publicizing U.S. foreign assistance. The lack of a strategy for assessing the impact of marking. and publicity efforts on public awareness and the lack of governmentwide guidance for marking and. publicizing foreign aid is one of the challenges. State indicated that the interagency public diplomacy strategy will address assessment and will include governmentwide marking andPressure guidance. In 2005, we noted that State’s efforts to engage the private sector in pursuit of common public diplomacy objectives had met with mixed success. the absence of such research, programs may lack important information about appropriate target audiences and credible messages and messengers. Based on prior reports by GAO and others, the department has begun to institute a more concerted effort to measure the impact of its programs and activities. The department created (1) the Office of Policy, Planning, and Resources within the office of the Under Secretary. The Public Diplomacy Evaluation Council to share best practices. The Department established an expanded evaluation schedule that is designed to cover all major public diplomacy programs. department also has called on program managers to analyze and define their key inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact to help identify meaningful performance goals and indicators. In 2001, the BBG introduced a market-based approach to international broadcasting that sought to “marry the mission to the market.” This approach was designed to generate large listening audiences in priority markets. The department recently launched a pilot public diplomacy performance measurement data collection project that is designed to collect, document, and quantify reliable annual and long-term outcome performance measures. State has not yet developed a comprehensive strategy to guide the Department’s efforts to engage the private sector. In 2005, the Under Secretary established a strategic framework for U.S. public diplomacy efforts. It includes three priority goals: (1) offer foreign publics a vision of hope and opportunity; (2) isolate and marginalize extremists; and (3) promote understanding regarding shared values and common interests between Americans and peoples of different countries, cultures, and languages. The State Department hosted a Private Sector Summit on Public Diplomacy in January 2007. and faiths. State has not yet developed written guidance that provides details on how these five tactics will be used to implement the Under Secretary’s priority goals. This framework partially responds to our 2003 recommendation that State should develop and disseminate a strategy to integrate its public diplomacy efforts and direct them toward achieving common objectives. However, it should be noted that the Under. Secretary has said she intends to achieve these goals using various public diplomacy programs and other means, including coordinating outreach efforts with the private sector. The U.S. government lacks an interagency public diplomacy strategy. The lack of such a strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages. State officials have said that it also diminishes the efficiency and effectiveness of governmentwide public diplomacy efforts. Such a plan has been drafted and will be released shortly, the authors say. The authors recommend that meaningful performance goals and indicators be established by both State and the BBG.performance and results. They also recommend that State develop a strategic plan to integrate its diverse efforts. The key objectives of U.S. public diplomacy are to engage, inform, and influence overseas audiences. Public diplomacy is carried out through a wide range of programs that employ person-to-person contacts. Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, State has expanded its public diplomacy efforts. The State Department’s efforts have focused on foreign elites. However, the dramatic growth in global mass communications and other trends have forced a rethinking of this approach, and State has begun to consider techniques for communicating with broader foreign audiences. established a new Policy Coordination Committee on Public Diplomacy and Strategic Communications. This committee intends to better coordinate interagency activities, including the development of an interagency public diplomacy strategy. We have been told this strategy is still under development and will be issued soon. The U.S. government also lacks a governmentwide strategy and meaningful methods to ensure that recipients of U.s. foreign assistance are consistently aware that the aid comes from the United States. In March 2007, we reported that most agencies involved in foreign assistance activities had established. BBG accept our recommendation and has informed us that it is currently considering how it will do so. Public diplomacy efforts in the field face several other challenges. Post officials have consistently cited a general lack of staff, insufficient administrative support, and inadequate language training. The BBG’s disparate organizational structure has been viewed as a key challenge. The U.S. State Department has a responsibility to improve its public diplomacy efforts, the authors say. They recommend the BBG improve its audience research methods, including identifying significant methodological limitations. October 2005 were having difficulty finding hosts for American Corners, as local institutions fear becoming terrorist targets. The Broadcasting Board of Governors has its own set of public diplomacy challenges, including trying to gain large audiences in priority markets. As noted in the BBG’s strategic plan, “diverse organizations with different missions, different frameworks, and different constituencies’ makes it a challenge to bring all the separate parts together in a more effective whole” As we reported in July 2003, the Board hoped to. its public diplomacy efforts globally, focusing particularly on countries in the Muslim world considered to be of strategic importance in the war on terror. In May 2006, we reported that this trend continued with funding increases of 25 percent for the Near East and 39 percent for South Asia from 2004 to 2006. The BBG supports U.S. public diplomacy’s key objectives by broadcasting news and information about the United States and world affairs. It serves as a model of how a free press should operate. State and the BBG spent close to $1.5 billion on public diplomacy programs in fiscal year 2006. As others have previously reported, in recent years anti-American sentiment has spread and intensified. For instance, favorable attitudes toward the United States in Indonesia declined from 75 percent in 2000 to 30 percent in 2006 and from 52 percent to 40 percent in 2005. The Pew Global Attitudes Project has found that the decline in favorable opinion of the U.S. is a worldwide trend.. The Board’s vision is to create a flexible, multimedia, research-driven U.S. international broadcasting system. Implementing this strategy has focused on markets relevant to the war on terrorism, in particular in the Middle East. The BBG subsequently created a single strategic goal to focus on the key objective of maximizing impact in priority areas of interest to the United States. However, we found that weaknesses in the BBG”s audience surveys create uncertainty over whether some of Radio Sawa’  performance targets for audience size have been met. on how to implement this strategic framework has not yet been developed. posts generally do not pursue a campaign-style approach to communications that incorporates best practices endorsed by GAO and others. In 2003, we reported that the United States. had begun to take credible steps towards instituting more systematic performance measurement practices. The BBG has added audience size as a key performance measure within its strategic plan. However, our latest review of MBN’s operations call into question the potential value of this measure due to various methodological concerns. address this key challenge through two primary means. First, it planned to treat the component parts of U.S. international broadcasting as a single system with the Board in the position of actively managing resources across broadcast entities. Second, it intended to realign the BBG’s organizational structure to reinforce the CEO with a host of responsibilities. In addition, in 2006, we found that MBN, which received $79 million in, was the largest broadcaster in the United States, followed by ABC. funding in fiscal year 2006, faces several managerial and editorial challenges that may hinder the organization’s efforts to expand in their highly competitive market. While MBN has taken steps to improve its process of program review and evaluation, it has not yet implemented our recommendations. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For questions regarding this testimony, please contact Jess T. Ford at (202) 512-4128 permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army on 8457 909090 or see http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/.