stated that this could lead to changes in OCC or interagency guidance. At the Federal Reserve, senior officials believed that the existing 2006 guidance was largely sufficient, but noted that efforts to clarify expectations for stress testing and capital planning were ongoing. The examiners and senior officials with whom we spoke agreed that determining certain limits on CRE concentrations, or requiring specific amounts of additional capital for certain levels of CRE concentrations would be difficult and require significant study. Federal Reserve officials also noted that limits or specific capital requirements would require studies on the potential effect on credit availability. All of the agencies provided written comments that we have reprinted in appendixes III, IV, and V. The agencies also provided technical comments, which we considered and have incorporated as appropriate. In written comments, the Federal Reserve welcomed our recommendations to improve CRE concentrations guidance to help banks and examiners comply with it. The Federal Reserve stated that it intends to work with its counterparts at the OCC and FDIC to develop and implement enhancements to CRE concentration guidance. The OCC agreed with our recommendations. Some districts of the Federal Reserve System reviewed implementation of the 2006 CRE concentration guidance and found instances of inconsistency. Senior regulatory officials with whom we spoke had differing views on whether the 2006 guidance was sufficient for examiners to address the buildup in CRE concentration risks. OCC noted that community banks’ increased CRE concentrations exposes them to CRE market declines, which may require more explicit regulatory expectations for the robustness of risk- management systems, stress testing, capital planning, and capital levels when CRE concentrations increase. impact of bank supervision is difficult. The recent severe cycle of credit upswings followed by the downturn serves as a useful reminder of the supervisory balance needed to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system. To improve supervision of CRE-related risks, we recommend that the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation enhance and either re-issue or supplement interagency CRE concentration guidance. We recommend that FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC provide greater clarity on CRE concentration. Bankers say examiners told them they exceeded 300 percent concentration threshold for CRE, but according to the calculations in the guidance they actually were under the threshold. Some examiners were including owner-occupied CRE and some were using the wrong type of capital for the calculation, which inflated the concentration levels. Banks ignored examiners’ concerns on CRE risk management. A number of examiners admitted that during strong economic times they could have been more assertive in asking banks to implement risk-management changes related to CRE concentrations. that examiners have been requiring additional ALLL and criticizing the ALLL methodology. In addition, a few bankers noted that some examiners want ALLL increased based on their peers’ ALLL rather than the bank’s individual situation. Many bank officials with whom we spoke were concerned that examiners had been misapplying the 2006 guidance. The 2006 guidance states that the CRE and ADC concentration levels are not limits, but some bank officials told us that examiner have been interpreting them that way. increases the scrutiny placed on the banks’ risk- management systems. While FDIC clarified to its examiners in April 2010 how to calculate CRE concentrations, other regulators have not done so. Two of the FDIC ROEs in our sample that use only tier 1 capital in the calculation were issued after the April 2010 clarification. A number of field examiners from all the agencies stated they did not have the tools to proactively address growing CRE concentrations when the economy was strong or that some of the banks were overleveraged. concentration calculation (14 of 47), although the 2006 CRE guidance specifically excludes this type of CRE. We also found that 23 of these 47 ROEs include CRE concentrations calculated by using some combination of tier 1 capital. Another 24 ROEs specify using either total risk-based capital or equity capital. The effect of calculating these concentrations differently can be to increase the total CRE concentration number, which can lead to a loss of revenue for the bank. We found that this effect can be significant. guidance based on the feedback received. Issued in final form in December 2006, the interagency guidance provides levels of CRE concentrations that will result in additional regulatory attention on risk-management systems. The concentration numbers are not limits, but rather indicate when banks will receive closer scrutiny of risk- management systems and loans. In determining the concentration ratio, owner-occupied CRE is removed. The guidance also states that the concentration numbers aren't limits, and that the numbers are just a starting point. Revising or supplementing the guidance would help both examiners and bankers better understand how to assess and manage such concentrations. incorporating CRE-specific analyses into the scope of internal and quality assurance reviews will help ensure consistent application of the guidance. In this way, regulatory management can better ensure that examination practices related to CRE concentrations and risks will be carried out consistently. The guidance should provide more details about risk- management practices and examples of when to reduce CRE concentrations. It should also produce clearly articulated support in examination reports for requiring reduced concentrations. inconsistent with the 2006 CRE concentration guidance. In two other instances the ROEs state that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations but do not focus on the bank’s risk-management systems. Differences in message between an ROE and an enforcement action could be confusing to bank boards and management as they seek to comply with regulatory requirements for risk management related to CRE concentrations. Such confusion could lead bank officials to misunderstand whether they should focus on improving their risk- management systems or just reduce their total CRE concentration numbers. agencies reviewed CRE concentrations and risk-management systems across banks. The findings include concerns on the bank’s need to update or enhance internal policies on CRE concentration limits and CRE underwriting acceptable to the bank. The ROE requires a bank with a CRE concentration of about 600 percent of tier 1 capital to address a matter requiring immediate attention to improve stress testing. However, the ROE states that the bank was in compliance with the 2006 CRE guidance—which requires robust stress testing for CRE portfolios when banks reach certain levels of CRE. and whether regulatory guidance has been applied consistently. According to bank and regulatory officials with whom we spoke, when bank officials have raised concerns, they tend to first approach the examination team. Bank officials also can contact the ombudsman offices at the regulators to seek confidential assistance. In addition to these avenues, banks formally can appeal regulatory decisions. Some bank officials were cautious about raising issues because of potential repercussions from regulatory officials, the authors say.. Many bank officials’ overarching concern was that examiners have been applying guidance more stringently than before the financial crisis. was needed to address banks with high risk profiles or weak risk-management practices. We also found in past work that regulators identified a number of weaknesses in institutions’ risk- management systems before the financial crisis began but did not always take forceful actions to address them. A number of nonmanagement regulatory staff in the field offices we visited acknowledged they could have better followed up on outstanding issues. In response to the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission report notes areas in which regulators could have been more proactive in using regulatory tools to address certain risks. Capital provides an important cushion against losses for banks. Capital can be measured as total capital or tier 1 capital. Regulators oversee the capital adequacy of their regulated institutions through ongoing monitoring, including on-site examinations and off-site tools. When banks fail to meet these goals, they may face fines or other penalties from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and other authorities. When a bank fails to meet the minimum capital requirements, it may be fined or other sanctions may be imposed by the federal government. regulators require banks to hold capital above regulatory minimums. These requirements may result from an enforcement action through an agreement between the regulator and the bank. Examinations and ratings: Federal banking laws and regulatory guidance require on-site examinations. At each full-scope examination, examiners review the bank’s risk exposure on a number of components. It may reduce the availability of bank credit and reduce returns on equity to shareholders. It can also affect a bank”s financial health. The purpose of federal banking supervision is to help ensure that banks throughout the financial system are operating in a safe and sound manner. Financial regulation more broadly has sought to achieve four goals: to ensure adequate consumer protections, ensure the integrity and fairness of markets, monitor the safety and soundness of institutions, and act to ensure the stability of the overall financial system. Federal banking regulators use a number of tools to achieve these goals, the authors say. For more information, visit www.banks.gov. The Basel Committee released the framework for Basel III in December 2010. It includes increased and higher-quality capital requirements, enhanced risk coverage, and steps to encourage the “build up” of capital. The Basel committee has established procedures to help ensure the consistent global application of this framework. It has also introduced two global liquidity standards to help with the development of the global capital market for the banking sector in the future. The framework is expected to be in place by the end of 2014. Regulators have been incorporating lessons from the financial crisis in their supervisory practices. Many bankers remain concerned that regulators have become more stringent in reviewing CRE loans since the crisis. Given the key role community banks play in business lending, bank regulators are aware of the potential effects of their actions in exacerbating the credit cycle. If such requirements are too stringent, they can unduly limit lending. Such limits on lending can have widespread effects on the economy, as acknowledged in Basel Committee for Banking Supervision discussions on capital requirements. The recent financial crisis underscored how important it is for regulators to evenly apply guidance during strong economic periods. Consistent application of guidance is important to avoid unduly hampering credit provision throughout the economy. CRE still is working through a downturn sparked by the broader financial crisis, presenting an ongoing challenge to community banks and regulators. While community banks have been working through the challenges associated with many years of past growth, CRE is still working through its own challenges of the past few years, officials say. economic upturns or downturns. Bank examiners with whom we spoke in the field offices also noted that problems can be difficult to identify during strong economic times. Discussions about the procyclicality of regulation have been a central feature of recent deliberations on revised capital requirements among U.S. banking regulators and the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision. The discussions have been seeking to address the pro cyclical effects of banking regulation in the United States and around the rest of the world. developed standards that will be implemented gradually so that banks make the shift to higher capital and liquidity standards while “supporting lending to the economy” Federal bank regulators also have acknowledged the importance of addressing procyclicality in regulatory requirements and have made efforts in this regard. In addition, FASB has issued accounting guidance aimed at changes in accounting standards for the financial sector. The Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Forum have worked to address this as it relates to capital requirements. For example, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve has stated the. importance of regulators acknowledging the significance of procyclicals. stringent during the past credit crunch, even holding financial conditions constant. Regulators should be aware of how their actions can affect broader credit markets. The procyclical effects of regulation may not adequately discourage overly risky behavior during economic upswings or may inhibit bank lending during downturns, as banks may need to meet their obligations. The U.S. and foreign regulators have been attempting to address the procyclicals effects of their actions in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis in the United States and abroad. more stringent requirements during times when it is more difficult to do so. For instance, if regulators increase capital requirements at the same time that losses from an economic downturn decrease banks’ capital, banks may be less able to lend while they seek to rapidly raise additional capital. This can exacerbate downswings in credit cycles. Consistent and balanced application of policy guidance in strong and weak economic times is important to avoiding unnecessary procyclical effects, according to the IMF. The IMF urges regulators to ensure that guidance is applied consistently during strong andweak economic periods. through training, internal reviews, quality assurance processes, and processes for obtaining input from banks. Such processes reflect federal internal control standards, which provide reasonable assurance that management directives are carried out. Regulators’ internal reviews include comprehensive audits that recur periodically, and real-time and post-ROE quality processes. We also noted in our report some concerns raised by bank examiners and bankers about applying the 2006 guidance, such as whether the current CRE concentration thresholds are hard to hit. The report concludes that no regulator was immune from consistency issues. The regulators’ examination drafting and review process is iterative, with multiple levels of internal review. Different perceptions about the 2006 guidance among regulators could send mixed signals to examiners. Monitoring and revising existing controls, such as guidance, is a key component of a strong internal control system. Regulators require banks to maintain certain minimum capital requirements to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry. For all examinations, a team of examiners will conduct on-site work, led by an examiner-in-charge. ensure consistent application of policy guidance, we reviewed the examination report review process at all of the regulators. We also collected, compared, and analyzed examination review reports and quality assurance processes for the three regulators to determine what processes were in place to identify and address inconsistencies among examiners. We reviewed reports conducted by FDIC’s Internal Control and Review Section for the Atlanta, Dallas, New York, and San Francisco regions, because these regions covered the states in our nonprobability sample. learned from the crisis. Regulators have mixed views about the adequacy of the 2006 guidance. Our findings from an analysis of ROEs were similar to those of the regulators’ internal reviews and assessments. Given these findings, and in light of lessons learned from the recent financial crisis and CRE market downturn, the regulators could reassess the inadequacy of 2006 guidance, the authors say. The authors conclude that the 2006 CRE guidance is no longer appropriate for commercial real estate investment trusts (CREITs) they are appropriate. Regulators also provide training on new guidance to help ensure consistent application. In certain instances, the regulators’ headquarters offices in Washington, D.C., may participate. We sought to determine if there were different views or practices related to CRE. The interviews were conducted by telephone, video teleconference, and in person at district, regional, and field offices in California, Colorado, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas. We interviewed more than 230 regulatory field staff at FDIC, throughout the Federal Reserve System, and at OCC. further understand how FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC have responded to the CRE downturn and its effect on community banks. We collected and analyzed interagency policy guidance to examiners related to CRE loan treatment and interagency statements on lending. We also assessed regulatory efforts to address CRE-related concerns. As part of this work, we observed examiner training at FFIEC provided to commissioned examiners, to include a week-long training on CRE and a day-longTraining on regulatory updates related to policy guidance on CRE loans. examination workpapers sometimes lacked sufficient documentation to determine if the examiner adequately assessed compliance with the guidance. According to Federal Reserve officials, Washington staff also coordinated separate reviews related to implementation of the 2006 guidance. The reviews resulted in internal clarifications of the appraisal review process, ALLL assessment guidance, examiner training sessions on the use of interest reserves and TDRs, and contributions to the 2009 loan workout guidance. In June 2010, the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank implemented a “look back” process in June 2010 in which a a bank’s financial condition; (2) examiners review risks associated with concentrations and wholesale funding sources; and (3) appropriate capital is maintained. Based on our analysis of a nonprobability sample of 55 ROEs, examiners’ findings were generally consistent with policy guidance, with some exceptions. ROEs in our sample that comment broadly on banks’ CRE loan workouts tend to cite areas for improvement (20 of 27). loan workouts (8 of 20) specifically note concerns about the nature of banks' loan workouts. years, because examiners are usually commissioned within 5 years). Individual meetings with EICs were held based on our nonprobability sample. Of the field staff we interviewed, about 200 were directly involved in drafting or reviewing ROEs. We reviewed how examiners supported statements related to banks’ CRE loan workouts, concerns about CRE concentrations, and how examiner calculated CRE concentrations. To understand the controls the regulators have in place, we analyzed 55 ROEs of banks in California, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas. The regulators began to address CRE concerns before the financial crisis. Beginning in the early 2000s, the capital adequacy.part may explain bank officials’ experience of increased stringency in supervision. In October 2009, regulators issued interagency guidance on CRE loan workouts. According to the regulators, the guidance was issued to help ensure consistent CRE loan and workout treatment among the regulators and to inform banks of examiner expectations. The guidance is not intended to be a “safe harbor” and banks with lower concentrations may still receive scrutiny. example, on what is considered to be satisfactory stress testing. While more bank officials than not noted that examiners’ actions have been consistent with the letter of the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance, a few said examiners were not always complying with its spirit. Two bankers with whom we spoke stated that it was their experience that examiner were particularly stringent in 2008 when the financial crisis was escalating, but moderated their approach in late 2009, which is around the time that the 2009 guidance was issued. 97 percent of respondents stated that the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance has been helpful. Nearly 88 percent of banks stated that no specific guidance was inhibiting them from working with troubled borrowers. Just over three-quarters of them raised concerns about accounting-related guidance and reporting of TDRs. Based on this information, regulatory officials from FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC believe that the2009 CRE Loan Workflow Guidance has been Helpful. The report was published by the American Bankers Association. The 2009 guidance was not intended as forbearance, but to encourage prudent loan workouts. The examples provide scenarios for different CRE loan classification outcomes. Examiners told us that the examples have helped to resolve differences of opinion with bankers on how to treat certain CRE- related loans. In addition to the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance, the regulators issued statements on lending to creditworthy borrowers and creditworthy small business borrowers to encouraging prudent lending among banks and balanced supervision among examiners. Federal banking regulators help ensure consistency among examinations, and appropriate application of guidance.  increases in capital requirements can raise the cost of providing loans. This would lead to higher interest rates for borrowers, tighter credit terms, or reduced lending. Holding more capital against each loan means less equity is available to return to shareholders or back new loans. Using the “capital crunch hypothesis,” the researchers found that institutions with lower capital ratios had slower loan growth (or loans shrank more rapidly) to try to meet regulatory requirements for capital.system. The study found that banks with “low or no profits and an inability to obtain new capital at reasonable rates” decreased their assets and liabilities. on credit cycles; however, the studies that exist suggest the effects are minimal. In an analysis of the credit crunch from 1989 to 1992, researchers found modest support for the hypothesis that increased regulatory “toughness” occurred. In a comprehensive study spanning the last financial crisis, three hypotheses were tested regarding changes in regulatory toughness and its impact on bank lending. The data provided what the authors call “modest support” for all three hypotheses that: (1) toughness increased during the creditCrunch from 1989 through 1992, and (2) it declined during the boom from 1993. through 1998, and (3) differences in toughness affected bank lending. During the credit crunch they studied, the data show no more than 1 percent additional loans receiving classification or worsening of classification status. The authors also reviewed the economic significance of changes in regulatory “toughness” and found that growth in the number of classified assets by 1 percent would be predicted to decrease the ratio of real estate loans to gross total assets by less than 1 percentage point over the long term. The data show a similar change for a decrease in loan classifications. Opinion Survey have suggested that new CRE borrowers have faced tighter credit conditions. Banks tightening their underwriting standards in response to the downturn. Trend of tighter credit standards suggests that borrowers who previously were considered creditworthy might not meet banks’ higher standards. The regulators have been aware for some time of the risk-management challenges related to growing CRE banks. The January 2011 survey found that 10.6 percent of respondents reported easing credit standards over the previous 3 months, compared to 10.5 percent who reported tightening them. the amount of financing a bank is willing to lend against that collateral typically declines as well. Conversely, increases in collateral values lower the premium on external financing. Falling property prices can generate a cycle of declining CRE values because they can accompany reduced credit. A report by the Bank for International Settlements notes that falling CRE prices decrease the value of collateral held by banks and, therefore, can give rise to significant losses by these banks and ultimately contract the supply of credit. The report was published by the BIS. or chooses not to because the cost of capital is prohibitive, then it could, among other options, reduce its assets. Reducing assets is often referred to as “shrinking the balance sheet’ However, banks in better financial condition may be able to respond differently in the face of loan losses. They may be. able to continue lending without raising additional capital or can rely on their stronger financial position to secure new. capital to secure their new capital. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The authors cite the possibility that high-CRE banks may have failed at a greater rate than banks without that level of CRE exposure. Bankers attributed the CRE downturn to market factors such as problems in residential real estate that affected the CRE market and the severity of the broader financial and economic crisis. Although bankers did not state that regulatory policies were the cause of theCRE downturn, many noted that examiner actions were exacerbating it and a few stated banks needed to be given time to work through their troubled assets so they could continue to lend.  limited research exists on the impact of CRE loan concentrations on a bank’s ability to lend. High CRE concentrations can limit loan growth during economic downturns. Banks with capital bases that have been negatively affected by losses in their CRE portfolios may need to reduce lending to maintain an adequate capital-to-assets ratio on their balance sheets. To further demonstrate how loan losses, allowance for loan and lease losses, and capital requirements can affect lending, we developed an illustrative example of how Loan losses affect capital ratios on a banks’ balance sheet. the economy during this crisis at a “significantly slower rate’ than banks that did not have high CRE exposure. The higher the bank’s CRE concentration prior to the crisis, the more its non-CRE lending slowed during the crisis. The authors hypothesize that the rise in CRE lending and the substantially increased delinquencies on these loans “could have inhibited banks’ willingness or ability to lend to other segments of the economy.” The reasons for the contraction of non- CRE lending during the Crisis are being examined. and examiners better understand how to comply with CRE risk management requirements. FDIC also cited a study by the Bank for International Settlements that concluded the social benefits of higher bank capital requirements outweigh the large reductions in economic activity from a banking collapse. As our report notes, additional capital provides an important cushion against losses, though this comes at a cost. From our review of the literature, there is disagreement on the magnitude of such costs on lending. We added information to the report to clarify this issue. charged off the bank’s balance sheet. The end result of an on-site examination is an ROE that includes the CAMELS ratings. CRE encompasses many different property types that present different risks. Table 4 describes the key CRE property types. Regulators define CRE loans to include construction loans, loans to finance CRE that are not secured by CRE, loans secured by multifamily property, and nonfarm, nonresidential property in which the primary source of repayment derives from the rental income associated. Banks report on four broad categories of CRE in their quarterly call reports. CLD: loans secured by real estate to finance land development and construction. Multifamily: loans for residential properties with five or more dwelling units, such as apartment buildings. Nonfarm nonresidential: Loans secured byreal estate for business and industrial properties, as well as properties such as hotels, churches, hospitals, schools, and charitable organizations. This category includes offices, retail, and other nonfarm commercial properties.  CRE loans in which the primary source of repayment is not the property itself are called owner-occupied loans. For example, a line of credit for a business’s operating expenses might be secured in part by commercial property, such as an office. Owner-occupied properties generally are considered to carry less risk than non-owner- occupied properties because regulators consider them to be less sensitive to the condition of the CRE market. For more information on CRE loans, go to www.securitizer.gov. warehouse space. Loans to finance CRE, construction, and land development (not secured by CRE). Interagency guidance issued in 2006 on concentrations in CRE and sound risk-management practices define CRE loans within these categories to include those in which repayment is dependent on the cash flow generated from the real estate itself. CRE as an asset class—and especially properties in the ADC category—is prone to volatility and cyclical behavior, as illustrated in this chart. When evaluating concentrations inCRE, examiners are instructed not to include owner-occupied properties in which the income or value of the property is not the primary source of repayment. Construction and land development (CLD) loans are considered to be the riskiest class of CRE. They can include properties that are built before having firm commitments from buyers or lessees. By the time the construction phase is completed, market demand may have fallen, putting downward pressure on sales prices or rents. In recent years, this type of loan also has tended to have a much higher loss rate than other types of CRE, according to a report by the Bank of America Merrill Lynch. is slow to respond to an increase in demand, which drives prices up when investor optimism rises. Conversely, the marketplace isslow to respond when the market supply of CRE catches up and new construction projects are delivered, resulting in oversupply and declining property values. According to regulatory officials, the weakness in the ADC sector during this crisis was primarily due to residential housing construction. That weakness affected the performance of other areas of CRE, such as strip malls. The recent downturn in the CRE sector has been particularly bad. the current CRE market downturn. This volatility and cyclical behavior is attributed to characteristics such as information-gathering difficulties, infrequent transactions, high transaction costs, rigid and constrained supply, long construction times, and a two-fold reliance on external finance. CRE is by nature diverse and localized. For example, shopping centers are one type of CRE, but even within this category properties can have significant differences depending on design, types of tenants, and other factors that can affect their value. Because of these factors, the supply of CRE in the marketplace has been constrained. The increased exposure of community banks to CRE loans has been pronounced over the last 10–15 years. While in CRE concentrations, CRE portfolios continue to have a significant effect on community bank balance sheets as loan delinquencies and charge-offs remain historically high. Community banks continue to seek ways to work with their borrowers and shore up capital to remain solvent. But the current economic environment and the expectation that refinancing of CRE loans will bring a new round of market stress suggest many community banks may face these challenges for some time. many other MLRs we reviewed—states that the rapid growth of its CRE portfolio “increased the institution’s exposure to a sustained downturn in the real estate market and reduced its ability to absorb losses due to unforeseen events” CRE market value declines could reduce overall small business lending by community banks. Because CRE can be used as collateral for small business loans, diminished CRE values also can negatively affect credit availability to small businesses. Specifically, when the value of collateral declines, community banks tend to have a larger portion of small-business related loans. Low rental rates and high vacancies indicate that demand for office, retail, multifamily housing, and warehouse space remains relatively weak. Although CRE markets nationally have experienced a downturn, some regions have experienced more distress than others. The South, Midwest, and West have experienced greater stress and deterioration than the East. Community banks increasingly have moved toward providing CRE loans more than other kinds of loan products, in part in part because of the CRE market's strength. The CRE market has performed well more recently.  decline in CRE values has contributed to more noncurrent CRE loans, charge-offs, and bank failures. From the first quarter of 2008 through the fourth quarter of 2010, the percent of CRE loans at community banks that were noncurrent increased from 2.2 to 5.3 percent, well above the average rate of 0.9 percent from 2000 through 2007. However, the data show that the volume of non Current CRE loans has begun to level off (see fig. 3). CRE loan charge-off increased from 0.19 to 1.34 percent. CRE collateral backed about 30 percent of total loans and leases at community banks in 2000. A decade later that rate increased to more than 43 percent. Concentrations have been less pronounced at larger banks, which tend to rely less heavily on CRE lending. Nearly a third of community banks are exposing three times their total capital to risks related to their CRE Corporation, according to FDIC guidance on CRE. The average CRE concentration as a percentage of total risk-based capital increased from about 168 percent in 1996–2000 to about 289 percent in 2005–2010. As of December 2010, overall CRE market values were down more than 42 percent from their peak in 2007. By January 2011, the delinquency rate on loans included in CMBS was at a record high, above 9 percent. Although CRE market price deterioration appears to have leveled off recently, vacancies at many properties remain high. High-value properties in markets such as New York, Washington, San Francisco, and Boston are showing signs of a market recovery in different areas of the U.S. We analyzed monthly data from Moody’s/REAL Commercial Property Price Index from January 2002 through December 2010. We assessed their reliability for the purposes of providing a picture of the trends in CRE prices. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining price trends. To determine when CRE loans would be repaid, we looked at when the CRE market was at its peak. We also looked at the implications for community banks of CRE loans being repaid at the end of the cycle. Trepp LLC estimates that about $1.7 trillion in CRE mortgages will mature between 2011 and 2015. About 60 percent of CRE debt maturing in 2011 is “underwater’ Due to price declines and stricter bank underwriting standards, those mortgages will be difficult to refinance.bank could work with the borrower to restructure the loan and avoid default. Results from the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer be up for refinancing and what percentage of CRE loans were ‘underwater' problem of CRE loan refinancing may exacerbate the negative CRE trends and limit lending to small businesses. CRE loans usually are written for 3–10 years, with a 20–30 year amortization schedule and a balloon payment at the end. Small businesses that are looking to refinance a loan against a property that has lost a significant amount of market value may have to put up more equity. Alternatively, such borrowers might default on the loan, or the lender might be forced to sell the property. There are three classification categories used by the federal banking regulators: substandard, doubtful, and loss. These loan classifications, and the internal ratings that banks produce for all of their loans, are incorporated into how each bank calculates its allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) If additional loans are classified substandard or doubtful, this information is included in a bank’s updated ALLL estimates. If Loans are classified loss, they are not performing or may not perform in the future. Bank examiners have been asking bankers to place more loans on nonaccrual. Classifications also can reduce earnings because they factor into ALLL. As more loans are classified, more is generally reserved in ALLL to anticipate future losses from nonperforming loans. In our interviews with bank officials, some stated that some stated.that a bank should place a classified loan on non Accrual—which means the bank cannot accrue the interest income as earnings. It is not clear if the bank has made such a move. total capital ratio of 10 percent (calculated by dividing total capital by total assets) In this example the bank has analyzed the collectibility of its loans and decided to add $20 to its ALLL in anticipation of loan losses. Provisions for these losses increase the ALLL, which in turn are charged to the bank’s expenses, reduce income, and therefore reduce retained earnings that are included as part of total capital. As a result, the capital ratio falls to 8.2 percent. from certified public accountants. Increases in capital requirements or the allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) can affect a bank’s ability to lend. Figure 6 illustrates relationships between loan losses, bank balance sheets, and capital requirements under certain assumptions. In this simplified example, the bank begins with $1,000 in assets ($1,010 in loans and $10 in ALLL), $900 in liabilities, and $100 in capital, which equates to a $100 loan loss. to mark-to-market accounting for assessing asset values in inactive markets. More recently, in May 2010, FASB released a proposed Accounting Standards Update, which encompassed proposals on the impairment of financial assets and suggested implementing a more forward-looking impairment model. Efforts such as these seek to address procyclicality concerns related to capital and accounting requirements, while the potential procyclicals effects of examiners’ application of policy. Based on exposure draft comments, in January 2011 FasB proposed with the International Accounting Standards Board a common solution on how to account for financial assets. Lee, Analyst-in-Charge, managed this review. Emily Biskup and Jason Wildhagen also led portions of the research and made significant contributions throughout the report. Anna Maria Ortiz and Rudy Chatlos provided methodological assistance related to our nonprobability sample. Michael Hoffman provided assistance reviewing the methodologies of our research studies and assistance on capital-related issues. Bill Cordrey, Jay Thomas, and Gary Chupka provided accounting assistance. Paul Thompson provided legal assistance. Marc Molino developed the report’s graphics. Barbara Roesmann provided editorial assistance. Lauren Nunnally, Michael Pahr, Ellen Ramachandran, Maria Soriano, Winnie Tsen, Gavin Ugale, and Carrie Watkins held various roles in verifying our findings. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories, or follow us on Twitter @CNNSoulmatters and @CNNOpinion. For the latest from CNN iReport, visit the site here. For all the latest news from CNN, check out the news hub here. Bank officials expressed concerns with examiner- required loan classifications. A loan is performing when the borrower continues to pay and should not be classified. According to regulatory guidance, such a loan may be classified if identified weaknesses suggest a reduction in the borrower’s capacity to repay that in turn could lead to future nonpayment. The renewed focus on global cash flow analysis led many bank officials to conclude that examiners were classifying loans based on collateral value or because the bank lacked updated financial statements. In the current economic downturn examiners have been focusing more closely on analysis and documentation of borrowers’ and guarantors’ global cash flows. The purpose of such analysis is to determine whether they have sufficient income and liquid assets to support loan payments. In some cases, such analysis shows that a borrower is unable to pay the loan, even if the borrower is currently paying. For example, the borrower’s income and other debt obligations, when reviewed as a whole, could show that the borrower's debt obligations exceed income. Case managers review draft ROEs for consistency and adequate support of findings for a portfolio of banks. The analyst function at OCC serves a similar role: reviewing many ROEs, although not assigned to a specific portfolio. According to Federal Reserve officials, case managers and senior management hold discussions with the examination teams as examination findings are being finalized, to ensure that they are accurate and adequate for CAMELS ratings in a broad range of ROEs. Particular helps ensure consistency.particular helps ensuring consistency. loan treatment among regulatory roles or between those in headquarters and the field offices. The staff with whom we spoke in field locations included field examiners, their supervisors, case managers, analysts (at OCC), and senior management. Examiners were interviewed both in group settings and individually, and included those who served as examiners-in-charge (EIC) for ROEs in our sample. Based on our request, had a range of experience (either less than 5 years or more than 5) changed before the ROEs were finalized and were consistent with the bank’s internal loan ratings. All OCC districts instituted a real-time review process in which experienced staff reviewed the accuracy of CRE loan classifications. Among those classifications that were corrected, 3 percent of classifications were corrected. For example, in January 2009, OCC reported that 95 percent of examiners’ ratings decisions on CRE loans, and 99 percent of their accrual decisions, were determined to be accurate. The western district’s quality assurance process concluded that 4 percent of risk ratings were incorrect. Based on these findings, the district concluded that the vast majority of examiner loan classifications were accurate but recommended more training to address the discrepancies. Regulators also use surveys to gather information on how to improve the examination process and understand the impact of policies on the banking industry. For example, the regulators issued an interagency survey for examinations conducted between May 31 and July 9, 2010. According to an FDIC analysis of the resulting data, more than more than 2 percent were downgraded. senior official reviews the sufficiency of support for downgraded CRE loans for all issued ROEs. Of 11 CRE loan downgrades reviewed in the third and fourth quarter of 2010, this official stated that 2 should not have been downgraded. The loans initially were considered collateral dependent, but after closer review the official determined that the borrowers had some capacity to repay, so the loans should have been classified but not yet charged off. In these two cases, the downgrades were reviewed and the loans were classified. Bank officials say examiners have been more critical of recent appraisals. If the borrower lacks the ability to repay, the loan then could be considered “collateral dependent.” Such loans are classified based on the value of the property, and tend to rely on values established in appra isals. Classifications are a major concern for banks primarily because they can result in reduced earnings. For example, an examiner may determine that an applicant may not be able to repay the loan. Changes in CAMEL ratings were not found to have a “consistent’ impact on future lending behavior. When there was an impact, the data show that it was minimal. The researchers also noted that, based on their research, banks may respond “asymmetrically” to changes in CAMel ratings. These studies suggest examiners’ actions can affect lending, albeit minimally. However, research suggests that regulators were more regulators.this impact was projected to be significantly less than 1 percentage point. using what is known as the CAMELS rating system. CAMELS components consider the institution’s size and sophistication, the nature and complexity of its activities, and its risk profile. A bank is rated for each of the components and given a composite rating, which generally bears a close relationship to the component ratings. The component rating and the composite ratings are scored on a scale of 1 (best) to 5 (worst) Regulatory actions CAMELS composite ratings of 4 or 5, a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE in the 75th percentile or greater for the banks in our sample, and a loss ratio of 75 or greater. typically correspond to the composite CAMELS ratings, with the actions generally increasing in severity as the ratings become worse. Table 2 describes the definitions of the composite scores under the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System. In examinations, examiners review a sample of banks’ internal ratings of loans to determine the adequacy of credit risk administration and identify loans that show undue risk and may be uncollectible. As part of this review, Examiners determine which loans are considered “pass,” with no concerns noted, as well as those that are special mentioned or “classified” for community banks to work through the downturn. Bank officials we interviewed also stated that their experience with increased supervisory scrutiny was being reflected in CAMELS ratings and additional capital requirements. For example, many bank officials thought the management component rating was more critically assessed now, and heavily driven by asset quality and other component ratings. Some bank officials added that they were being rated on deterioration in their portfolios that was due to the broader economic downturn and problems in their geographic market that were out of their control. lessons learned, regulatory officials stated that they have been following up more often on matters requiring attention (MRA) and refocusing their supervisory efforts. OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division issued an MRA Reference Guide that provides examiners with OCC policy guidance on how to report, follow up on, and keep records related to MRAs. FDIC in June 2009 implemented its “Forward Looking Supervision” program that re-emphasizes reviewing all aspects of a bank’S risks during the examination process. our sample. OCC- supervised banks represent the greatest number of banks in our sample. A number of the examinations for the Federal Reserve and FDIC were led by the state regulator and were out of the scope of our review. The resulting sample from this process is outlined below, broken down by regulator (table 5), state (table 6), and CAMELS ratings (table 7). To avoid overweighting the sample with OCC supervised banks, we randomly removed some OCC-led bank examinations for which we had a sufficient number of cases. As of December 31, 2010, there were 6,364 community banks (commercial banks with total assets of $1 billion or less) This represents about 92 percent of all commercial banks, although only about 10 percent of commercial bank assets nationwide. Banks in the U.S. are supervised by one of the following three federal regulators: FDIC, Federal Reserve or OCC. The Federal Reserve supervises commercial banks that are state-chartered and members of the Federal Reserve System. OCC supervises federally chartered national banks. Regulators have been incorporating into their regulatory processes a number of lessons learned from the financial crisis. A few bank officials stated that the regulators should focus on the community banks that caused the problems, rather than subjecting all community banks to such strict scrutiny. As noted in a December 2010 report by the FDIC IG that summarizes certain MLR findings, FDIC determined based on the MLRs that earlier supervisory action could have been taken against the failing banks. The report was based on findings from the IGs of the banking regulators in 2009 and 2010. information on the study cited by FDIC. We are sending copies of this report to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, OCC, and other interested parties. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact A. Nicole Clowers at (202) 512-8678 or clowersa@gao-gov. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VI. trends in the CRE market, we interviewed regulatory and bank officials and reviewed reports of examination (ROE) from a sample of banks. We selected banks with elevated CRE and ADC concentrations and those that had a recent bank examination. From that subset, we placed banks into four “pools” with the goal of speaking with officials from, and reviewing ROEs for, a breadth of community banks. From the bank examination information we received from the regulators, we selected banks from California that had an examination conducted after October 2009. of 1 or 2 and a CRE concentration above 300 percent of CRE loans (including owner-occupied) to total capital. Pool 2 consisted of banks that generally were in good condition but also had ADC concentrations. Pool 3 consisted ofbanks that were generally in good shape but had high concentration of ADC loans to capital. The criteria were a CAMELS composite rating of 2 and both a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE and a 100 percent or more concentration in ADC loans in Pool 2. The pool was designed to include the largest possible pool of banks. banks were intended to represent banks that were struggling and that had a higher number of loans classified as loss at the most recent examination. These had a CAMELS composite rating of 3, an overall CRE concentration of 300 percent or greater, and a proportion of loansclassified loss to total assets in the 75th percentile and above. This “loss ratio” was calculated by taking the total assets classified loss for the most recently examination and dividing them by total assets. Pool 4 was the most distressed pool of banks and consisted of banks with banks with CRE concentrations of over 300 percent. issue of CRE, were identified to us through bank associations, or had learned of our work and wanted to talk to us. When we summarize statements from our interviews with bank officials throughout this report, we use the term “a few” to refer to 3–10 of 43 banks making the statement. We do not provide specific numbers in the body of the report to avoid overstating the precision of the results from the nonprobability sample we used to select the banks. Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas are the states with the highest share of CRE-related nonperforming loans. The banks in the first two states have had a relatively greater share of such loans. We analyzed the following data points for commercial banks with assets of less than or equal to $1 billion: loans and leases for construction and land development, multifamily, owner-occupied real estate, other property, and nonfarm nonresidential. We reviewed these commercial banks in each of the 50 states in relation to these measures. and development, nonfarm nonresidential, and multifamily residential real estate) divided by the reported amount of total risk-based capital. We conducted similar analyses for commercial banks with assets more than $1 billion. We assessed the reliability of the call report data by reviewing the controls in place to help ensure its accuracy and by relying on past GAO reviews of these data. We determined that they were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining trends in CRE loan concentrations and performance at community banks. We reviewed all 106 of the material loss reviews (MLR) issued by the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Federal Reserve), FDIC, and U.S. Department of the Treasury. We also interviewed officials at the Conference of State Bank Regulators on the findings of their independent review of the MLRs. The reports we reviewed were culled from research and literature reviews from academic journals, the Congressional Research Service, and the Congressional Oversight Panel, FDIC. increase in noncurrent CRE loans have put stress on banks’ capital and ALLL. Many bank failures are associated with high CRE and ADC concentrations. In 2009 and 2010, 102 of 106 of the MLRs issued by the IGs of the banking regulators cited high CRE concentrations. 92 of 106 specifically cited ADC loans in particular as a contributing factor in bank failures. In the 106 MLRs, 76 of the banks reviewed were community banks. For example, the MLR for one failed bank—which contains findings similar to those in this article. findings related to CRE loans, we interviewed bank and regulatory officials and analyzed ROEs. We spoke with community bank officials affiliated with 43 community banks in a number of states. Most of the bank officials with whom we spoke were located in California, Georgia, and Texas based on our nonprobability sample. We initiated contact with 62 banks drawn from this sample and interviewed all of the 21 bank officials who responded to us. We interviewed officials from 22 additional banks that either testified before Congress on the OCC or reviewed reports from all four of its districts. on bank lending. With assistance from a research librarian, we conducted searches of research databases and report sources. We also sought and reviewed studies cited by the American Bankers Association (ABA) and the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) All studies included published papers released between 1991 and 2010. Based on our selection criteria, we determined that six studies were sufficient for our purposes. We analyzed the methodologies underlying these studies and determined that they were sound. The study was published in the Journal of Economic Literature.