Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 ( P.L. 99-433 ) reorganized DOD's command and control structure. There are 10 combatant commands: 6 geographic and 4 functional commands. SOCOM was the first combatant command endowed with acquisition authority and its own budget line for training and equipping its forces. The Fiscal Year (FY) 1987 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) gave SOCOM its own acquisition responsibilities. The FY2016 NDAA gives SOCOM acquisition responsibilities for the first time. military departments. 10 U.S.C. 2216 established a Defense Modernization Account and granted authority for its use to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries of the military departments. The FY2017 NDAA ( P.L. 114-328 , §2447d) granted a new reprogramming authority, referred to as a special transfer authority. This authority is intended to expedite the selection of prototype projects for production and rapid fielding. In the FY2018 NDAA, the Department of Defense was required to submit a report on the acquisition authorities available to the military department. Title 10 U.S.C. Section 164(c) grants SOCOM authority to validate and establish priorities for requirements. The military services are responsible for funding certain types of SOCOM training, service-common equipment, and professional services. If SOCOM wants to acquire a weapon system that is not special operations specific, the acquisition must be executed through one of the military departments. The Air Force provides SOCOM with C-130s and the Army provides the ammunition for service- common weapons to include the M4. SOCOM's statutory acquisition authorities are more limited than those of the military departments. SOCOM acquisition personnel are bound by and act with the same freedoms and restrictions as the military services and defense agencies. The definition of military departments, codified in 50 U.S.C. 3004, does not include SOCOM. As a result, SOCOM may not receive new acquisition authorities provided by Congress and must work through the Secretary of Defense to obtain these authorities or seek a legislative change. Each military service and many DOD components also have their own acquisition regulatory supplement that provides unique acquisition guidance. For example, the Army maintains the Army Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplements (AFARS) and the Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) maintains the DLA Directive. SOCOM has its own supplement to the DFARS, known as the SOCOM Federal acquisition Regulation Supplement (SOFARS) SOFARS Part 5601.101 defines the supplemental regulation's purpose as "provid[ing] the minimum essential implementation of the Federal acquisition regulation (FAR) and DOD FAR Supplement (DFARS)." SOCOM programs have lower dollar thresholds, so they don't receive the same level of scrutiny brought to bear on the more expensive programs. Another factor that potentially enables SOCOM's culture of innovation and risk-taking in its acquisition programs is its general ability to execute programs below statutory and regulatory dollar figures that require more rigorous oversight. This point has been highlighted by James "Hondo" Geurts, current Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and Acquisition (and former SOCOM Acquisition Executive) Congress may ask: To what extent do current acquisition-related laws and regulations promote or inhibit a more efficient, less bureaucratic, and more balanced approach to risk in acquisitions? In some instances SOCOM has fewer acquisition authorities than the military departments. This occurs where legislation grants acquisition authorities or flexibilities to the SOCOM branch. In some cases SOCOM may have less acquisition authority than military departments, such as in the case of the U.S. Air Force, which has less acquisition powers than the Army. SOCOM has unique acquisition authorities, Goldwater-Nichols report says. SOCOM can negotiate with military departments for systems to be provided to SOCOM, it says. The report also explores whether SOCOM hasunique characteristics that influence how it conducts acquisition, it adds. It concludes that SOCOM's acquisition authorities for unclassified acquisition programs are similar to those granted to the U.S. military departments. It also compares the military departments' and SOCom's chains of command, and the scope of acquisition activity and program oversight. size, culture, and close proximity to the warfighter as factors that can contribute to more effective acquisitions. The successful use of the Special Operations Command acquisition authority below the acquisition category (ACAT) 1 level illustrates the transformation benefits of having a joint buyer, close to the user, maintain a streamlined acquisition process to deliver low dollar threshold systems rapidly. In discussing the SOCOM acquisition culture and the benefits of a flatter organization, a number of current and former SOCOM officials have stated that the lack of bureaucratic overhead allows the organization to be more effective. all of the same oversight and policy as the rest of DOD. Our workforce operates professionally within the same DOD 5000 directives, the same Federal Acquisition Regulation and the same Financial Management Regulation. Give credit to our acquisition workforce for the results they achieve, and you might dismiss using USSOCOM as a benchmark for how to do acquisition. In some instances, SOCOM may in fact have fewer acquisition authorities and flexibilities than the military departments, as in cases where statute specifically provides acquisition authorities to the SOCOM. SOCOM's statutory restriction to procure strictly SOF-peculiar equipment, modifications, and services enables a more focused, operations-oriented acquisition culture. In a National Defense interview, James Smith reportedly stated the following: Our direct relationship to USSOCOM for the acquisition of only services and equipment that are unique to special operations gives us three primary advantages. First,USSOCOM is a combatant command with a more focus on special operations than other commands. Second, the SOF acquisition culture gives SOCOM the ability to execute acquisitions more efficiently and effectively. the Service Secretary, whereas in SOCOM the AE reports to the Commander. The method SOCOM uses for acquisitions is similar to the acquisition processes used by the military services. SOCOM benefits from being a smaller organization with a more focused mission set and limited scope of acquisition authorities. Other SOCOM attributes, such as delegating more decisionmaking to lower levels and promoting a more risk-taking culture, may be transferable to the services. The services must manage acquisition programs across domains, using multiple acquisition processes, and to use different acquisition competencies. size and scope of the acquisition efforts result in SOCOM having a substantially smaller acquisition workforce than the services. SOCOM's acquisition workforce consists of approximately 500 civilian and military personnel, less than 1% of the total DOD acquisition workforce of 156,000. A number of analysts and government officials have argued that SOCOM benefits from its size relative to the military services. The current SOCOM Acquisition Executive also reiterated this point when he reportedly stated that "[SOCOM's] ability to move relatively fast is a function of scale" SOF AT&L is the organization within SOCOM that leads internal major procurement efforts. The SOCOM Commander is directly responsible for all portions of the command and the Acquisition Executive (AE) reports directly to the Commander. Falling under the AE are the Program Executive Offices (PEOs) and Directorates. This direct chain of command allows for rapid communication on purpose, intent, and decisionmaking (see Figure 1 ). The structure's design is similar to that of the other services, which also follow a Secretary/Commander-AE-PEO-PM structure. modified to include SOCOM? Appendix A. Comparison of Chains of Command with SOCOM. Appendix B. Comparison between SOCOM and other chains of command. Appendix C. Discussion of SOCOM's role in the U.S. national security state. Appendix D. Discussion about SOCOM as a part of the military-industrial-security complex. Appendix E. Discussion on the role of the United States military in the global security environment. Appendix F. discussion on SOCOM in the military. an extremely relevant ongoing mission. We're fully co-located and integrated with the staff here. We have a firsthand understanding of priorities and urgency that gives us a different appreciation for schedule emphasis. It's not a cliché to say that our operators will often accept the "80 percent" solution if we can get that solution into the fight sooner. The services, on the other hand, have a much broader acquisition mandate, including the acquisition of business systems, weapon procurement programs that must be integrated into joint operations. one of SOCOM's largest with a total estimated procurement cost through FY2023 of at $391.7 million. FY2017 actual procurement funding budget for the program was $34 million. In comparison, the military services have numerous major programs with significantly higher procurement appropriations. The Navy's 2017 appropriation for the Virginia Class submarine program ($5.39 billion) is 250% larger than SOCom's entire FY2017 procurement appropriation ($2.08 billion). In FY2017, the SOCOM procurement appropriation was 1.5% of DOD's total procurement appropriation of $132.2 billion. The Nunn-McCurdy Act requires DOD to report to Congress when an MDAP experiences cost overruns of 15% or more. There are currently more than 150 MDAPs in DOD; many of these programs have a larger budget in a single year than SOCOM's entire procurement budget for FY2017. If SOCOM’s current CAT II program (Silent Knight Radar) experienced 100% cost growth (from approximately $391 million to $782 million), it would still not require a Nunn/McCurdy notification to Congress. CVN-78 Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier was approximately 70% of SOCOM's entire FY2017 procurement budget ($2.0 billion) Some analysts believe that these lower dollar thresholds allow SOCOM to operate below the radar. Despite these perceived organizational advantages, SOCOM has experienced challenges in executing its acquisition programs. The Advanced SEAL Delivery System Program, intended to develop a covert submersible insertion vehicle, was documented by both the Government Accountability Office and RAND as experiencing considerable cost, schedule, and performance issues. programs are given an Acquisition Category (ACAT) designation based on dollar figures and program scope. These designations determine the level of oversight required for the program. SOCOM and the military departments adhere to the same oversight standards and dollar threshold for categorizing programs. According to officials, SOCOM has a total of six programs that exceed the category II dollar thresholds. Currently, the Silent Knight Radar program is developing a SOF-common terrain following/terrain avoidance radar system for use in SOF fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft. small business. Many analysts argue that small businesses and organizations can be more nimble, more innovative, and more adaptable than large enterprises. Sir Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group, reportedly stated, "Small businesses are nimble and bold and can often teach much larger companies a thing or two about innovations that can change entire industries" A 2004 congressional report identified SOCOM's unique capabilities. A number of analysts also argue thatsmall organizations are more effective in communication, innovation and redesign, customer service, and risk-taking.