DOT extended the deadline for highway agencies to implement an assessment or management method for ensuring that their signs comply with the retroreflectivity standard to May 2014. DOT said it changed the deadlines to reduce the costs and impacts of the compliance deadlines on state and local highway agencies. It noted that the original deadlines had been based on standard useful-life cycles for signs, but that varying environmental conditions meant that the actual useful life of signs varied in different areas of the country. Communities are still required to replace any signs that do not meet the standards. minimum retroreflectivity levels. Communities were required to comply with the new standard by certain deadlines. There were three deadlines: January 22, 2012 (four years after adoption), 2015, and 2018. The deadline for communities to bring all street name signs and overhead guide signs into compliance with the standard is January 22. 2018 is the deadline for bringing all street names and overhead guides into compliance. For more information on the standards, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/22/road-signs-standard/index.html. of the retroreflectivity maintenance standard is likely to be modest. The impact may be greater in smaller communities that may never have instituted sign maintenance and replacement programs. Press reports indicate that a number of state and local highway agencies stated they estimated that their costs to comply with the new standard were much higher than the estimate in the DOT study. The methodologies by which these estimates were generated were not reported. In the controversy over the newstandard, the charge was made that the standard required agencies to replace "perfectly good" traffic signs. If a traffic sign meets the MUTCD standard for retroreflectivity, it does not have to be replaced. Several comments submitted during the rulemaking process described the rule as an unfunded mandate. It would impose additional costs on state and local governments for developing sign inventories, training personnel to examine signs, and replacing signs without providing additional resources for these services. If a sign does not meet the minimum retroreflective standard, then it may create a safety hazard after dark, although it may appear to be perfectly good during daylight hours. The new standard involved two elements. First, it established measurable standards for the minimum acceptable retroreflectivity of signs. The second element was a requirement that agencies adopt a method by which to maintain the retro Reflectivity of their street signs. To provide flexibility to agencies, the standard listed several methods that can satisfy this requirement. They include visual nighttime inspection from a moving vehicle by a trained sign inspector; measurement of sign retroreflective using a retroreflectometer. and replacement of signs based on their expected status. of the state and local transportation agencies, by saying that not every sign needed to meet the minimum standard so long as agencies had a management process in place. FHWA noted that having formally implemented a method for maintaining retroreflectivity would appear to put an agency in a better position to defend lawsuits. Also, the final standard provided that agencies that have adopted an assessment or management method will be in compliance with the standard even if some signs do not meet the standard. The final standard was issued on June 25, 2013. life above the minimum standard for retroreflectivity; replacement of all signs in an area, or of a given type, at specified intervals. Replacement based on the performance of sample signs that are monitored for loss of retro Reflectivity. According to the standard, an agency using a retro reflectivity assessment or management method will be in compliance even if at times individual signs did not meet the standard. The standard is published by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) on behalf of the European Commission. meet the minimum retroreflectivity standard. Most MUTCD standards, such as the lettering standard, do not have compliance deadlines. It was given a compliance deadline because its safety impact was considered to be significant. States and local governments that are not in compliance with standards are potentially subject to having a portion of their federal transportation funding withheld. However, there is no federal enforcement mechanism for standards in the MUT CD. The reason for these requirements is the belief that uniformity in traffic control devices promotes public safety. Earlier versions of the MUTCD had declared that "All traffic signs ... should have adequate retroreflectivity" In 1985, the Center for Auto Safety petitioned FHWA to add a minimum nighttime visibility standard. Congress directed DOT to develop a minimum standard, with this provision in the FY1993 Department of Transportation appropriations bill. Generally, highway safety groups supported the standard, while state and local transportation agencies opposed the establishment of numerical minimum levels of retro Reflectivity. They preferred that the standard be limited to establishing a management process that agencies would follow. The 2007 amendment set a minimum level of retroreflectivity for signs and required state agencies to adopt a method to ensure that signs met that minimum. Because of its safety significance, this standard was given a deadline for compliance. Separately, in the 2009 edition of the MUTCD, FHWA updated the standard concerning the sign lettering style for names of places, streets, and highways (ยง2D.05). Formerly, names on signs could either be in all capital letters or have only the first letter capitalized. of using only uppercase letters. This standard did not have a deadline for compliance. The lettering standard applies only to signs with names of places, streets, and highways. State and local transportation agencies are required to implement the new lettering style only as they install new signs or replace existing signs. Some press reports have given the impression that the federal government is requiring communities to immediately begin replacing all street signs just to comply with this new standard. This change was made because drivers often have only a brief time to read these signs and studies indicate that mixed-case lettering is easier to read. no formal enforcement mechanism to ensure compliance. A study sponsored by DOT estimated the total additional cost to state and local governments of complying with the new standard to be $37.5 million over a 10-year period. The more significant potential enforcement mechanism for MUTCD standards is the tort liability that communities may face in the event of a lawsuit involving, in this case, a nighttime car crash in which the visibility of a street sign may be a factor. In fact, one report noted that "It is not uncommon for M UTCD principles to be violated (knowingly or unknowingly) in actual practice" Since 2007, the Federal Highway Administration has amended certain national standards for traffic signs. These new standards were the subject of some confusion and controversy. Some state and local agencies complained that the new standards would be relatively costly to comply with. The new standard took effect on January 22, 2008. The report provides background for the nighttime visibility maintenance standard and addresses some of the issues that have been raised about this standard. It was published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in 1998. number of older drivers is increasing significantly. Ensuring that traffic signs are easily visible to older drivers at night is becoming a more significant safety issue. FHWA-sponsored research and the development of a proposed standard based on that research by a task force appointed by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), which represents state and local transportation agencies. The process of developing the new standard included FH WA- sponsored research and a proposal by AASHTo. a minimum level of retroreflectivity that must be maintained for pavement markings and signs. The reflective properties of sign materials decrease over time, due to exposure to sunlight and other factors. As the reflective materials degrade, a sign becomes harder to see at night. For many reasons, including the limited visibility available to drivers after sunset, driving at night is much more dangerous than driving during the daytime. Nighttime crash rates are estimated to be three times higher than daytime rates, and the fatality rate for nighttime driving is also higher than for daytime driving. At night, when visual cues available to drivers are much more limited, the assistance provided by traffic signs becomes more important. If a sign is necessary in the daytime, it has equal or greater value to motorists at night. Nighttime driving becomes more challenging as drivers age, because over time the lens of the eye typically become less transparent. This and other changes result in reduced sensitivity to light and reduced clarity of vision for older persons. With the aging of the U.S. population, the. period. Of this, $27.5 million would be borne by local governments, and $11.8 million by state governments. The total cost was estimated to represent a 0.5% increase in annual sign maintenance costs for states. Up to 100% of the cost of replacing traffic signs is eligible for federal funding. Most larger communities already have sign maintenance and replacement programs. For these communities, the study estimated that the impact on local government budgets would not be significant. The maximum cost in any one year was estimated at $4.5million. The minimum retroreflectivity standard's primary impact was to establish a quantifiable level for what constitutes adequate nighttime visibility. Up to 100% of the cost of installing and replacing traffic signs can be covered by federal-aid highway funding under several programs. The annual level of federal-Aid highway funding provided through the annual DOT appropriations act rose from $33.9 billion in FY2004 (when the rule was formally proposed) to $41.5 billion in Fiscal Year 2012 (FY2012) The federal government provided $27.5billion to states and localities in FY2012.