risk assessment and providing Letters of No Prejudice earlier than traditionally allowed in the New Starts process to Houston Metro. FTA has also stated its amenability to waiving its risk assessment and financial reviews for non-pilot program projects. The agency has also granted a waiver from federal performance bonding requirements to the Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector pilot project, which it has also done for other non-Pilot programs. The project is currently in the final design phase of New Starts. In its November 2008 report, FTA determined that it would not relax, modify, or waive its risk assessment and financial capacity reviews prior to advancement into final design. Houston Metro retains risks in a number of critical risk areas including finance since there is no equity capital investment by the private sector partner. Officials said that they considered transferring more risk to the privatesector to meet FTA’s threshold to waive certain New Starts evaluation requirements, but decided against doing so because of their concern that private sector assuming certain risks to meet the threshold may be too much. use of a rigorous and systematic evaluation process to distinguish among proposed New Starts investments. The New Starts grant process is closely aligned with the conventional design-bid-build approach, whereby the project sponsor contracts with separate entities for the design and construction of the project. In 2005, in 2005, FTA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York were the first agencies to use this approach to evaluate New Starts projects. In 2010, the Federal Government changed the way it evaluates New Starts grants. The New Starts process is perceived by project sponsors as intensive, lengthy, and burdensome. FTA’s prescribed review times of 30 and 120 days for entry into the preliminary engineering and final design phases are apparently arbitrary, a 2007 Deloitte study found. In particular, the study found that the review times are generally longer than the 30- to 120-day prescribed review period for a project to be considered for the New Starts program. The study also identified opportunities for streamlining or simplifying the process. eligible for a simplified and accelerated review process that is intended to substantially reduce the time and cost to the sponsors of New Starts projects. This can include major modifications of the requirements and oversight tools. For example, FTA may offer concurrent project approvals into preliminary engineering and final design. The modification of any of FTA’s New Starts requirements and Oversight tools will be on a case-by-case basis if FTA determines enough risk is transferred to the New Starts program to warrant such a change. The risk-assessment process, which aims to identify issues that could affect a project's schedule or cost, may also be modified. that FTA required them to submit and resubmit entire project documents to FTA multiple times, which led to delays. FTA officials told us the length of time for reviews depends on a number of factors, most importantly the completeness and accuracy of the project sponsor’s submissions. In addition to the costs of delays, the design of the New Starts project approval process—which is closely aligned with the conventional design- bid-build process—is also to blame for delays, they say. FTA’s risk-assessment process delayed project development. Consultants to the Dulles Silver Line project sponsor told us that through the New Starts process, FTA has complete control over a project's schedule. Project sponsors have to put project work on hold while waiting for FTA's approval to advance into the next project phase. Construction activities on the Silver Line could not begin until the approval of a full funding grant agreement, they said. Some of the time- savings benefits of the design-build approach were lost. FTA has yet to grant three pilot project sponsors any major streamlining modifications of the New Starts project approval process. FTA officials told us that none of the pilot projects has demonstrated a sufficient transfer of risk or financial investment by the private sector to enable FTA to relax its normal New Starts evaluation requirements. Thus far, FTA has only assessed the Houston Metro pilot project to determine the extent to which FTA could streamline the New starts process. The three pilot projects are the first to be assessed by FTA. To evaluate the effectiveness of a pilot program, a sound evaluation plan is needed and should incorporate key features. Without such an evaluation plan, FTA is limited in its decision making regarding its pilot program. The plan should include well-defined, clear, and measurable objectives; measures that are directly linked to the program objectives; criteria for determining pilot program performance; a way to isolate the effects of the pilot program; a data analysis plan for the evaluation design; and a detailed plan to ensure that data collection, entry, and storage are reliable and error-free. Starts process, such as Letters of Intent that announce FTA’s intention to issue a full funding grant agreement. Over the past 30 years, FTA has made very limited use of these tools by only to obligate future funds. We found that the governments of the U.S. and Mexico did not use these tools properly. We also found that under current statute, these tools count against FTA”s available funding for New Starts projects under the current surface transportation authorization. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, an advocacy group. granting three Letters of Intent and four Early Systems Work Agreements to transit projects. The Deloitte study noted that New Starts project sponsors miss the opportunity to use alternative methods including design-build and design- build-finance-operate-maintain. However, use of these tools is not without risk, as they could be misinterpreted as an obligation of federal funds when they only signal FTA’s intention, the study said. The study concluded that the greater use of the tools could be beneficial. used conditional approvals to incorporate more flexibility into their funding processes and help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. Without an evaluation plan to assess the results of its pilot program, FTA may also lose some valuable information Congress intended the agency to obtain through the pilot program’s establishment. FTA may want to turn to the experiences of these other modal administrations and governments and use existing, long-standing tools to incorporated more flexibility in the New Starts process to help facilitate transit projects that use alternative approaches. FTA officials noted that the agency has made use of tools such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements in the past in order to streamline the New Starts process. FTA officials acknowledged the need for an evaluation plan to assess the pilot program’s results and stated they will be working to develop one. Further, FTA officials stated that FTA is working to developed a plan to evaluate the effectiveness of the pilot. of our recommendations, and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use of these tools in the future. Congress authorized FTA to establish its Public- Private Partnership Pilot Program to demonstrate the advantages and disadvantages of these approaches in transit. The pilot project studies those projects that use alternative approaches that integrate a sharing of project risk and incorporate private equity capital. To date, only one of the pilot projects is expected to be funded by bonds issued through the state of Nevada and with contributions from the area resorts and hotels. The program is intended to show where FTA can grant greater flexibility of some of its New Starts requirements to projects within the program. Congress will be limited in its decision making about the pilot program’s potential broader application. FTA officials told us that they have not yet developed an evaluation plan for its pilot program. The alternative approaches we reviewed have protected the public interest in various ways to ensure the public receives the best price for a project and to create incentives for the private sector partner so that the project progresses and operates based on agreed-upon objectives. Project sponsors we found that the alternative approaches protect the public's interest. potentially increase private sector bids and that they would still be able to achieve some of the benefits of using an alternative approach without equity capital investment by the private sector. While it may be too early for FTA to grant major streamlining modifications with the other two pilot projects, FTA still has the ability as part of its pilot program to further experiment with the use of existing tools that could encourage a greater private sector role while continuing to balance the need to protect the public interest. FTA has the able to use conditional approvals in the New. has not yet illustrated how this can be done. This is because, on the one hand, no pilot project has demonstrated enough of a transfer of risk. On the other hand, the potential challenges posed by the New Starts requirements, including delays and additional costs, may discourage the private sector from assuming enhanced financial responsibility in these alternative approaches. Despite this apparent impasse, FTA sill has the unique opportunity to take advantage of the fundamental changes to its New Starts evaluation requirements to streamline the process. and equity capital is invested by the private sector. In addition to major modifications, FTA may also make use of other tools (not unique to the pilot program) to expedite the review process. These include Letters of No Prejudice that allow a project sponsor to incur costs with the understanding that these costs may be reimbursable as eligible expenses. FTA can also use Letters of Intent to signal an intention to obligate federal funds at a later date when funds become available for the project. United States generally provides public transit agencies a cheaper source of funding because they can borrow more cheaply than the private sector. FTA distributes billions of dollars of federal funding to transit agencies for the construction of new, large-scale projects. Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector (design-build-operate-maintain), Denver Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects. Houston Metro North and Southeast Corridor pilot projects ( design- build-finance- operate-m maintain) FTA identifies and recommends new fixed-guideway transit projects for federal funding. Over the last decade, the New Starts program has resulted in funding state and local agencies with over $10 billion. New Starts is FTA’s largest capital grant program for transit projects. Since the early 1970s, a significant portion of the federal government”s share of new capital investment in mass transportation has been decide which projects to recommend to Congress for funding. We have previously identified New Starts as a model for other federal transportation programs. FTA must prioritize transit projects for funding by evaluating, rating, and recommending potential projects on the basis of specific financial commitment and project justification criteria. Using criteria set by law, FTA evaluates potential transit projects and assigns ratings to them annually. These evaluation criteria reflect a range of benefits and effects of the proposed project, such as cost-effectiveness, as well as the ability of the project sponsor to fund the project and finance the continued operation of its transit system.initiated through the New Starts process, resulting in full funding grant agreements. Congress authorized FTA to establish the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. Pilot program allows FTA to study projects that incorporate greater private sector involvement through alternative project delivery and financing approaches. Project sponsors are looking to transit projects that use alternative approaches to deliver and finance new transit projects, along with federal funds. But because of its sequential and phased structure, FTA’s New Starts program is incompatible with transit projects using these approaches, authors say. They say Congress and FTA have taken steps to streamline New Starts by establishing the pilot program. The New Starts project approval process poses particular challenges for project sponsors using alternative approaches for their transit projects. The challenges they raised include (1) delays, (2) additional costs, and (3) the loss of other potential benefits, such as enhanced efficiencies and improved quality. The sequential and phased New Startsproject approval process can create schedule delays as project sponsors await federal approval. The amount of money involved in the New Starts process can be significant. The process can also create additional costs and delays. FTA has employed a contractor to determine whether risk is effectively transferred from the public to private sector for its pilot program projects. In the United States, the private sector has played a more limited role in the delivery and financing of transit projects than in some other countries. Since 2000, seven New Starts projects were completed using alternative approaches (see table 1). These projects have focused on delivery, rather than financing, and have used alternative funding methods such as EASI. Available in U.S. alternative approaches may help ensure more predictable funding for maintenance and operations since these activities can be subject to unpredictable public sector budget cycles. Because alternative approaches for transit projects may include operations and maintenance standards in the contract, the private sector might be responsible to fund these activities within the overall contract price. Expanded FTA efforts could facilitate the implementation of transit projects that use alternative approaches and protect the public interest through the use of tools such as standardized contracts, technical assistance, and financial assessments. We recommend that the Secretary of Transportation direct the FTA Administrator to take the following actions: Incorporate greater flexibility, as warranted, in the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. further streamlined. As more transit projects use alternative approaches, FTA may not be able to readily accommodate these approaches, ultimately disadvantaging transit project sponsors. We provided a draft of this report to DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed to consider our recommendations and provided comments through e-mail from FTA officials. In their comments, FTA officials stated that the agency has ongoing and planned efforts as part of its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program that they believe address the intent of the pilot program. on how project sponsors and DOT can protect the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 through October 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. We also held in-depth interviews with FTA on its steps to protect thepublic interest in federally funded transit projects with greater private sector participation including programs like FTA’s Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. FTA’s pilot program is expected to demonstrate potential benefits to using alternative approaches in transit. Project sponsors cited a range of potential benefits, such as achieving cost and time savings, as well as potential advantages to the public sector. A separate entity was created to oversee the project's development and the private partner provided one-third of the project’S funding, including private equity capital, in exchange for periodic payments based on performance and ridership. 2010 Winter Olympics. DOT outlined some of these same benefits and advantages in its 2007 Report to Starts Process, and Options Exist to Expedite Project Development. Public Transportation: Improvements Are Needed to More Fully Assess Predicted Impacts of New Starts Projects. Highway Public-Private Partnerships: More Rigorous Up-front Analysis Could Better Secure Potential Benefits and Protect the Public Interest. High Speed Passenger Rail: Future Development Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and Establishing a Clear Federal Role. Highways: Increased Reliance on Contractors Can Pose Oversight Challenges for Federal and State Officials. Railroad Bridges and Tunnels: Federal Role in Providing Safety Oversight and Freight Infrastructure Investment Could Be Better Targeted. Is Likely for New Starts and Small Starts Programs, but Improvements Needed to the Small Starts Application Process. GAO-07-917. Washington, D.C.: July 27, 2007. Public Transportation: Preliminary Analysis of Changes to and Trends in FTA’s New starts and Small starts programs.GAO-06-910T. Washington,. D.c.: June 27, 2006. Equal Employment Opportunity: DOD’S EEO Pilot Program Under Way, but. Improvements Need to be made to DOD's Evaluation Plan. FTA officials have plans to develop an online toolset for employees to help them provide technical assistance to project sponsors on these alternative approaches. This assistance is to include checklists to help determine whether a project should use an alternative approach, risk matrices and a financial feasibility model. In June 2009, the House of Representatives’ Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure approved a bill that would require the FTA to consider alternative approaches to transit projects. The bill was passed by the House Transportation Committee and the Senate Transportation Committee in June 2009. technical assistance for its staff on how to structure and evaluate alternative approaches to transit projects. Because these efforts are either planned or in their early stages, we are retaining our recommendations. FTA officials provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and DOT. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the individual named above, Steve Cohen, Assistant Director; Jay Cherlow; Patrick Dudley; Carol Henn; Bert Japikse; Joanie Lofgren; Maureen Luna-Long; Amanda K. Miller; Tina Paek; Amy Rosewarne; Tina Won Sherman; and Jim Wozny made key contributions to this report. GAO-09-712. Washington, D.C.: August 12, 2009. interest in public-private partnerships through the use of quantitative and qualitative public interest assessments. We have previously reported that more rigorous, up-front analysis could better secure potential benefits and protect the public interest. For example, a Value for Money analysis is a tool used to evaluate if entering into a project as a public/private partnership is in the public's best interests. The use of such tools can help lay out the expected benefits, costs, and risks of the project. Conversely, not using such tools could potentially allow aspects of thepublic interest to be overlooked. The United Kingdom, and British Columbia in Canada, among others, require a Value for Money analysis for all transportation projects over a certain cost threshold. Domestically, Florida requires avalue for money analysis for public- private partnerships, one of which was recently conducted on the Florida Turnpike. Public-private partnership is the best project delivery option available, according to the U.S. Department of Transportation. The U.K. requires a Value For Money analysis if a project costs more than about $24 million, while British Columbia requires one if the cost is over $46 million. Project sponsors can assess if one public-private partnership option is more advantageous than another. For example, Bay Area Rapid Transit used a Value for Money analysis in its original iteration of the Oakland Airport Connector to assess which alternative project delivery approach would be more advantageous. Project sponsors can also use Value for money to give a range of possible project costs when coupled with a sensitivity analysis. A sensitivity analysis developed for the Canada Line suggested that a design-build-operate-maintain approach provides more value. assessments such as Value for Money analysis provides a more comprehensive project assessment. Project sponsors can also use financial assessments such as value for money analysis for other reasons. For example, it can assist in determining which project delivery project costs could have varied from $47 million more to $270 million less than expected, depending on the level of risk. A further example of how project sponsors can use Value for money is to enhance communication about a project. They can lead to more-informed discussions and provide transparency in the selection of the project delivery approach. tests examine not only the economic value of a project but also other factors that are hard to quantify, such as design quality and functionality. In the United Kingdom, Value for Money analysis includes qualitative factors such as the viability, desirability, and achievability of the project. Provinces such as Canada’s British Columbia and Australia's Victoria also include qualitative factors in their financial assessments. Government officials stated that including both quantitative and quantitative factors in financial assessments is a good idea. Money analysis, cautioned that the assessments are not without limitations. For example, officials and consultants told us that these analyses are inherently subjective and rely on assumptions that can introduce bias. Assessments can include the assumption that the public sector will likely have higher construction costs due to a history of cost overruns. In the United Kingdom, an “optimism bias” of 15 percent is added to a public sector comparator in part to account for this. Consultants noted that there is subjectivity in valuing risks as detailed data on the probability of particular project risks occurring are unavailable. Project sponsors seek to protect the public interest through an emphasis on performance. Performance specifications focus on desired project performance and not design details. When specifications are focused on performance, bidders can offer a range of design and technology options as well as follow best practices that meet best practices for project delivery. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Project sponsors have sought to use performance standards to protect the public interest. These standards are what the private sector partner must meet to be compensated during the project. In contrast, one project sponsor noted that performance specifications should not be used when conditions of the facility or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances could occur that would require more specific design specifications. Also said that projects with a range of technology options must undergo the environmental review process at the highest possible level of design given the effect of different technologies on the environment. be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants. Project sponsors then conduct a request for qualified bidders to gain more detailed input from the private sector on a project. The request can establish a higher threshold of responsibility for private partners compared to traditional procurements in which a private partner is selected based primarily on bid price. Thus, sustained and iterative interaction between the project sponsor and theprivate sector can refine the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to use the funds. project’s construction, operations, and maintenance phases, helping to ensure adequate performance. If the private sector partner does not meet the standards, then it is penalized with no, reduced, or delayed payments. Standards for construction include delivering a completed project or project element within a set schedule. For example, the Canada Line had 400 milestones that it needed to complete and have certified in order to continue to receive timely payments during the project's construction period. Performance standards for operations and maintenance cover all aspects, also called key performance indicators. or a significant number of functions in connection with a project. Risk transfer involves assigning responsibility for a project risk in design and its effect on construction that would normally be borne by the project sponsor. In transferring responsibility and risk for multiple project elements to the private sector partner, the project sponsors often has less control over the procurement. The private sector partners may have the opportunity to earn a financial return commensurate with the risks it has assumed. By transferring these project risks, theproject sponsor creates incentives for the privatesector to keep the project on schedule and on budget. which transferred ridership risk but not the ability to set fares. Officials we interviewed stated that the private partner progressively faced financial difficulties due to low ridership revenue, which led to the collapse and ultimate buyback of the partnership by Transport for London. If a transit project is built as an extension of an existing system, the private sector partner may not want to operate a single segment of a publicly owned system. According to officials, private investors are reluctant to assume Ridership risk of any portion of a system operated by an entity they do not control.  connector project initially tried but ultimately was unable to transfer ridership risk. Private sector concessionaire (under the project’s original iteration) would not have fare-setting authority. This was also the case with the Canada Line, where the agreement was structured to incorporate a limited transfer of ridershiprisk to the private sector partner. Although the project sponsor wanted to transfer full ridership. risk to the concessionaire, it learned that private investors would not finance a deal with full Ridership risk transfer due to their inability to control factors. that are not identified during surveys of a project site. Past experience in projects demonstrates the difficulty of transferring these risks to the private sector. Denver Regional Transportation District chose not to transfer ridership risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects given that it wanted to retain the right to set fares. Another example is the United Kingdom’s Croydon Tramlink project, which will link London to the south coast of England and the south-east of England in one of the world's busiest rail links. East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ long-term design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession. This caused the private sector to estimate a $25 million charge for taking on this risk. When the project sponsor decided to retain one aspect of the environmental risk related to several unknown remediation elements, the cost estimate of transferring the remaining environmental risk was dropped from $25m to $9m. Permitting requirements and other environmental risks may become too time-consuming and costly for the privatesector to address. Project sponsors can transfer a range of key project risks to the private sector. These include those related to design, financing, construction performance and schedule. But some risks may not be transferable. For example, it may be too costly for project sponsors to transfer certain risks, such as ridership and environmental remediation. The private sector may want to charge an additional premium to take them on, the authors say. They say the federal government’s share of project risks should not be transferred to theprivate sector. The project sponsor decided to transfer limited ridership risk to the private sector. Denver Regional Transportation District originally planned to transfer all environmental remediation risk for its trains. Officials said it may be difficult to transfer to theprivate sector because of the additional premium the privatesector charges to address unknown factors. The project sponsors said the move was done to induce the concessionaire to increase ridership by providing quality customer service. The private sector partner will be responsible for 10 percent of its payments during operations and maintenance based on ridership figures. The Manchester Metrolink Phase II light rail project was a 17-year concession agreement. The private partner had responsibility to design, construct, finance, operate, and maintain this project. The project sponsor retained the authority to set fares. In this project, payments to the private sector partner during operations were based entirely on ridership revenue. The concession was ultimately bought by Transport for London. It was designed to expand theMetrolink System in order to connect two of the city’s existing stations. The project sponsor for Manchester Metrolink had to break two existing public-private partnership concession agreements to accommodate extensions to its system. Consultants to the Manchester project told us that breaking a concession agreement can be very expensive and can damage the relationship between the project sponsor and the private sector partner. Similarly, to accommodate increased ridership, theProject sponsor for Docklands Light Railway decided to build platform expansions. However, the privatesector partner was not willing to take on this additional work, requiring the project sponsors to take the extra steps. The Docklands Light Railway serves a redevelopment area east and southeast of London. The Lewisham Extension was the United Kingdom’s first transportation public-private partnership for both project delivery and financing. The Croydon Tramlink light rail project was a 99-year light rail projects in the UK and Canada. It was financed in part or full using private equity investment, and was the first public-to-private project partnership in the U.K. and Canadian history. a design-build alternative approach. Denver Regional Transportation District and the private sector completed the Transportation Expansion project 22 months ahead of schedule and within budget. The South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades saved 4 to 6 years by completing all upgrades as a single project, but incurred slightly higher costs than estimated for the conventional approach. In the United Kingdom, the three Docklands Light Railway extensions were built using design- build-finance-maintain approaches. However, the use of alternative approaches does not guarantee cost and schedule benefits. its costs plus provide a return on investment. Since the private sector partner borrows to finance its costs, it has equity at risk if it does not meet standards. Bank lenders protect their investments by ensuring that the privatesector properly develops a concession agreement and then delivers on it. This situation can create incentives for theprivate sector partner to deliver according to the terms of the agreement, the authors say. They say it can also provide incentives for project sponsors to deliver on their promises to project sponsors. The public interest is further protected by this integration of responsibilities. The bank lender and concessionaire provide additional project oversight through the monitoring of cost overruns and schedule delays, among other issues. To better protect the public interest, project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that protect public interest. For the Croydon Tramlink, the private sector partner contributed 30 percent of project costs. In the case of the Canada Line, theprivate sector partner did not miss any of its 400 payment milestones. Refinancing gains refer to savings that occur when the private sector revises its repayment schedule for its equity investment by taking advantage of better financial terms. The governments of the United Kingdom as well as Victoria and New South Wales, Australia, require that any refinancing gains achieved by private concessionaires generally be shared with the government. Some foreign governments have recognized the importance of protecting the public. The public interest is at the heart of the highway public-private partnerships, says the government's report. The private partner provided over one-half of the project’s funding for construction. The public sector terminated the concession to further expand the system. One of the two private sector partners subsequently went bankrupt, and the concession agreement was then taken over by Transport for London. The Nottingham Express Transit light rail project used a 27-year contract to maintain and upgrade the system's infrastructure, including track, tunnels, trains, and stations. In return, the private sector would receive periodic payments based on its performance. of service including the availability, frequency, and reliability of service and conditions of facilities. Some projects have also incorporated standards that link to increased ridership to provide incentives for the private sector partner to provide good customer service. For example, Nottingham Express Transit has 20 percent of its payments to the privatesector based on ridership. Additionally, the draft concession agreement for Denver’s metro area has a 20 percent ridership link to private sector payments. The London Underground chose to emphasize key performance indicators in four areas—availability, capability, ambience and service points. allow for flexibility under certain circumstances. For example, Houston Metro’s North and Southeast Corridor projects’ concession agreement incorporated this flexibility by including an operations and maintenance agreement for the first 5 years after service begins with the option for renewal. According to a consultant that works on the project, this approach was chosen in part because the project sponsor wanted to protect the public interest in the project. The project sponsor also said it was in the interest of the city to have a long-term concession agreement. project sponsor an option to break and buy back the agreement for a set price. In contrast, in the previously mentioned example of Manchester Metrolink, concessions for phase 2 were terminated by the project sponsor to allow for system expansion in a third phase. According to consultants we interviewed, the terminations could have been avoided if the initial concessions had been shorter. Shorter concession periods are thus being used as a means to revisit terms and rebid if desired. In addition to clauses that allow project sponsors to revisit concession agreement terms, Both of the London Underground’s maintenance 30-year concession agreements are reviewed for scope of work and costs by a public-private partnerships arbiter every 7.5 years. The concessionaire has the ability to request an extraordinary review by the arbiter if costs rise above a specified threshold. Periodically revisiting terms, or shorter concession periods, can also allow for changes such as system extension. One of the Docklands Light Railway extensions has breakpoints at the years 2013 and 2020 in its concession agreement. other clauses that allow for flexibility can also protect the public interest. Denver Regional Transportation District’s draft concession agreement includes clauses specifying both triggers that could lead to default and terms of compensation in case of default. Other advisors to project sponsors told us that a clause specifying the sharing of “refinancing gains” between the project sponsor and concessionaire could also help to protect public interests. These provisions help to minimize disputes, according to the advisors to the project sponsors, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Infrastructure’s surface transportation reauthorization blueprint proposed that an Office of Expedited Project Delivery be created within FTA. Such support is not currently available for project sponsors of transit projects that use alternative approaches. Project sponsors and their advisors noted that as there is little public sector institutional knowledge about public- private partnerships in the United States, projects may be carried out without the benefit of previous experiences. We defined traditional financing to include federal grants (such as New Starts program grants), state delivery and alternative financing. to a greater private sector role in transportation, as evidenced by its newly established Office of Innovative Program Delivery for public-private partnerships. Congress has taken a greater interest in facilitating alternative approaches as well. Quasi- governmental entities established by foreign governments have better equipped project sponsors to implement alternative approaches, including public- private partnerships. FTA could consider these international models and expand its current efforts in transportation public-Private partnerships to support agreater private role in the transportation industry, says the FTA. report, we noted that formal consideration and analysis of public interest issues had been conducted in U.S. highway public-private partnerships. Since that report, the Federal Highway Administration’s Office of Innovative Program Delivery has been established to provide support. The office is intended to offer outreach, professional capacity building, technical assistance, and decision-making tools for highway-related public- private partnerships. It also provides an easy, single- point of access for project sponsors and other stakeholders. In the 1800s, the private sector played a central role in financing early transportation infrastructure development in the United States. Original sections of the New York City Subway were constructed from 1899 to 1904 by a public-private partnership. Another example is the City of Chicago’s “L” transit system, which was built from the 1920s to the 1950s by a private-sector partnership. In the U.S. today, private sector participation and investment in transit is not new. the 1880s through the 1920s and operated by the Chicago Rapid Transit Company, a privately owned firm. The construction of the system was financed by the private sector. In following years, transportation infrastructure development became almost wholly publicly funded. Conditions placed on federal transportation grants-in-aid limited private involvement in federally funded projects. More recently, there has been a move back towards policies that encourage more private and public blending of funding, responsibility, and control in transportation projects. The federal government has progressively relaxed restrictions on private participation in highway and transit projects serving public objectives. points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. Our work was focused on transit projects that involve greater private sector participation than is typical in conventional projects. In particular, we focused on the role of the private sector in the delivering and financing of U.S. transit projects compared with other countries. We also looked at the benefits and limitations of and the barriers, if any, to greater privatesector involvement in transit projects. GAO: Private Sector Sponsorship of and Investment in Major Projects Has Been Limited. GAO-04-419. Washington, D.C.: March 25, 2004. Highways and Transit: Private sector sponsorship of and investment in major projects has been limited. GAo-04/419.5, 2006. U.S. Department of Transportation: Privatesector Sponsorship and Investment In Major Projects has been Limited. Government Accountability Office: March 25/04, 2004, and March 4/05/06, respectively. Some countries have further protected the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by establishing quasi- governmental entities to assist project sponsors. Entities such as Partnerships UK, Partnerships Victoria, and Partnerships BC are often fee-for-service and associated with Treasury Departments on the provincial and national levels. Quasi-governmental entities can further protect the publicinterest through the benefits they provide, the GAO says. In a previous GAO, the agency said DOT does not provide similar support for transit projects. exists at the federal level, nor does federal guidance identify public interest considerations in transportation. Stakeholders include public transit authorities, transit agency employees, mass transit users and members of the public who may be affected by ancillary effects of a transit public-private partnership or alternative project delivery approach. defining the public interest is a function of scale and can differ based on based on scale. The public interest in transit may refer to the many stakeholders in public- private partnerships, each of which may have its own interests. Interviewed have attempted in part to protect the public interest by ensuring the use of competitive procurement practices. These practices are not unique to alternative approaches and are sometimes used in conventional procurements. Federal law and regulations generally require federal contracts to be competed unless they fall under specific exceptions to full and open competition. Nevertheless, project sponsors told us that maximizing the use. of these competitive procurement Practices helps to maximize the public's interest in transit projects, the authors say. The authors say the public should be able to have a voice in how transit projects are funded. The FTA defines alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships, as those that increase the extent of private sector involvement beyond the conventional design-bid-build project delivery approach. These alternative approaches contemplate a single private sector entity being responsible and financially liable for performing all functions of the project. The benefits are not assured and should be evaluated by weighing them against potential costs and trade-offs, the FTA says. The agency says states should also reexamine their own public- private partnership policies for transit projects. entities all develop guidance such as standardized contracts and provide technical assistance to support transit projects that use alternative approaches. According to an advisor for project sponsors, contracts for these partnerships and approaches generally follow a standard model. The United Kingdom’s standard contract outlines requirements as well as factors to consider from a project’S service commencement through termination, which is periodically updated to reflect lessons learned. For example, after the government of the United.Korea decided to build a new rail line, it decided to use an alternative approach. To determine how transit projects that use alternative approaches have been used in the United States, we collected and reviewed descriptions of the projects, copies of the concession or development agreements, planning documents, and documentation related to the financial structure. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors, private sector participants, international stakeholders, and experts regarding the competitive procurement process, robust concession agreements, and Value for Money analyses. We also examined international mechanisms that were implemented for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands Light Railway, London Underground, Manchester Metrolink. Transit public-private partnerships have been implemented in Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Hong Kong, Malaysia, the Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, and the United Kingdom. International projects generally require a government subsidy to supplement farebox revenues for construction as well as operations and maintenance. According to World Bank officials, the U.K. and Canada are leading countries for private equity investment in transit. The United Kingdom has the most experience using different public- private partnership models. The World Bank- sponsored report was published in May. United Kingdom and Canada use conditional approvals to help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. If those conditions are not met, the project loses its government funding. This conditional approval occurs after the department reviews projects, in part to address the risk of cost increases. It thus provides a signal of project quality to the private sector to help maintain a competitive bidding. The UK Department for Transport grants a conditional approval announcing the government’s intent to fund a project before it receives private sector bids. process. If the agreed-upon cost, schedule, and risk transference are not met, the government withdraws its funding. United Kingdom Department for Transport officials told us that they have experience withdrawing funding when such conditions have not been met. We also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations have also withdrawn funding for transit projects when they have not met the agreed conditions. We have asked Transport Canada for comment and will update this article if we receive a response from Transport Canada. potential universe of countries with significant experience in transit public-private partnerships. We determined that we would collect the most valuable and relevant information from countries that share a similar political and cultural structure to the United States. Given our limited resources, we decided to select only two of the three remaining countries. Thus, we ultimately identified Canada and the United Kingdom for our international site visits. Issues discussed in the report related to the interpretation of foreign law, including issues related to state-to-state agreements. completed or had already carried out substantial planning. The potential universe of projects contained 10 completed projects including: Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion Light Rail. We also included 3 eliminated the John F. Kennedy Airtrain, Portland MAX Airport Extension, and Las Vegas Monorail projects. We decided to select all three of the ongoing pilot projects—Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector, Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Transit Minimum Operating Segment 1, and Bay Area Rapid transit Extension to San Francisco International Airport. The Oakland Airport Connector project is to be a 3.2-mile system that will connect the Oakland International Airport to the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Coliseum Station. In its original iteration, the project planned on using a design-build-finance-operate-maintain project delivery approach that included private sector financing. Lower-than-expected ridership predictions due to the economic climate, among other factors, led BART to move forward with a different alternative approach for the project. officials said that in many cases, the private sector partner would need the authority to increase or decrease transit fares based on ridership trends. However, because raising fares involves political considerations, including equity for low-income transit users, officials told us that most project sponsors retain the right to set fares. Some project sponsors that have tried to transfer ridership risk while retaining fare-setting authority have run into difficulties, officials said. According to project sponsors and transit experts, the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport is a good place to start. European Union countries are required to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one bidder are less competitive and can result in less attractive bids. For example, although Bay Area Rapid Transit prequalified three contractors for the first version of its Oakland Airport Connector, two contractors withdrew during the negotiation period due to concerns about the project affordability. Bay AreaRapid Transit negotiated with the sole remaining bidder on costs for nearly a year but then let the Request for Proposals expire with no bids. Value for Money evaluations examine total project costs and benefits. They are used to determine if a public-private partnership approach is in the public interest for a given project. Value for Money tests are often done by comparing the costs of doing a proposed project. against an estimate of the costs. of procuring that project using a public delivery model. The I-595 Corridor Roadway Improvements Project in Broward County was one of the projects assessed. The Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport Connector was also assessed. Bay Area Rapid Transit says a contract will be awarded in December 2009. The project was originally to use a design-build-finance-operate-maintain approach. The private sector can be held responsible for the condition of a transit project for longer durations than under the conventional design-bid-build approach. A greater private sector role in transit projects can also potentially offer certain advantages to the public sector, including increased financial flexibility and more predictable operations and maintenance funding, the authors say. private sector can bid to provide something different than what was agreed upon under preliminary engineering. Houston Metro’s private sector partner told us it would like to begin some construction activities on the North and Southeast Corridors, but will not be able to begin until a full funding grant agreement is awarded. FTA officials responded that they allowed Houston Metro to carry out someConstruction activities in advance of their receiving a fullfunding grant agreement. Moreover, Houston Metro officials told us that the private sector has to delay its work until the funding process is completed. Project sponsors, stakeholders, and transit experts we interviewed told us that potential cost and time savings can be key incentives for using alternative approaches. Minnesota Metro Transit’s Hiawatha Corridor (one of the seven completed New Starts projects that used an alternative approach) was completed 12 months ahead of schedule compared to using the conventional design-bid-build approach. This saved an estimated $25 million to $38 million since early completion led to avoided administration costs using is really needed, the report says. A conventional design-bid-build contract is generally not flexible enough to allow for enhanced efficiencies and design improvements. This allows the private sector to potentially generate and apply innovative solutions in the design of the transit system. For example, Denver Regional Transportation District’s Transportation Expansion Light Rail project (another of the seven New Starts projects) used a design-build approach. A lessons-learned report following the project's completion stated that the project sponsor was able to incorporate 198 design modifications. design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors may be able to benefit from certain efficiencies and service improvements by transferring long-term responsibility of transit operations and maintenance. DOT’s 2007 Report to Congress on transit public-private partnerships stated that the private sector may be. able to add value to transit projects through improved management and innovation in a project.“We took several steps and considered various criteria in selecting which domestic transit projects to study as part of our review of alternative financing and project delivery practices,” the authors say. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Transportation Expansion light rail offered proposal stipends to private sector entities that submitted formal bids. Stipends add costs that must be weighed against the benefits they provide. Project sponsors have encouraged early and sustained interaction with the private sector to test the project's marketability and whether and in what form private sector participation is advantageous. Such feedback can be helpful in the development of a project's plans and plans for the future, the authors say. include the private sector. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential elements agreed upon by the public agencies funding the project. The Hiawatha Corridor project used a request for qualifications to select bidders and solicit private sector’s review of project details. Minnesota Metro Transit told us that input from the privatesector produced several good ideas that were incorporated into the project, such as a shared risk fund to provide an incentive for theprivate sector to reduce construction delays. The pilot projects are part of the Federal Transit Administration's "Transit for All" program. The Canada Line light rail project in the Vancouver area is a 35-year design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession agreement. Payments to the private sector were based on performance and ridership revenue. The private sector was also given the ability to set fares. The project is in the ninth year of its contract. It is designed to link Vancouver with its international airport and neighboring employment and population centers in anticipation of the light rail line's arrival. The line is expected to open in 2015. No completed New Starts projects have been privately financed and therefore, none of these projects have used private equity financing. One project, the Las Vegas Monorail, a 4-mile fixed-guideway system serving the resort corridor along Las Vegas Boulevard in Nevada, was financed with tax-exempt revenue. However, there have been very few examples of completed non-New Starts-funded new fixed-Guideway projects that have been private financed. The private sector role is to design and construct the project or to design, construct, operate and maintain the project. and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds, and defined conventional project delivery to refer to the design-bid-build approach. We defined innovative financing to include loan or credit assistance such as the Transportation Infrastructure Financing and Innovation Act, Private Activity Bonds, Tax Increment Financing, State Infrastructure Banks, Grant Anticipation Notes, and Revenue Bonds. Finally, we defined alternative financing to referring to public-private partnerships that involve private equity capital such as concession agreements and defined alternative approaches as ones that transfer greater risk to the private sector. private sector bidders to incorporate these funds into their financial plans without having to individually apply as otherwise required. The Federal Highway Administration has also carried out three pilot programs that have allowed projects to move more efficiently through its grant process by modifying some of its requirements. These pilot projects waived certain aspects of the federal-aid highway procurement provisions, such as moving forward with final decision prior to a National Environmental Policy Act decision, and allowed federally funded highway projects to use alternative approaches including design-build. Pilot program allowed project sponsors in two states to contract with the private sector at a much earlier point in the project development cycle than was previously allowed. FTA does not yet have an evaluation plan to accurately and reliably assess the pilot program’s results, including the effect of its efforts to streamline the New Starts process. Having helped pave the way for design-build to become the standard project delivery approach in highway projects, pilot program has been a big success for the federal government. The Federal Highway Administration has not yet granted project sponsors any major streamlining modifications. The Federal Aviation Administration has granted 90 of these multiyear awards since 1988. The Federal Highway Administration grants early conditional approvals to highway project sponsors seeking Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act funds. The FAA uses Letters of Intent in its Airport Improvement Program to establish multiyear funding schedules for projects that officials said allow project sponsors to proceed with greater certainty regarding future federal funding compared to the broader program. It also helps prevent project stops and starts, officials said. It is intended to encourage greater private sector involvement in projects. the reauthorization of the existing transportation bill, the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users, and awarding a full funding grant agreement for the project. Denver Regional Transportation District officials told us that following this approach will likely increase the cost. FTA officials said these additional costs stem from a lack of funding available in a surface transportation authorization period rather than FTA’s New Starts requirements. Tax-increment financing funding was a major funding source for the $2.6 billion project. One ongoing New Starts project did not apply to be part of the pilot program, but is using an alternative approach. The Dulles Silver Line is using the design-build approach with partial funding of the local share coming from area businesses. In contrast, international project sponsors have delivered transit projects using a wider range of alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships, beyond the more commonly used design- build in the United States (see table 2). According to the U.S. Department of Transportation, the majority of international transit projects have been delivered using a range of approaches. For the East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects, Denver Regional Transportation District officials also told us that since enough design work will be completed during the New Starts preliminary engineering phase, no additional design work is needed. However, as required by New Starts, they will again prepare the design documentation for the final design and full funding grant agreement approval phases, potentially contributing to schedule delays. FTA officials said that the resubmission of the documentation is necessary because the project will need to be fully funded before construction can begin. The East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects initially had a 700-page design specification document for their commuter rail vehicles. After industry review and feedback that the specifications would lead to customized vehicles that would be expensive and difficult to operate and maintain, the project sponsor responded by creating a 15-page performance specifications document for the vehicles. An advisor noted that the use of design specifications is more challenging with transit projects than in highways and other sectors given the technology issues and environmental concerns. The advisor also noted that design specifications are difficult to use on transit projects due to technology issues. Denver's East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects are to connect the city’s main railway station with its airport and other parts of the city. The project is using a design- build-finance-operate-maintain approach, which includes financing by the private sector. The private sector partner will be selected through a competitive proposal process to deliver and operate the project under a long-term agreement. It may also contribute to additional project costs borne by the public sector when other alternative approaches are used. Denver Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line, and Houston Metro North and Southeast Corridors. FTA views these projects as currently having the most private sector potential and thus designated them as their three Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program projects. We also decided, given our limited resources, to select two of the remaining three completed projects. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver Regional Transportation district Transportation Expansion. These two projects have successful collaborations with their respective departments of transportation, including their highway counterparts. payments tied to operations to the private sector over a number of years. By using the design-build- finance-operate-maintain approach, Denver may have more financing flexibility. With a longer payment period, project stakeholders told us that the transit agency could conserve funds in the short term to help it construct other new transit projects on time. Additionally, Denver could potentially extend the payments 20 years longer than if a bond were used and private sector were not involved in financing the project. Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects incorporate payment deductions. Low performance, such as delayed trains and littered or unclean railcars, persists. If low performance continues over a period, the project sponsor can terminate the concession agreement and rebid the project to another private partner. Project sponsors also protect the public interest in transit public-private partnership and other alternative approaches through the incorporation of private equity capital. When a private sector partner finances a project using equity capital, the private sector uses payments received from the project sponsors to repay. Public-private partnerships incur added costs when the private sector provides the financing for the project. Denver Regional Transportation District anticipates spending $15 million in advisory fees for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ request for proposals submittals. The municipal bond market in the U.S. may not necessarily require.that the conventional project delivery approach may notnecessarily require. that the public-private partnership approach be used for all projects, according to a report by the Center for American Progress.