SIPP data for April 2013, the latest month in common from data released for the full SIPP sample. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. An estimated 3.2 million (37%) were in families in which Social Security was reported as having been received on behalf of at least one of the children in the family. Another 1.9 million (22%) lived in families where a parent or guardian reported receiving Social Security benefits. poor, in that nearly all TANF dollars go to families that are poor on a pre-transfer (pre-TANF) basis. Social Security plays a much greater role in reducing poverty among children than does TANf. The estimates presented in this report are based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. The SIPP collects information on Social Security receipt and the reasons for receipt for persons age 15 and over. The U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data are used in this report. The most recent SIPP data are from the 2008 panel, which is designed to interview a representative sample of families every four months over a 64-month period. The SIPP collects detailed information on family composition, labor force participation, income, and program participation among families and their members in each of the 64 months they are included in the survey. With children, other data sources must be used. Security benefits may have been received by an extended family member (e.g., grandparent, aunt or uncle, cousin, niece or nephew) or an older adult sibling. For this latter group, children may incidently be affected by Social Security, but not directly as a matter of policy aimed at them. For the former group, Social Security's effect on child poverty is more directly related to Social Security policy, whereas for the latter group the effect is more related to children's incidental family living arrangements. as living in families in which Social Security benefits were reported, either on their own behalf, or on behalf of another family member. All children of a parent (or guardian) who are under the age of 18 are identified as Social Security child beneficiaries. To some extent, this method will overstate the number of children under age 18 who received Social Security, as potentially some, but not all, children of the parent may be Social Security beneficiaries. For more information, visit the Social Security Administration website. status is to estimate poverty by excluding Social Security from family income and comparing the result to the extent of poverty when Social Security is added back into family income. Figure 3 shows, for example, that 47.8% of children living in families that received Social Security would have been considered poor based on their families' incomes from sources other. In families where Social Security benefits are received on behalf of children or by parents or guardians, Social Security reduces their poverty rate from 54.2% to 27.2%. Social Security plays an important role in reducing poverty, not only among the aged but among children. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent dies, becomes disabled, or retires. In addition to receiving Social Security, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. This report examines the effects of Social Security on child poverty. The estimates presented in this report are based on a CRS analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation.  aggregate Social Security benefits paid on behalf of children in December 2012 amounted to about $1.712 billion, or about $20.5 billion on an annualized basis. In FY2013, combined federal and state TANF expenditures, in the form of who would otherwise be counted as poor, were $4.485 billion. Of this amount, nearly half (49.2% ) went to families that had total incomes, excluding Social Security , below the poverty line, which is more than five times the estimated federal cash welfare spending under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program. cash aid to families, amounted to an estimated $8.7 billion, of which approximately $4.3 billion (49%) was from federal funds. Families with children reported receiving about $6.053 billion in Social Security benefits in April 2013. Of these benefits, an estimated 44.1% (about $2.671 billion, or about $32.050 billion on an annualized basis) went to families who were poor based on their total cash income, excluding any benefits they received. worker who met the program's insured status requirements. In December 2012, 3.3 million Social Security beneficiaries (5.7% of all beneficiaries) were children under the age of 18. Among child beneficiaries, 1.2 million were children of deceased workers, and about 322,000 were dependent children of retired workers. The average monthly benefit among child beneficiaries in December 2012 was $525. Average monthly benefits of children of disabled workers were $525 per month in the same month of 2012. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent dies, becomes disabled, or retires. For children of disabled or retired workers, the child's benefit is generally equal to 50% of the parent's primary insurance amount (PIA) before adjustments. (The PIA is based on the parent’s Social Security earnings record.) Social Security is a work-related entitlement, in which benefits are determined on the basis of workers' employment and earnings history, without respect to current income. Children of deceased workers are generally entitled to benefits equal to 75% of the deceased parent's PIA before adjustments. Stepchildren may be eligible in some cases, as may some legally adopted grandchildren, with their benefits. Child benefits generally apply to all biological children of a worker (assuming that paternity/maternity has been established) and to legally adopted children. The family maximum cannot be exceeded regardless of the number of recipients entitled to benefit under the deceased or retired worker's earnings record. A maximum family benefit applies, varying from 150% to 188% of. the PIA of the retired, disabled, or deceased parent. being determined on the basis of their grandparents' earnings record. Children may receive benefits until they reach age 18, and if in high school, through age 19. Disabled children can receive benefits indefinitely as long as the disability was incurred before reaching age 22. In addition to receiving Social Security benefits in their own right, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. As noted above, children can qualify by being a child of a retired or disabled worker receiving social Security or a survivor of a deceased worker.