This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and returned via e-mail to USTSurvey@gao.gov. If you prefer, you may print copies of the questionnaire and complete them by hand. Please use your mouse to navigate by clicking on the field or check box you wish to answer. To select a check box or button, simply click on the center of the box. To change or deselect a checkbox response, simplyclick on the the response field. check box and the ‘X’ will disappear. To answer a question that requires that you write a comment, click on the answer box ____ and begin typing. The box will expand to accommodate your answer. We provide definitions for terms in this survey at or near the point at which the term appears. Please consider these definitions when responding to survey questions. Have there been any reviews of the recent review? [Enter quality of the data? UST management? 4 digit year.] Survey data presented in appendix II are not reliable for state level comparisons. 17 states generally reported having fairly recent data quality reviews, several internal controls on the data, and no significant data quality problems. 26 states and the District of Columbia generally report having some internal controls. 6 states reported having few, if any internal controls, according to our assessment of the reliability of their survey responses. We contacted state officials to clarify survey responses when necessary and used a centralized tracking document to record all changes. We included a series of data reliability questions in the survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us by the respondents. We collected information about the databases states used to provide survey data and the internal controls on those databases. We also requested supporting documentation if states noted their database(s) We also asked about whether the data provided were actual or estimates; and the assumptions, data, and calculations used to provided the actual or estimated data for selected questions. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. variability in the ways state officials described how they arrived at responses to certain questions. Some states provided explanations for their responses that were precise and grounded in reasonable mathematical or trend based assumptions, while others noted that their responses were educated guesses. Given the limitations in the information reported from some states, we determined that the survey data are not comparable by state, nor should they be reported using such terms as “actual” sums, budgets, or outlays. Consequently, the data are presented in the body of the survey. for data for a specific year referred to the federal fiscal year. If states were unable to provide data, we asked them to provide us with the starting date of their alternative reporting year. As a result, we present such data in the report as 2005 data. We also interviewed agency officials in a nonprobability sample of eight states to gather additional information regarding selected survey topics. Specifically, we talked with this group of officials in Florida, Iowa, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, and Utah. and/or significant data quality problems, and/or didn’t provide explanations for their calculations or reported that they were guesses. Overall, given the limitations in the information reported from some states, data reported by states and presented in this appendix should not be used to compare state programs. The GAO is an agency of the legislative branch that reviews federal programs on behalf of the U.S. Congress. To see the full report, go to: http://www.gao.gov/report/50-states. respond can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results. We included steps in both the data collection and data analysis stages to minimize such nonsampling errors. We asked respondents to return the survey by e-mail, fax, or mail by February 3, 2006. We accepted responses to the survey through mid-October 2006. For selected survey questions, where we were able to, we independently corroborated survey data by comparing these data with EPA data. We then followed up with states and EPA as needed about discrepancies. pretests to ensure variation in size of workload and status of the state financial assurance fund. As a result of our pretests, we made changes to some of the survey questions. We sent an announcement on November 18, 2005, of the upcoming survey to state contacts (including state officials). We then interviewed the officials to ensure that the (1) questions were clear and unambiguous; (2) terms used were precise; and (3) data needed to respond to the questions was available to the state officials. We edit-checked all surveys before they were keypunched. We verified the computer programs used to generate survey results. From the population of 51 state contacts who were asked to participate in our survey, we received 50 questionnaires for an overall response rate of 98 percent. We did not receive a questionnaire from South Dakota. We checked the data against hard copies of the surveys to ensure all changes and updates were recorded. When changes took place after a survey waskeypunched, the updates were made in the computer program used to generated survey results and recorded. are the penalties and the circumstances under which they would be imposed? 57. Are there any issues that have not been covered in this survey that you anticipate affecting the availability of public finding for cleanups in the next 5 years? 58. Arethere any additional comments you wish to make regarding the issues in this Survey or other matters related to USTs? Thank you for completing the survey! Please save this file now and send an e-mail with your saved questionnaire file and supporting documentation as an attachment to: USTSurvey@gao.gov. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from around the world. Visit iReport.com each week to see which photos have been featured in the latest Travel Snapshot gallery. The gallery will feature a new photo each week until the end of the year, with a selection of the best chosen to share with the world at large. For more information, visit CNN.org/Travel. Methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) is a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane. In some cases, MTBE was added to gasoline to fulfill requirements set in the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments to reduce certain types of emissions. Because MTBE dissolves easily in water and does not cling to soil very well, it migrates faster and farther through the ground than other gasoline components. This makes it more likely to contaminate public water systems and private drinking water wells. effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government has determined it to be a potential human carcinogen. The effects of exposure to MTBE include headaches; eye, nose, and throat irritation; coughs; nausea; dizziness; and disorientation. Low levels of MTBE can make drinking water supplies undrinkable due to its offensive taste and odor. Because of uncertainties about MTBE’s health effects, EPA has not set a national standard for MTBE in drinking water. cooperative agreement with EPA. EPA will undertake a cleanup only when there is a major public health or environmental emergency. In these circumstances, EPA’s involvement is to be limited to stabilizing the immediate situation, with the expectation that further cleanup will be conducted by the state. States are responsible for overseeing cleanup work performed by the party responsible for the contamination and for performing the cleanup at sites where sites where it has been found to be contaminated. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. site as “cleanup initiated” when the release has been confirmed and a case number assigned. According to the EPA definition, however, cleanup initiated requires that the state or responsible party has evaluated the site and initiated physical activity. Cleanup initiated should also be reported in situations where the state has determined that no physical activity is necessary to protect human health and the environment. A Louisiana Underground Storage Tank Program official told us that a state official said a cleanup was underway at the time of the release. risk sites. As of February 2006, the state was only authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within 90 days. Officials generally preapprove cleanup work only at the sites where contamination is most severe. The most urgent category includes releases deemed emergencies, all of which were being actively cleaned up as of August 2006. The remaining categories are ranked based on how soon the release is likely to affect human health and the environment, as well as its impact on the environment. The state categorizes releases into one of four categories. our report is included as appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the EPA Administrator and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. a. Yes....... No ........ b. Yes......... No ........ c. Yes...... No ........ d. Yes..... No ........ 2. Which of the following types of information does each of the databases you listed above contain? (e.g. location) a. .......................................................... b. ........................... c. ................................................................... d.  ................................. 4. What are the known limitations of the current data ( e.g., data elements that are known to be incomplete, incorrect, or out-of-date)? This term does not include any farm or residential tank of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes. The term also includes a septic tank, storm- water or wastewater collection system, flow-through process tank, or liquid trap or associated gathering lines directly related to oil or gas production and gathering operations. A tank situated in an underground area is defined as a tank situated 1.percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/energy/energy-storage-tanks/index.html. The EPA is surveying the 50 states as part of a study of how states finance the cleanup of leaking underground storage tank (LUST) sites. We will use the information gathered in this survey to provide the Congress with information about the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. We are aware of similar survey efforts conducted in the past year by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation and by EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks. We have discussed our survey with these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. The objectives of this review were to provide information on the cost in public funding from state and federal sources to clean up known releases from underground storage tanks. For the purposes of the review, we defined public funding as including any money controlled by the federal government. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix V. of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/23/science/science-and-environment/features/top-10-reports-on-clean-up-from-underground-storage-tanks. do not know if responses for South Dakota would have differed materially from those of the states that completed the survey. From the responses we received, we gathered information about state databases used to track underground storage tank information. We provided states with the definition of public funding and provided data regarding active and closed tanks, confirmed releases, and cleanups initiated and completed. We also provided information about states’ sources of money for cleanup, including state financial assurance funds and federal money to clean up leaking underground storage tanks. We used a data collection instrument (DCI) to systematically and consistently record all available data reliability information. The DCI was then reviewed by an independent person who assessed the accuracy of DCI data entries and the reasonableness of the judgments on the reliability of states’ survey data. As expected, there was wide variability in the level of oversight of the databases states use to track underground storage tank information. There was similar that we used in this report from Treasury’s financial statements sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review. survey to state officials responsible for underground storage tank programs or, where applicable, for state cleanup funds. The practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling error. We sent the e-mail regarding the most appropriate contact to officials named on lists of state contacts from two other professional organizations that also conduct surveys about underground storage tanks. We report all states’ responses to selected questions only in appendix II, because of the known limitations in the reliability of state level comparisons. The survey data are sufficiently reliable as they are used in the body of the report. The survey was focused specifically on federally regulated underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. A few states reported they were not able to provide us with data specific to such tanks for selected questions. Instead, they generally provided us with either data including a different universe of tanks or data prorated based on the number of federally regulated storage tanks in the state for these questions. Most survey questions that asked about funding for underground storage were answered in the affirmative by the states in which they were asked. discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state based on the number of relevant topics they could discuss, as indicated by their survey responses. We interviewed all states that had scores at or above a threshold score that we determined, based on how many states we would need to discuss the relevant topics with to obtain sufficient information for the purposes of this report. We also conducted interviews with regional program officials from EPA’s Underground Storage Tank Program in six EPA regions to gather additional information. states without taking into account the number of such releases in each state. EPA expressed concern about placing an undue burden on states. 37 states and the District of Columbia reported data on number of tanks without viable owners that had known releases. Taking this information into account in distributing LUST Trust Fund money could encourage the remaining states to gather such information as well. In addition, developing national data on the extent to which releases remaining to be cleaned up are attributed to tanks without viability owners would be useful to both EPA and Congress. EPA develops information on states’ needs and performance from semiannual activity reports. According to officials in two states, the information they report in the reports is based on estimates rather than actual performance. EPA regional officials were not aware of reporting problems with the states in their regions that our survey disclosed. The data the state reports is generated by canvassing their regional staff, and the state has found errors in the data corrected data. The state has also reported that the data it reports on its tank numbers and cleanup activities is inaccurate. that the division had been reporting performance data on all tanks regulated by the state, including the aboveground storage tanks. Also undercounting the number of “active tanks’ by excluding tanks that were only temporarily out of service. To help ensure the accuracy of the states’ semiannual activities reports, EPA recommends that the regions review each state’s data submission for reasonableness based on the state's prior reports and the regional program manager's knowledge of the state�s program. Wyoming tracks contaminated sites rather than releases, official says. Arizona program official uncertain of EPA’s definition of cleanups initiated performance measure. Wyoming provides its best estimate of release data, official tells us. The state reports a total of about 1,000 cleanups since the start of the EPA program in 2006. The total number of cleanup initiated cleanups is about 2,000. The number of releases is around 1,500. The EPA reports call for data on releases rather than sites. review of its files disclosed that the program had been reporting duplicate entries and releases that did not meet EPA’s definition. An Oregon Underground Storage Tank Program Coordinator told us that, in the process of cleaning up its database information, program officials found many sites being reported that were duplicates or involved releases that didn't come from regulated tanks. A Maryland Department of the Environment official acknowledged that it has been reporting semiannual performance data incorrectly, and as a result, some of the state's performance activities have been double counted. a.... ........................... None b. .. ........................ ... None c. ............................ None d. ................................... None 5. Is there any additional information about the way your states’ data for UST management is collected, entered, stored, and quality reviewed that would help inform our interpretation of these data? 6. How many new releases from federally regulated USTs did your state confirm in each of the last five federal fiscal years? Is this numbers exact or estimated? 7. Is this data accurate or an estimate? EPA regional officials consider the components of the state formulas, along with additional factors, to determine the actual amount to be distributed to each of the states in their region. Additional factors that may be considered, according to EPA regional officials, include states’ actual need for money in light of such things as funding carryovers from prior years. For the most part, the EPA Regional officials whom we interviewed stated that deviations from the formula distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor. The total for the states within each region. In 2005, EPA began collecting information from states on various aspects of their financial assurance funds. According to some EPA officials, however, the data collected were of limited usefulness. One region’s program manager did not expect that the effort would provide any new information, except data to document what he already knew. An EPA headquarters official, who is closely involved with the effort, agreed that the agency's information collection, at most, helped confirm what regions already saw as problem. The goals of this effort included providing a better tool to monitor state financial assurance Funds’ soundness. EPA agreed with our recommendations and provided information on the agency’s plans and activities to address each of them. Regarding our recommendation that EPA ensure that states verify that tank owners and operators maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage, the agency indicated that it has issued draft guidelines that would require inspections of underground storage tanks to assess compliance with financial responsibility requirements. The agency indicated it would strengthen its oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds by improving a recently developed monitoring tool and by developing guidance for its guidance. The agency indicated that it would consider conducting such a study in conjunction with the states. EPA said it would work toward ensuring that state- reported data are consistent with existing EPA definitions and are limited to federally regulated underground storage tanks. Also, EPA stated that it will consider changes to improve the distribution of future LUST Trust Fund money. The agency said it will also work to better focus how EPA distributes program resources to states. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/Impact. the future public funding needs for EPA’s UST program. We recommend that the Administrator, EPA, take the following four actions: Ensure that states verify, on a regular basis, that tank owners and operators are maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage, as required by RCRA. Assess, in coordination with the states, the relative effectiveness of public and private options forFinancial responsibility coverage to ensure that they provide timely funding for the cleanup of releases. Better oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds to ensure they continue to provide reliable financial responsibility Coverage for tank owners. Financial assurance funds may take on additional liability from tank installers and manufacturers. Some states may discover more releases in the coming years than in past years. The 2005 Act requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of their underground storage tanks on a 3-year cycle, beginning after the state inspects tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. For those states, some state funds already provide such coverage to installers, but this additional liability could strain the resources of some states’ funds. approximately $190 million in fiscal year 2005. The 2005 Act also included several other provisions regarding inspections, operator training, and financial responsibility, among other things. Some of these provisions impose ongoing requirements on states. For example, the inspection provision requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of its regulated underground storage tanks at least once every 3 years, beginning after the state has inspected tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. Effective February 2007, the 2005 Act directs EPA to require that each state receive federal funds either (1) require additional, or secondary, structures that would be required to be inspected, or (2) require inspections of existing structures.  states provided data with gaps or further clarifications needed in key areas, such as the number of release sites awaiting funding. EPA regional officials described this first effort as a collection of baseline information. The agency decided to collect data again in 2006 without changing its method. Results for 2006 were not available as of December 2006. The 2005 Act also included language providing that EPA may withdraw approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without withdrawing approval of the overall state underground storage tank program. States provided information about the estimated total liabilities for underground storage tanks. that currently inspect sites less frequently, the additional inspections, while intended to prevent leaks in the long term, could lead to a spike in the number of releases discovered. For example, officials in Texas told us that underground storage tank facilities in their state are inspected about every 10 years, on average. Releases in this state that may not have otherwise been found for as long as 10 years may be discovered much sooner, leading to an increase in confirmed releases over the next few years. Finding these releases sooner may mean that the contamination would be less extensive. did not comply with applicable regulations or failed to report a release. New Hampshire officials indicated that, while the state has authority for administrative fines and civil penalties in cases involving multiple releases, such actions are not automatically imposed. None of the 20 states that provided comments in response to our survey question indicated that increased penalties were imposed simply based on the occurrence of a second release. Instead, fines and penalties may be assessed if a tank owner’s recalcitrance in achieving and maintaining compliance with operational regulations. The tax has been in effect continuously since 1987, except for a short period in 1990 and the period between December 31, 1995, and October 1, 1997. Since 1987, the fund balance has been growing at an average rate of about $129 million per year. By fiscal year-end 2005, the LUST Trust Fund had collected about $3.7 billion in revenue while appropriations totaled about $1.2 billion, leaving a fund balance of approximately $2.5 billion. States’ revenues from the Lust. 10 states reported they did not spend any of their LUST Trust Fund money on cleanup activities in fiscal year 2005. Regional officials told us that many states prefer to use their money to fund staff positions rather than cleanups. An EPA official in Region 4 took issue with states that do not use LUST trust fund money for cleanups, saying cleanups that could have been performed with the money are not being undertaken because the money is being used for salaries. The official said Region 4 encourages states to fund salaries with LUST funds. EPA has formed a workgroup to examine the issue of how to assess the soundness of state financial assurance funds. Annual appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have averaged about $71 million in recent years. Typically, about 80 percent of the money is distributed to the states to support their cleanup programs. According to EPA, over the past 10 years, on average, states have used roughly one-third of their Lust Trust Fund money. The guidance had not been made final as of December 2006.  Appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have been relatively stable since fiscal year 1998. In fiscal year 2005, the states used about two-thirds of their distributions to fund program administration and enforcement activities. EPA uses the balance of the annual appropriations to support cleanup activities on Indian lands and its own cleanup-related activities. The Trust Fund’s annual appropriations represent a relatively small part of many states’ cleanup program revenue in any given year. LUST Fund money used for cleanup work is generally intended to pay for cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner. year for a variety of activities. $200 million for cleanups of releases from leaking underground storage tanks. $100 million for activities including onsite inspections, groundwater protection, and enforcement. $55 million for delivery prohibition, operator training, and release prevention and compliance. An additional $50 million per year is authorized from the general fund to cover administrative expenses and other activities. Net revenue to the LUST Trust Fund from taxes on petroleum products totaled $1.2 billion in 2013. The Trust Fund was established in 1998. Federal money from EPA’s Brownfields program can be used to clean up sites contaminated by petroleum under certain circumstances. Only certain governmental organizations, nonprofit organizations, and nonprofit educational institutions are eligible for Brownfields cleanup grants. In fiscal year 2005, EPA provided eligible entities with about $22.3 million in Brownfields grants for cleaning up Sites contaminated with petroleum. No responsible party can be found for the LUST Trust Fund, which was established in the 1970s to help clean up contaminated sites. Department of the Treasury officials responsible for managing the LUST Trust Fund interviewed EPA headquarters and regional officials. We gathered documentation regarding appropriations of money from the fund to EPA, states’ expenditure of fund money, and the balance of the fund and its annual revenues. We selected these sources based on EPA officials’ indications that they were the most appropriate sources for the purposes of this report. We also discussed the reliability of Treasury’s Lust Trust Fund data with knowledgeable EPA and Treasury officials. contaminated soil and water; providing safe drinking water to residents at the site of a tank leak; providing for temporary or permanent relocation of residents; and providing reasonable and necessary administrative and planning expenses directly related to these activities. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (the 2005 Act), enacted in August 2005, expanded the permitted uses of the LUST Trust Fund. It authorizes states to use a portion of their LUST Fund money for inspections and other leak prevention purposes. The 2005 Act authorizes appropriations from the Lust Trust Fund through fiscal year 2011 of $555 million per year. for each of the following categories: (1) administrative activities, including LUST Trust Fund program management, general management and administrative support, program guidance and implementation, and training. (2) enforcement activities including all actions necessary to identify a leaking underground storage tank site’s potentially responsible party; issuance of letters, notices, and orders to the responsible parties; oversight of the cleanups; and activities associated with cost recovery actions. (3) cleanup activities consisting largely of emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, and corrective actions. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the tax on petroleum products that capitalizes the federal LUST Trust Fund. EPA also aggregates elements of the states’ semiannual activity reports to measure program performance against the national goals it establishes. For fiscal year 2005, EPA’s goals for the underground storage tank program included (1) completing 14,500 cleanups, (2) completing 30 cleanups in Indian Country, and (3) decreasing newly reported confirmed releases to fewer than 10,000. The 1986 amendments to RCRA established the LUST Trust Fund to finance the cleanup of petroleum releases from underground storage tanks. Until recently, states could use these funds only for cleanup and related administrative and enforcement activities. Within this restriction, trust fund money could be used for the following general categories of activities: testing tanks for leaks when one is suspected; investigating a site to evaluate the source and extent of petroleum; assessing the number of individuals that may have been exposed to petroleum contaminants and the seriousness of exposure. a viable owner. 37 states and the District of Columbia reported numbers of releases that came from tanks without a viable owner in our survey. EPA Office of Underground Storage Tanks officials stated that EPA had not focus how EPA distributes program resources to states. We spoke with regional officials about these apparent discrepancies, as well as about the regions’ processes for distributing money from the LUST Trust Fund. We provided EPA with a draft of this report for its review and releases from leaking underground storage tanks. formula EPA headquarters uses to distribute LUST Trust Fund money to the regions. formula incorporates three components: minimum distribution of $300,000 per state; need-based amount; and performance-based bonus to states that meet or exceed national averages for cleanups initiated and completed. The distribution formula does not consider the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner in various states, nor does it consider the percentage of the population relying on groundwater for potable water. The formula also doesn't consider the numbers of underground storage tanks and releases in the state. annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Owners or operators that choose private insurance for financial responsibility coverage must pay annual premiums to maintain coverage. EPA does not provide states specific guidance on whether or how frequently states should engage in routine verification of financial responsibility Coverage. Most states reported to us that they attempted to checkFinancial responsibility coverage on a regular basis. Only about one-third of the states reported that they required annual proof that tank owners or operators were maintaining coverage. The remaining states generally report that they checked this coverage. As of September 30, 2005, 37 states had funds that met federal requirements for financial responsibility, according to EPA. An additional 6 states had such funds in the past but these funds no longer provided coverage for new releases. 7 states and the District of Columbia have never had financial assurance funds that were approved by EPA to provide financial responsibility coverage. The funds in each of the six states that stopped providing financial responsibility Coverage did so after a certain deadline. Tank owners and operators in these states now demonstrate financial responsibility covered by these funds. Twenty-three states reported cases of inadequate coverage in the past 5 years. States used somewhat different definitions of what constituted inadequate financial responsibility coverage. In general, states said they counted cases as having inadequate coverage when an owner or operator either (1) had not maintained coverage or (2) had maintained coverage but did not have proof of coverage at the time the state requested it. The federal government says it has no plans to require tank owners to prove they have adequate financial responsibility insurance in the next five years.  states that do not check financial responsibility coverage on an annual basis may not know if owners or operators are maintaining required coverage. Many states could not provide information on the extent of inadequate financial responsibility in their states for the past 5 years. If states do not verify coverage on a routine basis, it may be difficult for them to know whether owners or operator will have required coverage in the event of a release. If the required coverage is not in place when a release occurs, the release may not be detected. not know the number of times public funds had been used in these types of situations in the past. Checking financial responsibility coverage helps to ensure that owners or operators maintain adequate coverage as required by federal law. Some options that owners and operators can choose for coverage either require annual updates or are often renewed annually. Owners or operators that self-insure, or choose to demonstrate that they have sufficient assets to cover costs resulting from a release, must prepare an insurance application. For more information, visit the Federal Insurance Commission's website. and type of UST cleanups in your state? Sources of Funding for Cleanup Public funding: Includes any funding controlled and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Do not include funds spent by federal, state, and local governmental agencies to clean up releases from tanks they either own or operate. These funds would be considered to be provided types of state cleanup funds: (1) state financial assurance funds that cover the cleanup of contamination from federally regulated USTs, and (2) funds that are devoted solely to the cleanup from tanks without a viable owner. state money so that LUST Trust Fund money can be used for cleanups. EPA generally relies on states to ensure that tank owners and operators comply with federal financial responsibility regulations. EPA does not provide specific guidance to the states as to whether or how frequently they should verify financial responsibility coverage. States are not required to report data to EPA on the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner. EPA is ideally situated, through its existing relationship with state program officials throughout the country, to shed light on this issue. State financial assurance fund: Any state fund used to pay for cleanups of releases from federally regulated USTs. We recognize that in some cases a state’s fund may cover tanks without a viable responsible party as well as other types of tanks. We do not make a distinction between funds that EPA has approved as a financial responsibility mechanism and those that EPA hasn’t approved. In those cases where a state fund is dedicated solely to coverage of tankswithout a viableresponsible party, the survey provides a separate space to answer questions. covered by the state’s fund, the state expects that more than 95 percent of releases in its current backlog will be cleaned up using at least some public funding. State laws addressing when a specific owner or operator is considered to be responsible for a release can affect who pays for cleanups. For example, Michigan program officials previously told us that the state's causation standard exacerbates the funding problem for tanks without a viable owner. The state must prove that the present owner/ operator is responsible before it can be held responsible for. soon decided that funding staff positions was more cost effective than performing the cleanup and pursuing cost recovery, which can be an expensive and time-consuming process. By funding additional staff positions rather than cleanup activities, states were often able to identify the responsible parties and force them to do the cleanups, thereby avoiding the time and expense of pursuing cost-recovery actions. Because they have state money available for cleanup efforts, states can use the federal money for cleanup activities. A Region 6 official told us that some states view the cost recovery process as a deterrent to using the federal funds. EPA-defined site cleanup costs: “All costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of threats to public health, welfare, or the environment that may occur by a release (or suspected release) of petroleum from an underground storage tank.” These costs include emergency responses, site cleanup. Responsible party funding: Includes both direct expenditures by responsible parties (for example, a tank owner paying out-of-pocket for all or a portion of the costs of cleanup) and indirect expenditures. after June 1995 because it had insufficient funds to pay existing and future claims. Michigan state officials reported that several other funds provided cleanup money for underground storage tanks in 2005. Seven states and the District of Columbia have never had funds that provided financial responsibility coverage. In these states, tank owners and operators use other ways of demonstrating financial responsibility Coverage, primarily private insurance and self-insurance, according to our survey. The Clean Michigan Initiative Bond Fund can be used for many activities, such as waterfront improvements and cleanup of contaminated lake and river sediments. While they never had financial assurance funds, some states have provided cleanup funds to address releases from underground storage tanks. Four of these states reported paying for such cleanups from state sources in 2005. Delaware, for example, reported spending $1 million in 2005 from a reimbursement fund for 240 sites. Other states assist or have assisted owners and operators with cleanup by operating insurance-type mechanisms. In the state of Washington, for instance, the state’s reinsurance program helps owners and Operators obtain affordable pollution liability insurance by assuming part of the risk. States may have releases from tanks without a viable owner in their backlog. Maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage ensures that money will be available to clean up releases from underground storage tanks. The longer contamination from these releases is left in place, the greater the potential becomes for the contamination to spread. The farther these contaminants are allowed to spread, the chance becomes that they will contaminate drinking water and other sensitive resources, potentially putting human health and the environment at risk. We asked states about that they require more urgent cleanup. Under the principle of “the polluter pays,” tank owners and operators are primarily responsible for the costs of cleaning up contamination from their leaking tanks. RCRA requires these owners to obtain some form of financial responsibility coverage to demonstrate that they have access to resources to cover cleanup costs. To avoid funding shortages, many states developed financial assurance funds, at least in part to ensure that releases are cleaned up in a timely manner. In the event of a release, tank owners should seek financial assurance coverage. The approach that different states use regarding who pays for the cleanup of leaking underground storage tanks can affect the percentage of releases in a state that are cleaned up using at least some public funding. One such approach is whether a state has chosen to set up a financial assurance fund that provides financial responsibility coverage for tank owners. Nearly all states reported to us in our survey that they use public funding to clean up releases from tanks without a viable owner. Four states reported that they may wait until the property on which the leaking tank owners are covered by these funds usually pay a relatively small deductible. EPA estimates that releases cost about $125,000 to clean up. Most state financial assurance funds charge a deductible of $25,000 or less. Twelve states described the circumstances under which penalties could be imposed on tank owners for multiple, or repeated, releases. Officials in several states indicated that penalties were not usually imposed simply if multiple releases occurred. Rather, most states imposed penalties on the basis of evidence that the tank owner was responsible for the release, the survey found. The survey was based on responses from tank owners in 12 states. cleaned up using public funds is likely to decline in the future. Some states that do not use their financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Arizona, expect particularly sizable declines. These states expect that owners or operators will use private sources of financial responsibility. coverage to pay for the cleanup of most releases identified in primarily through private insurance, according to state officials. Florida. Although the state’s financial assurance fund stopped providing financial responsibility Coverage for new releases in 1998, it is having difficulty paying for all of its cleanups. The state fund is only able to actively conduct cleanup work at about one-third of the remaining sites. years, while only 7 states and the District of Columbia reported no cases. The number of cases involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage may indicate that at least some public funds will be used to clean up a release that otherwise would have been paid for by a responsible party. For example, according to Florida officials, the state has cleaned up about 350 sites annually in past years using public funding. Of these sites, approximately three to four sites per year involved responsible parties that would have paid for the release. did not maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. In our survey, Florida estimated an average cost of $380,000 in public funds to fully address each release requiring public funds. Florida may have spent more than $1 million per year on such sites in the past. Officials in three additional states—New Jersey, Texas, and Utah—also told us that public funds could be used in cases involving inadequate financial responsibility Coverage. They did not say if they would use such funds, but they did say they could. as about $207 million. Pennsylvania, Florida, Texas, New Jersey, and California account for more than half of the total balance. State taxes on gasoline and other fuels accounted for about $1.3 billion (92 percent) of this income to state funds. States reported that financial assurance funds also received revenues totaling about $42 million (3 percent) from fees paid by tank owners and operators. Only four states’ financial assurance. funds collected tank fees but not gasoline taxes in 2005. projections on recent trends, although officials in a few states specifically noted that they expected to identify fewer releases in the future. Most states use financial assurance funds to pay for cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks, with most of the revenues coming from state gasoline taxes. Lack of timely cleanup is a concern because the longer pollution from releases is left in place, the greater the potential for it to spread, further placing human health and the environment at risk. EPA officials are responsible for determining whether a financial assurance fund is financially sound. State financial assurance funds generally pay for cleaning up releases from tanks. Some states may not have sufficient resources to ensure that these cleanups are performed in a timely manner. Officials in nine states reported in our survey that their funds limit the amount of cleanup work they finance based on funding availability. North Carolina. The revenues to the state’s financial assurance fund have not been sufficient in recent years to address all of the fund’‘s high-cost, high-risk’ releases. State financial assurance funds must be financially sound, according to EPA guidance. EPA can withdraw approval if a fund no longer provides coverage that ensures timely and adequate cleanup of releases. EPA would be concerned about the soundness of a state financial assurance fund if the funding levels or claim processing time caused undue delays in cleaning up releases. In Texas, for example, claims substantially exceeded revenues during the early years of the state’sFinancial assurance fund. By 1992, the fund had a backlog of unpaid funds. bills totaling about $170 million. This amount exceeded the fund’s annual income by approximately 300 percent. In order to catch up, the fund temporarily slowed down some cleanup work. Even though the fund stopped accepting new releases after December 22, 1998, state officials expect it to remain in place at least until 2008. EPA monitors the soundness of state financial assurance funds; this task is carried out by EPA regions, according to the agency's 1993 guidance on the subject. This guidance suggested several steps that regions could use to adequately monitor the funds. The 2005 Act included language providing that, if a state diverts resources from its financial assurance fund, EPA may not distribute a certain portion of LUST appropriations to that state for enforcement purposes. This provision affects only the 37 states whose financial assurance funds still provide financial responsibility coverage for new releases. Officials we interviewed in Pennsylvania and South Carolina regarding this issue were uncertain about the 2005 Act’s impact on future diversions. Two states even commented in their responses to our survey that they anticipated diversions in 2006. Of the 43 states that have had financial assurance funds, 16 reported in our survey that they had diverted a total of nearly $435 million from their funds between 2001 and 2005. Officials in most of these states reported that the diverted amounts went to the state’s general fund or to offset state budget shortfalls. Diversions may also limit some states’ ability to pay for cleanups under certain circumstances, the authors say. They say states may sometimes decide to withdraw or withhold money from state financial assurance Funds. diverted funds for specific programs, such as Brownfields grants and loans, a lead- based paint removal program. Officials we interviewed in two states where diversions occurred reported a negative impact on the state program’s ability to clean up sites. In Florida, for example, $20 million was diverted in 2002. As a result, financial assurance fund managers had to adjust the threshold for cleanup, meaning that the cleanup of less urgent releases, which otherwise would have been addressed, was delayed. State financial assurance funds may also be affected by future natural disasters, such as hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005. As late as June 2006, the impact of the flooding caused by these hurricanes on Louisiana’s financial assurance fund was not yet fully known, according to a state official. If all underground storage tanks that could have been affected by the flooding turn out to have had releases, the workload of the state assurance fund would increase by 25 percent. Payouts from the state guarantee fund would also increase by approximately $4. states about topics such as their use of LUST Trust Fund money, restrictions within their state financial assurance fund on accepting claims. We selected this sample of states in order to discuss as many of our topics of interest as possible within a limited number of interviews. To select the states, we first reviewed all states’ responses to survey questions related to the relevant topics to determine which states would be able to participate in the survey. We then selected the states based on their responses to the survey questions. the state’s unobligated balance of federal LUST Trust Funds, if any? Is this an exact number or an estimate? State’S unobliged balance ofFederal LUST trust funds. How do responsible parties who have active federally regulated USTs in your state demonstrate financial responsibility? Please list the number of tanks covered by the various available financial responsibility mechanisms below. Is there any additional information about the LUST Fund amounts listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? each loss and insulating the primary insurer from losses greater than a certain amount. In the case of a $1,000,000 policy, for example, Washington’s reinsurance program is responsible for settlements over $75,000. At federal fiscal year-end 2005, state financial assurance funds in 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion. Four states did not have or did not report a fund balance. As shown in figure 8, individual states’ fund balances ranged as high as $2 billion. Many states have maximum limits on the overall balance of their funds. If a state’s maximum limit is reached, its fund ceases collecting revenues from one or more of its revenue sources until the fund balance drops below a minimum threshold. For example, Idaho has not collected certain fees for its fund since 1998 when the balance of its fund exceeded $30 million. The fund will again begin collecting revenue from these fees once its balance falls below the minimum threshold, an official says. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/state/financial-assurance-funds/index.html. Q27: Is your state fund limiting the number of claims it accepts based on the amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Q27: What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? Q28: What was the status of your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? Q29: What is your state's financial assurance fund's priorities for paying claims to conserve funds? Q30: What are the priorities you set for your fund? claims against the state financial assurance fund after a certain date? Date after which claims will no longer be accepted No decision made to stop accepting claims......... 35. How capable is your state’s financial assurance. fund of meeting future demands upon it? . Able to meet all......................................................................... Able to meeting most .................................................................... Able to met some ................................................................... Not able. 36. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop collecting revenues for the state. financial assurance Fund after acertain date? fund over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What was the amount of the outstanding claims (claims received by the state program for which funds have not yet been obligated) on your state’s financial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Outstanding claims ......................... $ 33. If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert UST financial assurance funds? How much was deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Amount deposited........................... a. Is amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Yes ....................... No......................... b. Is your state fund setting priorities for paying claims to conserve funds? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable.] [Enter mm/dd/yy.] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? provide this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05).] Is this an exact number or an estimate? Total outlays................................... a. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? b. Enforcement costs .................... c. Site cleanup costs ..................... d. Total costs ................................ e. According to EPA, states may sometimes not spend a given year’s entire LUST Trust Fund award in the year the funds are provided. Over the past 5 years, how many cases has your state encountered in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility? Is this an exact number or an estimate? If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert funds from the fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner? As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new years or longer...................................................................................... State does not check financial responsibility..................................................... ........................................................................... 55. Does your state ever impose penalties on responsible parties for multiple releases from federally regulated USTs? Yes ....................... No......................... Go to next question. How frequently, if at all, does your state check whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? At least annually ................................................................................................ Every 1 to 2 years .............................................................................................. Every 3 years. As events warrant (e.g. upon tank installation or upgrade, upon a release).. d. State does not check financial responsibility ................................................ ....................................................................... 54. Of the 54 states surveyed, 54 said they check tank owners’ financial responsibility on a regular basis. Financial test of self-insurance: c. Corporate guarantee: d. Insurance coverage: e. Surety bond: f. Letter of credit: g. Trust fund set up by owner or operator: h. Bond rating test: i. Financial test (local government only): j. Guarantee from another local government or the state: k. A dedicated fund: l. The number of tanks covered by the various financial responsibility mechanisms: 52. Is there any additional information about how you calculated the number of Tanks covered? What was the amount of the outstanding claims (claims received by the state program for which funds have not yet been obligated) on your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Obligated ...................................... 42. During the past 5 years, what amount of funding, if any, did your state divert for purposes other than those related to claims against the state fund? 43. As of September30, 2005, had your state decided to stop collecting revenues. This amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes......................... No .......................... b. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year 29. How much of the amount deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year was from each of the following sources? A. Flat rate fees assessed on tanks. b. Fees/taxes assessed on a per-unit basis on fuel(s) c. Interest ....................................... d. Cost recovery. or an estimate? a. Public funding spent to clean up tanks WITH a viable owner ....... b. Publicfunding spent toClean up tanks without a viable owners........................................... c. Is this the total amount ($0) spent (in actual outlays) in the past year for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? Yes .................... No...................... d. Why is this amount different? e. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year g. How did you calculate the amount of public funding? assessed on a per-unit basis on fuel(s)................................ c. Interest ............................................ d. Cost recovery .................................. ...... ...... ...... 40. What do you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? EPA and states have made progress in cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks. Of the almost 450,000 releases confirmed as of fiscal year-end 2005, cleanups had been initiated for about 93 percent and completed for about 74 percent. About $4.0 million of these grants were awarded for direct cleanup work, $13.3 million for site assessments, and $5.0million for revolving loan fund programs. Table 1 shows key tank- related data elements reported by EPA as of September 30, 2005. The Congress also took action through the 2005 Act to reduce the use of MTBE in gasoline. States reported that completing the cleanup of approximately 54,000 known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would likely require substantial amounts of public funds from state and federal resources. The public cost of cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner, as well as the number of releases in states’ cleanup backlogs that lack a viable owners, is not fully known, according to the states. The Clean Air Act Amendments were passed in 1990. Cleaning up known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would cost an estimated $12 billion in public funds from state and federal sources. States were unable to estimate the cost of cleaning up more than another 8,000 releases whose cleanup will require at at least some public funds. Tank owners or operators will pay the entire costs to clean up another 34 percent of these releases, according to state officials. States reported that they did not know whether any public funds would be used toClean up most of the remaining 13 percent of releases. About 11 percent of the approximately 117,000 releases that have not yet been fully cleaned up came from such tanks. The full extent of releases from tanks without a viable owner is unknown. 11 states reported that they did not know how many of the releases in their backlogs were from tanks with no owner. 17 states reported there were approximately 4,000 Releases from tanks for which they had not yet determined whether a viable owners was in place. The actual number could be much higher for two reasons. least some public funds. Nearly half of these releases will require $100,000 or more to fully clean up, with about 5 percent requiring $500,000. Just over half of the approximately 117,000 releases that states reported in our survey had not yet been fully cleaned up will be cleaned up using that they expect to spend public funds to clean up a total of about 16,700. Using these estimates, we determined that the total cost toClean up releases projected to be identified in the next five years in these states could be around $2.5 billion. EPA estimates that a release costs about $125,000 on average to clean up. Proving responsibility becomes difficult in cases where releases have occurred in the past. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then fund any cleanup of the site. EPA has stated that releases that have contaminated groundwater are generally more complicated and more expensive toClean up than releases that haven't. The cost can vary based on several factors, including the extent of contamination, the cleanup method selected and the presence of MTBE or groundwater contamination. In 2005, these states confirmed a combined 8,000 releases, compared with their projections of an average of about 7,400 releases per year for the next 5 years. In general, state officials told us that they based their projections on releases they had identified in the past. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services says it has no immediate plans to change the way it releases drugs and other drugs. The agency says it will continue to work with state and local governments to identify and prevent drug and alcohol abuse. an exact number or an estimate? How did you calculate the number of new releases from USTs your state confirmed in each of the last five years? How many new releases do you estimate that your state will confirm over the next five years. How many releases from federally regulated USTs do you expect your state to confirm in the next 5 years? An estimate of how many releases your state is likely to confirm over that period of time. An estimated number of releases that you think your state could confirm in that time period. 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... h. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? 18. Is there any additional information about the amounts of public funding listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? 19. What additional sources of public funds for LUST cleanups, if any, do you believe have a high probability of becoming available in the next 5 years? 20. What were the primary factors you considered in making an assessment of the probability that any of the current sources of. public funding for Lust cleanups will no longer be available in. the next five years? investigations, exposure assessments, the planning and design of corrective action, and the conduct, management and oversight of long-term remedial corrective actions. How did you estimate the number of releases for which EPA-defined site cleanup costs will be paid for exclusively by responsible parties? How many releases in the current cleanup backlog that will require at least some amount of public funding after September 30, 2005, excluding funds already spent on these cleanups? And how many would you estimate will require public funding amounts in the following ranges? a. $0 - $99,999 ............................................... b. $100,000 - $200,000 ...................................... next five years? b. Estimated number of new releases over the next five years that will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? c. How many of these new releases do you estimate will require some public funding? 9. EPA computes your state’s “cleanup backlog” by subtracting the cumulative number of cleanups completed from the total number of releases completed over the past five years. For more information, go to the EPA website or go to www.epa.gov/cleanup. What do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release that involves MtBE? How did you estimate the number of releases that fall into each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups of leaking federally regulated USTs that require some amount of public funding, what do you estimates the cost to address each of these releases? 16. What do you think the cost would be in the event of another MtBE release in the near future? 17. What would the cost in the future be if MtBE were to be replaced with a new system? What do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release that impacts groundwater at levels requiring cleanup? How did you estimate these average costs in public funding? 16. In the past year, what was the total amount spent (in actual outlays) to pay for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? [If possible, if possible, we would like to hear from you about how much you spent on cleanups in the last year] of confirmed releases. Based on the numbers you provided above, your state’s cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: 0. Is this number correct? Yes .................... No...................... a. What is the correct number? Please refer to this number when answering questions about your state's cleanup backlog in completing the remainder of this survey. 10. Considering the number of releases in your state.”, how many involve MtBE at levels requiring cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases with MtBE. as of September 30, 2005, the responsible party was unknown, unwilling, or unable to perform the needed cleanup (for example, “orphaned” or abandoned tanks). How many releases in your state’s cleanup backlog, identified above, come from tanks without a viable owner? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases ......................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in. your state's cleanup backlog that come from Tanks without a viability owner? able to perform the cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases .......................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in your state’s cleanup backlog for which the state has not yet determined whether a responsible party is known, willing, and able to perform cleanup? 23. In the past year, how much public funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleaning up releases from USTs, both WITH and WITHOUT a viable owner? If possible, provide these amounts for the latest federal fiscal year, 10/1/04. spent to clean up releases from USTs with and without a viable owner. How much do you estimate it will cost to complete the remainder of the cleanups for all of these releases? None ................. Go to Q25. a. How did you estimate the cost to. complete the rest of theCleanups for the backlog of releases from. USTs without a. viable owner? Go toQ25.b. For the purposes of the following questions, please consider two questions.