Financial stress in 2012 is elevated compared with the lows of 2006 and 2007, but has fallen from the high points of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009. The TAG program established by the FDIC expired on December 31, 2010, and was replaced on the same day by the TAG program as established by Section 343 of the Federal Reserve Act. The St. Louis Federal Reserve Financial Stress Index is an index composed of 18 data series that provides one measure of financial stress. The index is based on data from the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank. to the program's extension for each calendar year and to collect an amount equal to the expected losses by September 30 of each calendaryear. The assessments would be in addition to the assessments that the FDIC would otherwise collect. The program is expected to be in place for at least the next five years, according to a report by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people who participated in the program in the past two years. The FDIC says it will continue to monitor the program. NIBTAs constitute one of several cash management tools used by businesses, non-profits, governments, and other entities. They provide depositors with easy access to their money, allowing them to make transfers and to would still have the incentive to monitor the bank for excessive risk-taking. On November 26, 2012, Senator Harry Reid introduced S. 3637 , a bill to temporarily extend the TAG program for two years. S.3637 would instruct the FDIC to estimate the expected losses due to NIBTas. The TAG program created by the FDIC was a voluntary program in which eligible financial institutions were automatically registered to participate unless they opted out. The Dodd-Frank Act, however, made all FDIC-insured banks part of TAG by temporarily changing "the definition of insured deposits to include the entire balance of noninterest-bearing transaction accounts" Since TAG was first established, the amount of deposits insured by TAG has increased, as shown in Figure 2 . On December 31, 2008, shortly after TAG was implemented, the program guaranteed approximately $722 billion.  section 1105 of Dodd-Frank provides the FDIC with authority to institute a widely available program of emergency assistance. The authority appears to be limited to situations involving a liquidity crisis. The FDIC and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed Board) must make a detailed determination that a liquidity event exists and that failure to take action would have serious adverse effects on U.S. financial stability or economic conditions. WSLG37: Extending the FD IC's Transaction Account Guarantee Program Given the Uncertain Economic Outlook? it is possible that since the end of 2010, both large and small banks may have changed their views on the value of the program. It is also possible that deposits may migrate away from those institutions due to regulatory changes made by the Dodd-Frank Act. Some market participants may view the steps taken by the DHS Act to be a threat to financial stability, the authors say. For example, the Act created a special resolution regime administered by the FDIC for failing firms that pose a threat of financial stability. In September 2008, ongoing financial turmoil escalated into a financial panic. Large financial institutions, such as Lehman Brothers and AIG, were failing. The federal government responded with a series of lending and guarantee programs to mitigate the economic damage. Among the many policy responses, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) established the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP) on October 14, 2008, to strengthen confidence and to encourage liquidity in the banking system. The TLGP had two parts: a debt guarantee program and a lending program. options, such as commercial paper, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities, repurchase agreements, enhanced cash funds, and municipal securities. Money market funds are mutual funds that invest in money market securities. They are short-term financial instruments with relatively high liquidities and short maturities of between several days and about a year. They're the second-most popular individual form of short- term investment according to a survey of financial professionals and will be the focus of this section of the article. Money market funds act as intermediaries between shareholders who demand liquid investments and borrowers who desire short-term funding. Money market funds attempt to keep a stable net asset value (NAV) on their shares, typically of $1.00. A stable NAV gives shareholders the impression of a high degree of safety similar to deposits but offering a higher return. If a money market fund falls below a $ 1.00 NAV, then the fund is said to "break the buck," and part of its value is lost. Money market funds have traditionally earned a higher yield than bank deposits. Money market funds are currently earning historically low returns, lowering the opportunity cost of holding noninterest-bearing deposits. There is also uncertainty surrounding the future regulation of money market funds. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), a council of financial regulators that is charged with monitoring systemic risk in the financial system, has identified structural vulnerabilities in money market Funds. It is identified vulnerabilities in funds which could affect financial stability. The FSCO has identified vulnerabilities that could affect the financial stability of the United States. to have more of all three, but face trade-offs. For example, there is a trade-off between safety and yield on an investment. To have a higher return, an investor may have to sacrifice liquidity (the ease with which an asset can be converted into cash) Certificates of deposit, for example, may pay a higher interest rate than a typical savings account, but there are restrictions on when the money can be used. The more at risk an investor's money is, the higher the possible return if the risk does not eventuate. with less concentration in a risky asset class, may be perceived as less likely to fail. Depositors may move their accounts to one of the largest or most interconnected banks if they believe those banks are in practice "too big to fail" (TBTF) A bank is said to be TBTF if policymakers are likely to judge that its failure would cause unacceptable disruptions to the overall financial system and would act to prevent failure. If a depositor thinks policymakers would not allow a particular bank to fail, they may move to another bank. remove TBTF status as credible and think they would recover even less of their uninsured deposits at a large firm than at a smaller or less interconnected institution. In that case, uninsured depositors may move their TAG deposits away from large institutions and use smaller banks. Depositors can effectively "deposit" their money in other nonbank options by buying shares in a money market fund (MMF), by buying U.S. Treasuries, or by choosing one of the many other available options. During the financial crisis, policymakers reassessed the tradeoff between the stability and the moral hazard created by deposit insurance. Extending deposit insurance to some uninsured accounts through TAG may have strengthened the banking system by discouraging some borrowers from withdrawing their deposits during the height of the financial stress. The counterfactual cannot be known with certainty, making it difficult to estimate the costs and benefits of extending TAG. In the context of deposit insurance, moral hazard can manifest itself in two ways: "first, explicit deposit insurance gives insured banks incentives to pursue added risks because they can capture any profits but shift any losses to the government"  Deposit insurance brings stability to the banking sector by giving depositors confidence that if their bank fails, they will not lose the money in their insured accounts. Deposit insurance, however, also reduces the incentive of depositors to monitor their banks and ensure that their banks are not assuming unnecessary risks. The establishment of TAG, in addition to the existing deposit insurance and other measures taken by regulators, may have bolstered depositors' confidence in banks as reliable counterparties. Of confidence in other parts of the financial system, the insured banking sector saw few bank runs during the financial panic. uninsured deposits to various accounts in different insured banks so that each account is under the maximum insured level. Although this option may minimize risk, it would increase the transaction costs for the depositor. Some depositors may attempt to recapture the safety they would lose if TAG expires by shifting their deposits to safer banks, which for some may mean to one of the largest or most interconnected banks. Safer banks, such as those with higher capital levels or higher equity levels, may be more able to cope with the loss of TAG. Depositors' preferences for safety, liquidity, and yield will determine how they allocate their money across the various options they face. NIBTAs have grown by approximately $1 trillion from $1.3 trillion in the third quarter of 2008. Changes in the financial and regulatory environment since 2008 could also result in a different allocation than the pre-TAG levels. If TAG expires, depositors may choose to leave their deposits as uninsured deposits at their existing banks. The options available to depositors can be simplified to two general choices: (1) depositors could leave some or all of their money in the traditional, insured banking sector. The TAG program currently provides unlimited deposit insurance for $1.4 trillion in noninterest-bearing transaction accounts. NIBTAs are accounts that do not pay interest and allow the depositor to make withdrawals without giving advanced notice to the bank. Although the DGP is no longer guaranteeing new debt, TAG continues to apply to new deposit balances. In spite of a loss, the TAG program will continue to provide coverage for depositors in spite of the loss of the Deposit Guarantee Program. quarter of 2008 (before TAG was implemented) to $2.3 trillion in the second quarter of 2012. NIBTAs were used at relatively high rates before TAG and their growth may not be due solely to the guarantee offered by TAG. Changes in economic and financial conditions since TAG was introduced may make NIB tas an appealing choice. The expiration of unlimited insurance may increase the risk of NIBtAs. But even without TAG, the high degree of liquidity offered by NibTAs may incentivize some borrowers to keep their money as uninsured deposits. table 1 shows statistics on TAG accounts by bank size. The largest banks have more accounts per institution and higher average account balances than smaller banks. Approximately 75% of TAG funds are in the 19 banks with more than $100 billion in assets, though those 19 banks account for 61% of total assets in the insured banking system. Even with TAG, if a bank is allowed to fail, then the depositor may view their uninsured deposits as safer than if the deposits were in a bank that would be allowed to failing. The largest banks hold a disproportionately large share of TAG accounts. The expiration of TAG may increase the concentration of deposits in the largest banks. When the FDIC version of TAG expired on December 31, 2010, 31% of banks opted out of the program. The percentage of each group that opted out is an indicator of the different views of large and small banks about the usefulness of TAG. The FDIC's TAG program was optional; at certain points banks were given the ability to opt out. with assets over $10 billion were still participating in TAG. 75% of banks with less than $10billion in assets were in the program. The higher participation rate by smaller banks may signal that they believed they needed the program to attract funds, whereas the larger banks were less likely to view it as necessary. Others may argue that decisions to participate in TAG may not have been driven by the actual usefulness of the program as much as by a possible stigma associated with participating in a program developed in response to the financial crisis. the fund's shareholders' invested principal is in jeopardy. Investors could actually lose money. Breaking the buck is a rare occurrence, though it happened in September 2008. In response, many withdrew their money from money market funds and deposited it in banks, as seen in Figure 5. If one of the reasons that money flowed to deposits was the presence of TAG, it is possible that the expiration of TAG could lead to a loss of money for investors.. Non-financial businesses have increased their. holdings of checkable deposits and decreased their holdings of money market. funds. The FDIC estimates that, for the 108 banks that failed in 2011 and the first quarter of 2012, TAG deposits amounted to 3 percent of deposits on average. Most of the bank failures since January 2011 have been smaller banks which, as mentioned previously, had relatively few TAG deposits. Allocating DIF losses between these deposits and other deposits would result in an estimated TAG cost over these five quarters of about $270 million. If future losses cause the DIF to become depleted, the Dif may have to borrow from the Treasury to protect depositors. Unclear if the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the primary regulator of money market funds, will impose additional regulation. Some have raised concerns about what effect an extension of TAG would have on the FDIC's Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) For a risk-based insurance system to function effectively, the entity setting the insurance premium must accurately forecast future risk or be able to recoup losses ex post. If FDIC can successfully estimate the future cost that TAG funds would impose on the DIF, then the premiums could be set to cover the expected losses.