not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement. A key legislative issue is how to finance Settlement implementation, specifically how to resolve congressional Pay-As-You-Go (PAYGO) issues. Other challenges are how to achieve the Settlement's dual goals of fisheries restoration and water management, and how to address concerns of stakeholders not party to the Settlement without disrupting the negotiated agreement. This report provides a brief overview of the Settlement, its legal history, and the legislative process. The Settlement Agreement was accepted by the District Court on October 23, 2006. The stated goals of the Settlement are twofold: (1) to restore and maintain fish populations in "good condition"—the § 5937 standard—in the Bay Area, and (2) to protect the environment. The terms of the settlement were then vetted with selected stakeholders, finalized, and presented to Congress in September 2006. It was approved by Congress on September 13, 2006, and signed on September 14, 2006 by the U.S. District Court. in addition to integration of federal, state, local, and private infrastructure projects. Whether Congress addresses this issue—in California and elsewhere—given current water resource authorization and appropriations practices and a restrictive budgetary climate remains to be seen. This is a common dilemma for resource agencies implementing projects and programs which are based on societal and political trade-offs made decades ago. While the issues discussed here have confronted prior Administrations and Congresses, a Settlement Agreement was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted. election of a party, at which point litigation might resume. To date, no party has officially elected to void the Settlement. In September 2006, the settling parties presented the Settlement, including its legislative proposal, to various Members of Congress. The parties hoped implementing legislation would be enacted prior to the Settlement's adoption. The Settlement was signed into law on September 14, 2006. It is the largest settlement in U.S. history, and the largest since the ratification of the United States Constitution in 1788. to adjournment of the 109 th Congress. However, numerous entities who were not party to the Settlement (i.e., third parties ), objected to the legislative proposal included in the Settlement. Shortly thereafter, many third parties met with the Settlement parties and certain Members of the California delegation. An agreement was reached to address certain third party interests; in exchange, these third parties agreed to support new legislation. Although many parties who had opposed the draft legislation in September 2006 supported the new legislation, other parties emerged that were for construction of numerous projects and other activities that could cost between $250 million and $1.1 billion. Federal funding for these projects and activities is sought by the parties and is contemplated under the Settlement. Direct spending funding mechanisms included in the legislation would typically require a budgetary offset under congressional PAYGO rules. While short-term (10 year) direct spending in H.R. 146 has been reduced substantially, the budget effects of the legislation in its entirety are still at issue for some. Historically, Central California's San Joaquin River supported large Chinook salmon populations. Since the Bureau of Reclamation's Friant Dam became fully operational in the 1940s, much of the river's water has been diverted for agricultural uses. In 1988, a coalition of conservation and fishing groups. advocating for river restoration to support Chinook. salmon recovery sued the bureau. Chinook Salmon are not listed under the ESA, but are identified as a species of concern. The lawsuit and the negotiated Settlement Agreement are discussed below. dry today, except during flood events. Reclamation's operation of Friant Dam largely destroyed numerous species of native fish from the Upper San Joaquin River, including spring- and fall-run Chinook salmon. The diverted water helped develop and continues to support a diverse agricultural economy from north of Fresno to Bakersfield. Today Central Valley spring-run chinook salmon are listed as threatened under the ESA; they may have exceeded 200,000 fish annually in the 1940s and 1950s. Central Valley spring-run Chinook salmon have been entirely extirpated from the San Joaquin River drainage, and currently inhabit only the Sacramento River drainage. Native fall and late-fall-run chinook salmon continue to spawn in small numbers in the SanJoaquin River tributaries such as the Mokelumne, Stanislaus, Tuolumne and Merced Rivers. These fish spawn at lower elevations and have been less affected by dam construction than were spring- run Chinook Salmon. Claims have been litigated in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. The implications of this decision are far reaching for California water management and for both the directly affected water users and the indirectly affected communities, landowners, and water users. Several broad policy issues are raised by the Settlement. These issues partially derive from constraints imposed by the pressure to react to a settlement responding to a judicial ruling, as opposed to managing or legislating on an issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement. environmental grounds. Plaintiffs argued that Reclamation had violated Section 8 of the Reclamation Act of 1902. Reclamation will act in conformity with state laws "relating to the control, appropriation, use or distribution of water used in irrigation," the suit says. The state law that is at issue here is California Fish and Game Code, according to the suit. In addition to claims that the process under which Reclamation. had begun contract renewals violated the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and that the lack of water in the river. violated the ESA (16 U.S.C. §§ 1531-1544), the plaintiffs argued that. San Joaquin River restoration Settlement legislation was first introduced in early December 2006. No action was taken on the bills before adjournment of the 109 th Congress. Settlement bills were reintroduced in the 110 th Congress as H.R. 24 and S. 27. Hearings were held in both houses of Congress; however, the legislation was not enacted. The Settlement aims to end a 19-year lawsuit and comports with a court ruling, the Settlement would affect others outside the Friant Division Service Area. the San Joaquin River, finding that Reclamation had violated the state law. The court did not declare what amount of water was necessary to satisfy the law or declare any other type of relief. It set a 2006 trial date to determine a proper remedy. Faced with the prospect of a court-imposed remedy, and mounting legal fees in preparation for trial, the parties (NRDC et al) decided to go to court. The case was settled out of court in a settlement reached in 2005. agricultural industry over commercial and sport fishing industries, or timber harvest over species habitat). It is hard to say what is fair or just when such significant trade-offs were made decades ago, causing harm to some, but providing benefit to others. In the eyes of many, the San Joaquin river restoration is an effort to respond to fisheries economic and ecological damage begun 60 years ago. For others, the potential of reduced water supplies for off-stream use is a breach of promises made 60 year ago. recapture, recirculate, and/or reuse San Joaquin River restoration flows. At minimum, it appears the restoration effort will necessitate multi-year water planning and investments. The funding on hand and infrastructure in place to buy and put to use surplus water (e.g., for groundwater recharge) should be in place, the authors say. The future of water resource management in the Central Valley is not just conjunctive water management, they say, but multi- year management with financial resources. the Settlement and implementing legislation, increased water flows for restoring fisheries would reduce diversions of water for off-stream purposes, such as irrigation, hydropower, and municipal and industrial uses. The quantity of water used for restoration flows and the quantity by which water deliveries would be reduced are related, but the relationship would not necessarily be one-for-one. In some of the wettest years, flood water releases could provide a significant amount of the restoration flows, thereby lowering the reduction in deliveries to agricultural and municipal users. driest of years; thus, no reductions in deliveries to Friant contractors would be made due to the Settlement in those years. In some years, the restoration flows released in late winter and early spring may free up space for additional runoff in Millerton Lake. Consequently, how deliveries toFriant water contractors might be reduced in any given year would depend on many factors. Regardless of the specifics of how much water might be released for fisheries restoration vis-à-vis water diverted for off-stream purposes, there will be water diverted. operates Friant Dam ( Natural Resources Defense Council v. Rodgers ). Most long-term water service contractors who receive the diverted water were added to the case shortly thereafter as defendant intervenors. A U.S. District Court judge has since ruled that operation ofFriant Dam violates state law because of its destruction of downstream fisheries. If Congress does not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement and which may have more severe consequences for some area water users. Be impacts to existing surface and groundwater supplies in and around the Friant Division Service Area and adjustments in local economies. Majority of Friant water contractor organizations, and environmental, fisheries, and community groups support proceeding with the Settlement Agreement. For some groups, going to trial risks considerable uncertainty and expense; others may be more willing to take such risks. Congressional authorization and appropriations are required for full implementation of the Settlement. If Congress does not approve the Settlement, the agreement will not go into effect. it is a matter of Friant Dam operations comporting with state law. It is not a question of whether or not the dam should be closed. It's a matter for the state of California to decide. The dam is open to the public as long as it is in compliance with the law. The state has no plans to close the dam at this time. It will be closed if the dam needs to be closed for safety reasons. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. Friant Dam is one of the largest federal dams of the Bureau of Reclamation's Central Valley Project (CVP) in California. The Settlement calls for new releases of water from Friant Dam to restore fisheries in the San Joaquin River and for efforts to mitigate water supply losses due to the new releases. Full implementation of the Settlement would require congressional authorization and appropriations. For more information on fisheries restoration, water management, funding, economic, and third party issues, see CRS Report RL34237, SanJoaquin River Restoration Settlement. Friant Dam was built on the San Joaquin River by Reclamation in the early 1940s. By the late 1940s, Reclamation's operation of Friant Dam had caused long stretches of the river to dry up. The Friant Division serves irrigation and water districts in the Fresno, Kern, Madera, Merced, and Tulare counties. The Settlement states that if legislation is not enacted by December 31, 2006, the Settlement may become void at the end of the year. The San Joaquin Valley (SJV) is an eight-county region extending 250 miles from Stockton in the north to Bakersfield in the south. The Friant Division Service Area includes four of these counties: Fresno, Tulare, Kern, and Merced. The SJV faces significant environmental and natural resource challenges, including the court-ordered restoration of the SanJoaquin River discussed in this report. It is home to five of the nation's ten most agriculturally productive counties. Other CVP management decisions, as well as state and local water systems. Recent court decisions regarding the health of threatened Delta Smelt have constrained water exports and may constrain future exports. The degree to which some of the water management goals identified in the Settlement might rely on moving water in and out of the Bay-Delta could affect the ultimate ability to move water. The CVP and State Water Project (SWP) are operating under regulations that limit the amount (and timing) of water that can be exported south.