WHD’s child labor compliance efforts comprise several strategies: enforcement, partnerships, education and outreach, and public awareness. Education and outreach activities are specifically targeted to groups that can have an impact on youth employment, such as teachers, parents, and employers. WHD headquarters officials told us that they devote a lot of their resources—both at the national and local level— to education and Outreach activities. The agency is working to develop methods of measuring the success of all of their child labor Compliance activities. 1996 to 2001, WHD conducted its “Work Safe This Summer’ initiative designed to reach children beginning summer jobs. WHD provided pamphlets and posters with information on the child labor provisions of FLSA. Public service announcement displayed on movie screens in 22 states and printed on 37 million shopping bags distributed by K-Mart. Labor’s newest national child labor initiative, “YouthRules!” announced by the Secretary in May 2002, is aimed at “educating young workers, parents and employers about workplace hazards. of children under age 18, and maintaining a Web site with information on the child labor provisions of FLSA and state child labor laws. WHD’s enforcement actions include on-site investigations of employers and other activities designed to bring employers into compliance with the law. The penalties for child labor violations depend on the severity of the violations, the number of times the violations occurred, and aggravating factors such as falsification of records and whether the employer has a record of previous child work. the injuries required them to miss more than 10 days. Since 1990, Labor has developed better goals for increasing employer compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. Labor does not provide sufficient guidance and training to its regional and district offices on how to use their resources most effectively or help them consistently apply the Child Labor Act. The agency does not use all available data to plan its future efforts or measure its progress in improving employer compliance and ensuring that all working children are adequately protected under the law. Labor’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) is responsible for enforcing the child labor provisions of FLSA. Despite the importance that WHD places on ensuring the safety of children who work, it faces difficulty in showing that its efforts have made a difference in improving the working conditions of children. GAO revised the report to reflect the goals contained in WHD's draft performance plan for fiscal year 2003. See app. II for a list of the legislative proposals introduced in the 107th Congress. Labor, which made several recommendations for changes to the orders. We believe that our report provides a comprehensive and balanced picture of Labor’s efforts to ensure compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. We also noted that Labor was in the process of reviewing the report and deciding the actions it would take in response to NIOSH's recommendations. Neither of these plans were based on our review of WHD's fiscal year 2001 and 2002 annual performance plans. The information in our draft report was based onour review of the WHD’S fiscal year 2000 and 2001 annual performance plan. of FLSA is dependent, in part, upon the establishment of a sound performance management system. WHD has taken some steps towards developing such a system, as reflected in the program goals it has established and refined in recent years. However, WHD continues to lack goals for industries that have high rates of injuries and fatalities. The system does not allow managers to fully evaluate the effectiveness of their child labor compliance efforts and ensure that their limited resources are used in the most effective manner, the agency says. Labor: WHD had developed specific, measurable goals in its draft fiscal year 2003 annual performance plan. The draft plan includes goals for grocery stores, fast food restaurants, and full-service restaurants, industries in which children are most likely to work. WHD did not, however, establish goals for industries that we found that children were likely to be employed, we say. We think these are positive steps and have revised our report to reflect these efforts, we add. We have revised the information in our report and the associated recommendations. FLSA. Labor recently established specific goals for fiscal year 2003 for the industries in which children are most likely to work. WHD’s national goals in the early part of the decade focused on increasing the number of employers with prior child labor violations. More recently, WHD developed goals for improving overall employer compliance with FLSA in some low-wage industries, including compliance with the child labor provisions. We believe the most important indicator of compliance is the percentage of employers who are in compliance. Labor considered setting specific goals for industries in which many children worked and were likely to be injured. It decided not to based on the results it received from a survey of employers. We do not believe that the most important working in this industry does not factor in these high injury and fatality rates. In fact, some of the most serious child labor violations WHD found occurred in sawmills and companies that produce wood pallets. We commend WHD’s recent decision to conduct a second compliance survey of the grocery, full service restaurant, and fast-food restaurant industries. We believe that this approach reduces attention to some of the industries that pose significant risks to children. There are no specific goals for construction, which has high fatality and injury rates. Labor also disagreed with the conclusions supporting our recommendation to develop methods of measuring the success of its child labor compliance efforts. In this regard, Labor noted that it had recently decided to repeat its compliance survey of grocery stores, full-service restaurants, and fast food restaurants in fiscal year 2004. While there are sufficient numbers of children working in these industries to justify setting such goals.  WHD is correct in its statement that the number of investigator hours devoted to child labor enforcement in fiscal year 2001, 74,000 hours, represents the largest investment of investigator time by WHD in the last 5 years. However, our report, which focuses on WHD’s efforts since 1990, shows that this is lower than the resources dedicated to child labour enforcement in the first half of the decade. For example, in fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992, WHD investigators devoted 143,000hours, 83,000hour, and 105,000 hour, respectively. We continue to believe.ensure compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. its child labor enforcement activities. Labor’s goals for fiscal years 1990 and 1992 focused on its plans to dramatically increase the number of child labor investigations. WHD measured the success of Operation Child Watch in the early 1990s by citing the large number of violations and penalties produced. In fiscal year 2000, illegally, such as manufacturing and construction, or for industries in which children have the highest rates of fatalities and nonfatal injuries. Such as construction, wholesale trade, and transportation and public utilities. It is not clear what factors led to the decrease in the number of violations. It could have resulted from an increased rate of compliance among employers. The number of investigator hours devoted to child labor investigations has declined from a high of 11 percent to 7 percent since Operation Child Watch began in 1994. The U.S. Department of Labor has a program that monitors child labor in the U.N. Children’s Rights Council has a similar program, but it is not as active as the Child Labor Watch program. We disagree with Labor’s statement that. the trends in the number of child labor violations found and the amount of penalties assessed are not valid indicators of WHD’S commitment to child labor compliance. In our conversations with WHD headquarters officials and in WHD publications, the. number of investigations, violations found, and civil monetary penalties were frequently cited as indicators of the. success of the WHD's child labor enforcement efforts. We don’t know what factors led to the changes in the numbers. In 2002, the maximum penalty for a child labor violation was raised from $10,000 to $11,000. In 2001, working children were as sizable a part of the U.S. labor force as they were in 1990. Most children worked in a variety of occupations concentrated in a few select industries. The penalties range from $275 for a record-keeping violation to $ 11,000 for a violation involving a serious injury or death. The number and characteristics of working children have not changed over the past decade. our estimates of illegally employed children showed greater numbers of children in the South to be illegally employed than in the Northeast. While these estimates do not prove that illegal child labor was a problem in the area of the state covered by that district office, it is an indication that potential violations exist undetected. WHD’s national office also does not provide specific guidance to regional and district offices on when to assess penalties for child labor violations. Labor disagreed with our recommendation to. provide training to all WHD staff on how to obtain information from the investigations database. found that district officials sometimes reduced the penalties for child labor violations. We also found that the average percentage of the penalties collected varied significantly among the district offices we visited. For example, one district office generally did not waive penalties forChild labor violations it found. Another district office waived many of the. penalties for the child labor Violations it found, including a violation of a Hazardous. Occupations Order involving a child who was working with dangerous equipment. The penalties collected by each district office varied significantly, from a small percentage to a high percentage. 2001, with a low of 5 percent in 1998. WHD headquarters officials use various factors to measure the success of their enforcement efforts. Officials told us they could tell their activities generate attention if WHD receives a lot of media inquires and that they count the number of times individuals access information from WHD’s Web site. However, WHD does not link its education and outreach activities with changes in employer behavior, we found. We recognize the inherent difficulties in assessing the impact on employer behavior. Much of the responsibility for planning and executing these efforts is left to WHD’s five regional offices and the 50 district offices that report directly to the regions. WHD headquarters officials do not use the quarterly reports prepared by these offices on their local initiatives to ensure that, nationwide, local child labor initiatives provide adequate protection for all children who work. The Child Labor Team Leader in the headquarters office is responsible for coordinating WHD's child labor compliance efforts, including disseminating information and guidance to regional and district offices. reports we reviewed for fiscal years 1999 through 2002 showed that, in some years, many districts had no child labor initiatives. For example, in fiscal year 2000, almost all of the district offices in the northeast region had at least one child labor initiative. Two regions had regionwide initiatives that required all of their district offices to conduct child labor investigations. Some districts in the southwest region, however, had no local child labor Initiatives planned for fiscal year 1999-2002. The number of child labor Initiative in each region varied significantly from one region to another.  WHD conducts child labor investigations either as a result of a receiving a complaint about a possible child labor violation or from a decision by a WHD office to conduct investigations of employers that focus specifically on children they employ. WHD officials told us that, although they review every complaint they receive, they do not receive many complaints about child labor. They also said that WHD’s national office does not require all district offices to conduct self-initiated child labour investigations. In fact, since Operation Child Watch, the only national initiative that required all district office to do so was the child labor compliance survey WHD conducted of the grocery and restaurant industries in 2000. The number of investigations conducted by each district office and by WHD’s five regions varied widely. A few district offices accounted for a large number of the child labor investigations and cases in which child labor violations were found. WHD headquarters officials were not able to a low of 49 percent of the original amount assessed to a high of 82 percent for investigations completed in fiscal years 2000 and 2001. Two of the five regional child labor coordinators and officials at two of the district offices we visited indicated that they had not been trained on how to obtain reports from WHD. had staff members with the skills needed to obtain reports from the investigations database. Officials at two of these offices said that they had only one person with these skills and that, if they lost this person, they would not be able to obtain the reports they need. By allowing and encouraging children to work, the nation acknowledges that children can derive many benefits from working, such as independence, confidence, and responsibility, the report says. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit that promotes free speech and equality. WHD staff on how to obtain information from the investigations database. Labor also provided technical comments and clarifications, which we incorporated in the report as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Labor, the Wage and Hour Administrator, the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and other interested parties. Copies will be made available to others upon request. This report is also available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. 14-year-olds who work and NLSY97 does not have information on children born after 1984. We recognize, however, that collecting these data will require additional resources. Regional and district offices also need sufficient guidance and training to effectively carry out their mission. To provide WHD’s regional and district. offices with the information, consider expanding CPS to include 14-year olds or beginning additional cohorts of N.LSY at regular intervals, such as every five years. The goal is to ensure that all children nationwide are protected under the child labor provisions of FLSA. work and ensuring that students’ education should be everyone’s first priority. The initiative includes partnerships that WHD has formed with all levels of government as well as businesses, unions, and advocacy groups to provide training and educational materials. WHD does not use all of the data available to plan its future child labor compliance efforts or assess their success. The agency does not routinely use data from BLS to identify the industries and occupations in which children work, WHD said in a statement. Labor agreed with the remainder of our recommendations or agreed to take action on them. For example, it agreed to obtain and review data from the WHISARD database to better hold local offices accountable. WHD routinely uses BLS and NIOSH data to plan the allocation of its child labor resources. The district offices we visited confirmed that they do not receive this information to use in planning their local child labor efforts. Many states refuse to release this data to WHD because of privacy concerns. The department has no procedures for routinely obtaining data from BLS or NIOSH.  WHD’s national office does not provide regional and district offices with adequate guidance on how to target their child labor compliance efforts. WHD lacks a sound basis for determining, among other things, the extent to which it should devote resources to child labor investigations versus its education and outreach and other compliance assistance activities. Its resource allocation decisions are also hindered because WHD does not routinely use all of the data available from BLS and NIOSH to target its child labor Compliance efforts to the places that are most dangerous for children. which children work because the information is not easily accessible and because the data do not provide information at the local level that could be used to help plan local compliance efforts. CPS data is available at the regional level and we developed state-level information by combining several years of data. For example, by combining CPS data for 4 years (1998 to 2001) and comparing it to the provisions of FLSA, we estimated the number of children illegally employed in each state. WHD also does not utilize information from its own investigations database to evaluate the child labor compliance efforts of its regional and district offices. the past, used only limited data from its WHISARD investigations database to plan its enforcement efforts. In some cases, reports we requested from the database, such as reports that showed the source of investigations completed in fiscal years 2000 and 2001, was the first time that WHD had run such reports. We believe the anecdotal information on injuries and fatalities maintained by WHD’s national office does not provide enough information to be useful in making WHD's resource allocation decisions. The information on fatalities and serious injuries to children was provided to us in May. 2002 contained data on only 7 fatalities and 36 injuries reviewed by WHD in fiscal year 2001. We clarified our conclusions to acknowledge that collecting these data may require additional resources. We agree with Labor’s statement that our recommendation to consider enhancing the data collected on children who work by expanding CPS to include 14-year-olds or beginning additional cohorts of NLSY cannot be implemented without additional study and resources, which is why we recommended that the Secretary “consider” these actions. that limited resources are used in the most effective manner. The Secretary of Labor should establish additional specific, measurable goals for WHD’s child labor compliance efforts for industries in which children are most likely to be injured or killed. develop methods of measuring the success of WHD's child labor efforts, including its education and outreach activities. routinely obtain data from BLS and NIOSH on the industries, occupations, and locations in which. children work and sustain work-related injuries and use them to target WHD.  WHD does not routinely obtain information from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work. WHD also does not use information from its investigations database or reports on local child labor initiatives to assess the results of the regional and district offices’ child labor compliance efforts. For example, we estimated that a significant proportion of illegally employed children worked in construction and manufacturing. We also found that children were more likely to be injured or killed while working in several industries in which WHD conducts few child labor investigations. We question how WHD determined that “many of these specialty trade contractors are so small that they do not meet the FLSA coverage criteria” because this information is not tracked in. 21. The injury rate for children who work in this industry was relatively high. We noted that the injury rate was higher than for children in the transportation and public utilities and wholesale trade industries. We also noted the fatality rates for the construction industry were higher than those for the wholesale trade industry. We questioned WHD’s decision to determine that these contractors were too small to be covered by FLSA because they were so small. WHD’s investigations database and we found no data on employer coverage under FLSA. We also found, in our discussions with WHD officials, that establishing coverage for employers in the construction industry was not a problem for some of the district offices we visited. 22. CPS data on occupations show that many children are employed as truck drivers. However, our draft report incorrectly indicated that 43 percent of all children who are employed illegally are employed in the truck industry. We clarified the report to show that the percentage of children who were employed illegally as a truck driver was 43 percent. high fatality rates for this industry, we found that the injury rate was high compared to other industries. It is not clear that establishing a goal for improving compliance in the transportation and public utilities industry would be unrealistic and counterproductive. Given the limitations of the estimates of illegal employment, we question the agency’s estimate that only 4,400 youth are employed illegally in this industry. The statistics cited by Labor on the number of violations found as evidence that violations are not prevalent are also questionable. truck drivers represents 42 percent of children who are employed in prohibited occupations. We continue to believe that the injury and fatality rates for children who work in the construction industry warrant WHD attention. WHD’s opinion that targeting additional resources on this industry would not be a wise resource investment and would have no impact on occupational injuries and fatalities for children. As noted in our report, manufacturing has one of the highest injury rates for kids. We commend WHD's efforts to fund research by NIOSH on the health and safety of young workers in the industry. Labor cites the drop in workplace injuries indicated by the BLS data from the Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses as evidence that “the workplace is becoming safer for young workers.” NIOSH data from emergency room records that indicates that workplace injuries to children are on the rise. Although we highlighted many of Labor’s efforts to improve child labor laws, we highlight many of their efforts to make the workplace safer for children as well as for adults. We also highlight the fact that Labor has been trying to improve the workplace for children for years. The primary sources of data on children who are injured or killed as a result of work-related injuries come from BLS and NIOSH. BLS reports all work- related fatalities, including those for children, in its Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries published each year. NIOSH collects data in its National Electronic Injury Surveillance System from a sample of emergency room records. The employment of working children is generally covered by FLSA and its implementing regulations, which limit the types of jobs, number of most children work part-time. The two primary sources of nationwide data on work-related injuries, one collected by BLS from employer records and the other collected by NIOSH from emergency room records, differ substantially in their estimates. For 1999, BLS reported that almost 13,000 children were injured on the job, while NIOSH estimated that over 80,000 kids were injured that year. Due to limitations of both data sources, it is difficult to determine the true extent of injuries to children who work. Both sets of data underreport injuries to kids. for all work-related injuries serious enough to cause children to miss at least one day of work. NIOSH’s estimate was based on records of injuries treated in emergency rooms. BLS data for 1992 to 2000 showed that sprains, strains, and tears were the most common injuries. The BLS and NIOSH data also, over time, indicate different trends in the numbers of work- related injuries to children. For example, certain types of injuries such as lacerations may be treated in. emergency rooms but not necessitate one or more days away from work. of the injuries occurred to boys, even though they accounted for only about half of all working children. During this period, children aged 16 and over sustained the vast majority of all work-related injuries. Most children (84 percent) were injured while working in the two industries in which children are most likely to work—retail trade and services. The risk of injury was highest in some industries with the smallest number of injuries to children, the study found. utilities, wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing industries had the lowest injury rates. in wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing had higher rates of injury than those working in retail trade or services. Injuries are caused by a variety of factors, but most frequently from coming into contact with an object or equipment. Other common accidents were overexertion, falls, and contact with hot objects. The causes of work-related nonfatal injuries were fairly constant over this period. In 1998 a 17-year-old worker fractured his hand when a piece of metal slipped off a power-driven machine he was operating. accidents, including highway collisions and nonhighway incidents, such as a fall from a moving vehicle. Other common events included being caught or compressed by equipment or being struck by a falling or flying object. Overall, the characteristics of children who died as a result of work- related injuries remained relatively constant. The characteristics of their fatalities remained relatively unchanged. The most common cause of death for children who worked in a supermarket was a cardboard box compactor, and another 16-year-old boy was crushed when the forklift he was operating flipped over. The number and characteristics of work-related fatalities and fatality rates for working children remained relatively constant from 1992 to 2000. The two primary sources of data on nonfatal injuries to working children—BLS and NIOSH—provide significantly different estimates of the number of children injured over the decade. Data from one of the two sources indicates that the characteristics of kids injured have changed little over the ten years. The number of 15- to 17-year-olds who died as a result of a work- related injury or sustained a non-fatal injury remained fairly constant. We used data from 108 monthly surveys to obtain the total number of hours worked by 15- to 17-year-olds between 1992 and 2000. In computing the rates for nonfatal injuries, we excluded children who worked for the government or were self-employed because they are excluded from the data. We totaled the hours worked each week by all children for each year. We did not aggregate the data on nonf fatal injuries over the decade because the number of injuries reported was large. We calculated fatality and injury rates by using the total amount of hours children worked. industries. Because the data sets for fatal and nonfatal injuries use different industry groupings than CPS, we combined industries. Because we were not able to obtain SOII data that only included 15- to 17-year-olds by industry, we calculated industry rates by dividing the total number of injuries to children under 18. Since CPS data do not include hours worked by children younger than 15, we were unable to include these children in our calculations. However, we did include them in our calculation of industry rates. worked in family businesses accounted for less than 1 percent of all working children. They accounted for about one-third of all fatalities. Children who worked for small employers—those with 10 employees or less—accounted for nearly two-thirds of the fatalities. About 90 percent of the children killed who work for an agricultural employer for which establishment size was reported worked for employers with 10 or fewer employees. The number of hours children work in each industry needs to be considered as well as the number of deaths. Exposure to risk, such as employment or hours worked. The number of hours worked is preferable because different workers spend variable hours on the job in a given time period. For the transportation and public utilities industry, Labor mentions only fatality rates and the number of fatalities. We believe it is particularly important to use the number. of children employed, to calculate injury and fatality. rates because so many children (87 percent) work part time. 18. In addition to employment and hours worked, there are other factors to consider. 62 and 73 children died from injuries sustained while working, a total of 613 children over the 9-year period. Most of the children killed were boys 16 years of age or older. Although girls were as likely as boys to work from 1992 to 2000, boys were almost eight times more likely to die as a result of a work- related injury than girls. Most children younger than age 15 who died as the result of an injury were employed in agriculture. About 50 percent of those who died while working in agriculture were 14 years old. Fatality data show that certain industries and types of businesses pose a greater danger to working children. During the decade, over 40 percent of the children killed as a result of work-related injuries worked in agriculture, primarily crop production. Retail trade and construction accounted for 20 percent and 14 percent of all fatalities, respectively. In both 1992 and 2000, 60 percent of children who died as a. result of a work- related injury were 16 and 17 years old, and 75 percent of. children killed for whom race was available were white. example, NLSY97 showed that 13 percent of all 14-year-olds worked for an employer in a particular week during the summer of 1996. The number and characteristics of children who die each year as a result of a work-related injury have changed little over the past decade. From 1992 to 2000, the number of fatalities and the fatality rates for working were the same as they were in the early 1990s. (See table 4 for more information) The number of children in the U.S. who die from a work related injury was the same in the 1990s as it was in the 1980s. In 2001, as in 1990, minority children and children from families with annual incomes below $25,000 were more likely than other children to work illegally. The percentage of children who worked illegally, either because they worked in occupations prohibited under the law or more hours than allowed, also did not change. Although most children worked in sales and services occupations, children who were employed in prohibited occupations were most commonly employed illegally in transportation-related occupations. In 2001, according to our estimates, over 40 percent of all children were employed illegally. 52,000 (2 percent) were self-employed and about 10,000 performed unpaid labor in a family business. Throughout the decade, children primarily worked in retail trade, in businesses such as department stores, grocery stores, and restaurants. In 2001, as in 1990, about 60 percent of all working children were employed in this industry, mostly in eating and drinking places. Children generally held jobs in sales occupations, such as running a cash register or clerking at a store, or in services such as waiting tables or cleaning hotel rooms. of employed 17-year-olds worked in retail trade, whereas 38 percent of employed 15-year old worked in this industry. Children from families with lower incomes are less likely to work than those from higher income families, and minority children are less Likely to Work than white children. In addition to age, family income and race are also related to children’s employment. About 1 in 5 children in the U.S. are employed in some form of retail trade or other industry, according to a recent study. worked in prohibited occupations worked as truck drivers. We determined that a child’s gender, race, and citizenship status were related to the likelihood that he or she worked in a prohibited occupation. There was no correlation, however, between family income and prohibited occupations. In 2001, boys were more likely than girls to work in prohibited jobs. In addition, black children were less likely than children of other races. Children who were not citizens were morelikely than those who were citizens to work. In 2001, as many as 3.7 million children between the ages of 15 and 17 worked. The percentage of children who worked in summer months fluctuated over the decade from a high of 36 percent in 1990 to a low of 30 percent in 2001. Although most children work for an employer, in 2001, about country.15 who are employed illegally. More children work during summer months when school is out of session than in school months, according to the study. The number of children working in agriculture has increased, from 17 percent to 30 percent. In 2001, children worked an average of 21 hours a week in summer months. This is similar to the number of hours they worked in both summer and school months in 1990. 87 percent of all working children worked part-time in 2001. Older children are more likely to work in the retail trade industry than younger children. In summer months in 2001, nearly 60 percent of children.aged 15 to 17 worked in summer. months, compared to 23 percent who worked in school months. In 2001, 17-year-olds worked a average of 23 hours a. week, 5 more hours aweek than 15- year-olds. 1990, their average hourly earnings increased by 10 percent. The older a child is, the more likely he or she is to work. In 1990, children paid an hourly salary earned an average of $5.70 an hour; in 2001, the average hourly salary was $6.36. The amount by which their earnings exceeded the minimum wage increased by $1.21. By 2001, children’s average hourly Earnings exceeded the Minimum Wage of $ 5.15 an hour. In school months in 2001, 15-year-olds in the South and West were almost 1.5 times more likely than their counterparts in the Northeast and Midwest to work more hours than allowed. The data on children who work has been collected in CPS for 50 years, and therefore provides useful information on children's work habits, the report says. The report also found that 15- year-olds who lived in metropolitan areas were 1.4 times more Likely to work. more hours. than those who lived. in nonmetropolitan areas. CPS does not capture information necessary to determine the number of 15-year-olds who work more hours than allowed on a daily basis or at prohibited times of day. CPS does not collect information on either the length of the workday, nor its starting and ending times. As with prohibited occupations, it was not possible to determine how much of our estimates are understated as a result of these limitations. However, we believe that the amount of this understatement is large because of the limitations. Most of the children who worked illegally were 15-year-olds who worked more hours than allowed under the child labor provisions of FLSA. Nearly 80 percent worked an excessive number of hours, on average, 10 hours more than the maximum hours allowed. Because of the hours restrictions for 15- year-olds in school months, they were much more likely to work illegally in schoolmonth than in summer months. Most children worked in the retail trade industry during the past decade, but a substantial percentage of the illegal employment number was actually worked each week. 17 percent of children in families with annual incomes below $25,000 a year worked in 2001. In 2001, 15 percent of black children and 17 percent of Hispanic children worked. Despite the fact that children from lower income families are less likely to work, when they do work, they tend to work more hours. As many as 4 percent of all 15- to 17-year-olds who worked in2001 worked illegally, either because they worked more hours than allowed under the law or because they work in prohibited hazardous occupations. NLSY cannot be used to show how the number and characteristics of all working children have changed over time because it only includes information on one group of children born from 1980 to 1984. The second set is the National Agricultural Workers Survey in which data are collected several times each year from a sample of crop agricultural workers. According to the data in this survey, the characteristics of children in crop agriculture changed somewhat over the decade. Although most children working incrop agriculture throughout the decade were boys aged 16 and 17, the percentage of boys increased. Most employment questions in NLSY deal with events that take place after the child’s 14th birthday. To determine employment for these children in 1996 and 1997, we identified those weeks that contained the 12th day of the month. We determined the frequency of employed children in each of the 16 weeks and averaged the result over the total number of months in each period. We coded children born in 1983 and 1984 as being 13 and 12 years of age, respectively. We used a different method to estimate employment for children younger than 14. volume of sales, or information that could be used to determine whether children work in interstate commerce. We used data from NLSY97, the survey of children born from 1980 to 1984, to estimate the number of 12- to 14-year-olds who work. The extent to which our estimates are overstated because not all children work under FLSA cannot be determined. We coded children noted in NLSy97 as being born in 1982 as being 12 to 14 years of age. Labor compiles two additional sources of nationally representative data on working children. The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) collects data on younger children who work. NLSY97 showed that about 24 percent of all 15-year-olds worked in a particular week during the summer of 1996,while CPS data showed that 18 percent of 15-years-old worked in that same period. For more information, go to Labor.gov/WorkingChildren or call 1-800-273-8255. While some data are collected directly from children who work, most of the information in CPS on working children is provided by an adult member of the household. Because the adult answering the questions may not be aware of the full extent of the child’s activities, information about the child's employment may be underreported or omitted. Another BLS survey, NLSY, collects information on children differently. In NLSy, children are directly asked by interviewers to describe their jobs as well as their activities at The Current Population Survey (CPS) is the primary source of information on the United States labor force. CPS provides data on where children work, the types of jobs they hold, and how many hours a week they work. In addition, it provides demographic information on children such as age, race, ethnicity, and family income. Because the data have been collected for over 50 years, they can be used to help identify working children in the U.S. The CPS is compiled monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Child labor compliance rates were relatively higher in these three industries than overall FLSA compliance rates. It would be a “serious mistake’ to compare the findings of the survey with compliance rates found in its surveys of other industries, the analysis said. At least 52,000 and as many as 220,000 children illegally employed in the three industries, according to the analysis. In addition, there were “still enormous child labor compliance issues that these industries need to address,” the analysis stated. who were self-employed and those who worked in agriculture from the data set. Key questions concerning child employment in a family business were not added to CPS until 1994. To obtain numbers of children who worked illegally, we averaged the results of the 2001 base population with the results from the 1990 base population. These children are not covered by FLSA, so we included them in the 2001 data set, even though they are not legally employed in the U.S. as a result of the law. we could not include them in our estimates. In developing our estimates, we worked with Douglas Kruse, Ph.D., a professor at Rutgers University’s School of Management and Labor Relations. We compared CPS data for 1990, 1996, and 2001 to the child labor provisions of FLSA by defining the base population and identifying illegal employment by occupation and hours. While recognizing these limitations, we continue to believe that our analysis provides the best estimates that can be made with available data. In fact, we used the same methods as those used to develop estimates cited by BLS and WHD.  limitations of the data affect our ability to accurately describe all children in the United States who work. In 1989, Labor stopped collecting data on 14-year-olds in CPS, although these children are allowed under FLSA and its implementing regulations to work in many jobs. The specific nature of child labor laws makes it difficult to reconcile them with generalized data sources. To estimate illegal employment in each state, we combined CPS data for 4 years (48 monthly surveys) from 1998 to 2001. The estimates presented in this report paint an incomplete picture of the employment patterns for younger children.  appendix discusses scope and methodology for estimating the number of working children in the United States who are employed illegally. Analysis showed that a large percentage of children working in this state worked in those industries where children were most likely to be injured. Most of the estimates in the report were calculated using data obtained from samples and, therefore, have sampling errors associated with them. All differences included in this report were tested for statistical significance at the 0.05 level. V. Because CPS does not capture data on children who work in occupations that are illegal under criminal statutes, such as drug dealing and prostitution, this report does not estimate the total number of children employed in these occupations. through the use of logistic regression for illegal occupations and cross- tabulations for hours. We used data from 36 monthly surveys from CPS for the following years: 1990, 1996 and 2001. Due to the small sample sizes of children identified in these groups, cross tabulations were not statistically significant at the 0.05 level. To determine demographic differences in the likelihood of working illegally, the following variables were included in the model: sex, race, urbanicity (metropolitan or non-metropolitan area), income, citizenship, and region. CPS treats ethnicity separately from race. A child can be identified in CPS as both “white” and “Hispanic.” To separately determine the effect of illegal employment on whites, blacks, and Hispanics, we coded the number of children who worked illegally in summer months. The number of illegal workers in the U.S. in the summer months was higher than in the school year, according to the CPS report. The CPS report was released on Tuesday. It is available online at www.cps.org. We used data for the four regions defined in CPS: Midwest, Northeast, South, and West. The states included in each region are Midwest: Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. Northeast: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont. South: Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, andWest Virginia. West: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. hours, and times of day that children younger than 16 years of age can work. Once children reach age 16, they are only prohibited from working in jobs or with equipment covered by these Hazardous Occupations Orders. Children of any age may work an unlimited number of hours (outside of school hours) in nonhazardous jobs, either on a farm owned by their parents or on a noncommercial farm with the written consent of their parents. The child labor provisions of FLSA do not cover all children. The provisions also prohibit 14- and 15-year-olds from working during school hours. Several legislative proposals were introduced in the 107th Congress to strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. In July 2002, the Senate passed the Traveling Sales Crew Protection Act. The law includes provisions that prohibit children under age 18 from working in traveling sales work where they remain away from home for more than 24 hours. The number and characteristics of children who worked from 1990 to 2001 as tabulated from the Current Population Survey (CPS) data we obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) are detailed in the tables below. employers whose annual gross volume of sales is less than $500,000 and whose work cannot be linked to interstate commerce are not covered under FLSA. In addition, children who are self-employed are not subject to the child labor provisions of FLSA, although they may be covered under state child labor laws. Children who work for their parents are prohibited from working in occupations and operating equipment listed in the Hazardous Occupations Orders. When children reach age 18, they are no longer covered under the Child Labor Act. In 2001, several legislative proposals were submitted in the House of Representatives and the Senate that would strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. The proposals include the Children’s Act for Responsible Employment of 2001, which would increase the maximum penalties for child labor violations and prohibit children aged 16 and 17 from working in hazardous occupations in agriculture. The Young American Workers’ Bill of Rights would amend the FLSA to require employers to obtain work permits for all children age 18 and under who are still in school. Our estimates of illegal employment are both under- and overstated. It is not possible to determine whether each child who works in a prohibited occupation category is actually performing prohibited activities. For example, because work as a public messenger is expressly prohibited for15-year- olds, we included children who worked in the occupation category “mail carrier” in our estimates. It was not, however, possible for us to determine the extent to which our estimates ofillegal employment are under- or overstatement. Using methods developed in our previous report and refined by Douglas Kruse, we defined a list of 100 occupational codes that correspond to activities prohibited by the Hazardous Occupations Orders. Any child in the base population with one of these codes was included in our estimates of children employed illegally. We used a similar method to identify occupations specifically prohibited for 15-year-olds. In this instance, 216 occupational codes matched the descriptions of activities prohibited to children under 16. Any. child identified in the Base population with a code that matched this description was included. children whose race was identified as “white” or “black” and whose ethnicity wasidentified as ‘Hispanic,’ as ’Hispanic’ only. For children whose race. was identified. as � ‘black’ or ‘white,�’ and their ethnicity was identified ‘non-Hispanic,' we included them in the category of race identified. This resulted in four racial categories: white, black, Hispanic, and other. For 1996 and 2001, “Other” included Asians and Native Americans. In 2002, NIOSH completed a review of the Hazardous Occupations Orders for Labor. Its report, issued in July 2002, made several recommendations for changes to the orders. Labor is in the process of reviewing the report and deciding what actions it will take in response to the recommendations. For jobs in agriculture, the report says the orders should be amended to make it more difficult for children to work in the construction industry. The orders should also make it harder for children under 18 to work on ladders, scaffolds, trees, and other structures.