The Alternate Access to Station (AAS) study contracts were awarded in July 2002, with 1-year contracts given to four contractors. In summer 2003, these contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international expendable launch vehicles. In the fall of 2003, the contracts were extended, and the contractors were asked to address larger cargo delivery capabilities and “downmass” requirements. The responses are being evaluated, and NASA plans to seek more detailed information from the commercial launch industry for additional study or development work in June 2005. could be performed by or complemented with commercial launch vehicles later this decade. NASA outlined a number of technical challenges to using an alternate vehicle for space station support, especially for assembly missions where the space shuttle’s crew and remote manipulator arm perform key functions. NASA officials stated they used the AAS study, which concentrated solely on logistics support missions, as the foundation for its 2004 informal assessment. In a summary of that study, NASA reported that the Aas contractors projected the cost to develop. NASA is currently evaluating responses from commercial industry on different ways to provide logistics services to and from the space station. NASA received 26 responses from a September 2004 request for information that asked for, among other things, input from the commercial space industry. NASA officials agreed there is an opportunity to perform a more comprehensive assessment of alternatives, especially for the logistics missions late this decade. The agency is examining configurations of the space. station that meet the needs of the new vision and the international partners with as few space. shuttle flights as necessary. steps to pursue a deliberate alternative cargo transportation system assessment. NASA should not limit documentation of this effort to the acquisition strategy meeting, but should also document the decision paths leading up to that event. This approach should identify the decision makers involved and provide a fully documented rationale of the acquisition processes. NASA analyzes all alternatives to determine the best options for delivering the logistics cargo for space station operations. As agreed, NASA’s comments are reprinted in appendix II. Unless otherwise noted, all comments are from NASA. NASA conducted a detailed assessment of alternatives to the space shuttle for completing assembly and providing logistics support to the International Space Station. We obtained and analyzed pertinent NASA documents and briefing slides related to the ISS, space shuttles, and other launch alternatives, such as Expendable Launch Vehicles. We also analyzed NASA documents, including: European Space Agency Segment Specifications for the Automated Transfer Vehicle; Specification for the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. We looked at space station and space shuttle status, history, and cost briefings; Return to Flight Status Briefings; and, Alternate Access. NASA plans to document its acquisition strategy through a NASA Headquarters Acquisition Strategy Meeting. NASA said it will evaluate the cost and capabilities of the proposed transportation system to meet space station and agency needs, as well as the needs of its partners. We are encouraged that NASA has taken this step in conjunction with its retirement planning for the space shuttle. NASA also said that its acquisition. strategy will be consistent with space station requirements, international partner agreements, and. available funding. The agency will release a request for proposal for commercial space station cargo services later this summer. available not later than 2009 and that these services are a key element in the future of the space station program. In addition to lacking sufficient knowledge with regard to the use of alternatives for logistics missions, NASA did not document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. The agency did not record the processes it followed and therefore did not capture the basis of the decisions reached. When asked about the details of the assessment, NASA officials indicated that the informal assessment was based primarily on the expertise within the headquarters. A thorough analysis of alternatives is an important aspect in the formulation of a program technical. NASA uses a formal method that compares alternatives by estimating their ability to satisfy mission requirements and their life cycle costs. The results of these two analysis are used together to produce a cost-effectiveness comparison that allows decision-makers to assess cost and effectiveness simultaneously. An analysis ofalternatives broadly examines multiple elements of program alternatives (including technical performance, risk, life cycle cost, and programmatic aspects), and is typically an important part of the formulation studies. an alternate launch capability would be approximately $1 billion, take 3 to 5 years to develop, and require $2 to $3 billion per year for operations. Since a majority of the space station assembly missions are scheduled within the next 3 years, these types of missions could preclude the use of an alternative vehicle. NASA did not have sufficient knowledge to conclude that the shuttle was the best option for logistics missions prior to its retirement under review. Several of the shuttle’s final flights are planned logistics support missions that might be conducted using alternative launch vehicles. launch vehicles would present operational risks, technical challenges, and long program delays. NASA did not perform a comparative cost analysis that considered the schedule impacts or associated costs of the shuttle in 2010. NASA officials stated that the technical challenges for developing an alternative vehicle could be overcome, but probably not before the 28 missions scheduled through 2010. We found no evidence of analyses performed by NASA to compare the cost and schedule impact of using alternate launch systems with the scheduled space shuttle program costs, to include the cost of returning the space shuttle to flight. Food, potable water, as well as propellant resupply for reboosting the space station to higher orbits. Launches of space station assembly elements and large orbital replacement items for maintenance have effectively ceased. NASA performed two studies that focused on the potential use of commercial launch vehicles to provide logistics services. In a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no commercial logistics service for the space space station was possible at that time. No launch vehicles possessed the critical capabilities necessary to providing logistics services, including automated rendezvous capabilities. of service as soon as assembly of the International Space Station is completed, planned for the end of the decade. In essence, NASA’s implementation plan holds aeronautics, science, and other activities at near constant levels and transitions funding currently dedicated to the space station and space shuttle programs to the new exploration strategy. The vision also changed the space stations’ on-board research focus. Originally, the space Station was to be used to conduct research on a variety of subjects. Under the new vision, the research will be focused on determining the effects of long duration space travel on humans and developing countermeasures. The space station research necessary to support human explorers on other worlds would be complete by 2016. According to program officials, NASA’s 2004 informal assessment concluded that alternative alternative plans were not viable. The new vision calls for the space station to be used for life sciences research on how humans adapt to long durations in space, biomedical research, and materials-processing research. had not been fully developed. In fact, NASA officials stated that they did not compare estimated costs for developing alternative launch vehicles against budget estimates for the 28 space shuttle flights currently planned to support the space station. NASA has also requested $1.8 billion for crew and cargo services over the same time frame to purchase commercial services using existing and emerging capabilities, both domestic and foreign. However, we were told these services would not eliminate any of the scheduled space Shuttle flights, but only augment the capabilities of the space shuttle. study ended in January 2004 with the contractors briefing on their study results. NASA concluded that developing a domestic capability to meet most of the space station cargo service needs was possible within 3 to 5 years. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for Exploration that called for retiring the shuttle in 2010, requiring NASA to find an alternative to support space station operations through 2016 by the end of the decade. The President called for a shift in NASA’s long-term focus, envisioning that NASA will retire the space shuttle after nearly 30 years. The Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV) is scheduled to be available in 2008 and will fly within the proximity of the space station to be caught by the station’s robotic arm. The ATV and HTV also carry less cargo than the shuttle. A carrier to go inside the new transfer vehicle to replicate the space shuttle attach points would need to be developed in order to meet volume requirements, according to officials. The HTV is being designed to rendezvous and dock to the space. station via the Russian Service Module. The space shuttle launch environment, with respect to vibration and g-force exerted on the payload, cannot be duplicated on an expendable launch vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed in order to rendezvous and dock assembly elements with the space station. Two transfer vehicles are currently being developed for logistics mission to support space station operations, the European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles (HTV) These vehicles, much like the Russian Progress vehicle, have a limited cargo capability. NASA plans to return the shuttle to flight in July 2005. While the shuttle has been grounded, space station crew transfers and logistics resupply have depended on Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. Europe and Japan are also developing logistics cargo vehicles to support space station operations later this decade. These Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable rockets. The European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) is scheduled to be launched in 2010. It will be launched on an expendable rocket. NASA and its international partners are building the space station to serve as an orbiting research facility. The space shuttle is the primary vehicle supporting the assembly and resupply of the station. Figure 1 shows the Space Shuttle Endeavour docked to the International Space Station. Following the Columbia accident in February 2003, the NASA Administrator grounded the space shuttle fleet pending an investigation into the cause of the accident. The administrator appointed the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to determine the cause and to make recommendations for improving the safety of the space Shuttle. designed and built to take advantage of the more benign launch environment in the space shuttle’s cargo bay. The following outlines the major challenges NASA identified. There would be a need to develop a new process to assemble the space station. Using another launch vehicle would require the redesign and retesting of space station elements already built due to the weight of the vehicle. The space station would be connected together by the space Shuttle crew during space walk activities. It would be assembled using only the space Station crew and without the benefit of the spaceshuttle remote manipulator arm. To accomplish our work, we visited and interviewed officials at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.; Johnson Space Center, Texas; and Kennedy Space Center,. These centers were chosen because they maintain primary responsibility for conducting space shuttle and space station operations on a day-to-day basis. Reviewed previous GAO reports on NASA, the Space Shuttle Program, International Space Station Program, and best practices in many areas and multiple agencies. Also reviewed reports from the Congressional Budget Office, Congressional Research Service, Office of Management and Budget, and the Planetary Society. the launch vehicles. We interviewed contractors at Boeing Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Space Systems. We reviewed pertinent documentation related to expendable launch vehicles for space station assembly and logistics support. We also reviewed NASA’s request for information related to commercial industry interest in providing that capability. We received, reviewed, and analyzed follow-up follow-ups to our original questions and concerns about the space station program. For this, we interviewed NASA officials within the Space Operations Mission Directorate and at Johnson Space Center, Texas. at Kennedy Space Center. We also visited the Boeing Launch Services, Inc., in Huntington Beach, California, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Boeing Commercial Space Systems in Research Park, Huntsville, Alabama; and Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company in Littleton, Colorado. We conducted our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. According to NASA officials involved in the 2004 assessment, accommodating a transition to other launch vehicles would create significant challenges that drive risk, schedule, and costs. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. To determine whether. you publicly announce the contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 15 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send copies to the NASA Administrator; the Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others on request. Please contact me at (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. the payload fairings would have to be modified from the current 5-meter to a 6-meter version to accommodate the larger diameter payloads to the space station during assembly missions. Staff making key contributions to this report were Jim Morrison, James Beard, Rick Cederholm, Karen Sloan, and T.J Thomson. For more information on the ISS, visit the International Space Station's official website at: http://www.nasa.gov/shuttle/. For more about the ISS in the U.S., visit the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's website at www.nasaspace.gov.