that may put the government at risk of contractors inappropriately influencing government decisions. Unlike the aggregate DOD spending limit, the statutory requirement for guidance on reductions in funding for closely associated with inherently governmental functions and staff augmentation are directed to each component. The reductions are expected to take place at each component, rather than an aggregate reduction across the department. Through subsequent revisions of the law, Congress extended the time period for DOD to implement the full 20 percent reduction through fiscal year 2015. Fiscal years 2014 and 2015. support contractors by 10 percent each year from fiscal year 2011 through 2013. If components are not in compliance with the full 30 percent reduction by fiscal year 2015, a Comptroller official said that the Comptroller’s office plans to enforce the reduction by making adjustments to component funding levels for the 2014 fiscal year. Section 808 calls for a total of 20 percent in reductions in fiscal years 2012 and 2013, as well as an additional 10 percent reduction for fiscal year2011. The Comptroller also plans to also include the additional 10percent reduction called for by Secretary Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative. and assistance services indicate that all of the military departments achieved reductions of greater than 20 percent by fiscal year 2014. As shown in table 2, the Air Force and Navy achieved reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations greater than 30 percent from fiscal years 2010 through 2013. The DOD Comptroller intends to measure a 30 percent reduction from 2010 levels based on former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative which called for DOD to reduce service. The Army achieved a 9 percent reduction by fiscal Year 2013, but achieved a 32 percent reduction in fiscal Year 2014. services budget category to measure the reductions. We analyzed each military department’s obligations for this budget category reported in the Comptroller's PRCP data from fiscal years 2010 through 2014. We conducted this performance audit from January 2015 through September 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The evidence obtained provided sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable based for our audit findings, the agency says. full 20 percent reduction. Because DOD has efforts underway to address our December 2014 recommendations, we are not making new recommendations in this report. In DOD’s written comments, reproduced in appendix II, the Director for Operations, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), concurred with the findings of our report. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees. In addition the report is available at no charge on the Department of Defense's website, which is open to the public. report on actions taken to implement reductions through the fiscal year 2013 inventory review. Only one of 35 components reported all of the information necessary to demonstrate compliance. The Comptroller’s office plans to assess the military departments and defense agencies reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations when the fiscalyear 2017 budget is submitted. However, a Comptroller official agreed that the data as presented in table 2 are consistent with its preliminary analysis indicating that each of theMilitary departments has met the obligations. The data have not yet been reported through fiscal year 2015, our analysis of currently available obligation data for advisory fiscal year 2017 budget submissions. plan to report the final results in 2016. DOD obligated $54.6 billion, or $280 million less than the limit on contract services in fiscal year 2014. DOD issued guidance in June 2012 instructing components to rely on the inventory of contracted services to measure funding reductions. DOD Inspector General found that the information included in the inventory was not sufficient to determine whether funding reductions were met and also recommended that DOD clarify how reductions should be reported. The Comptroller’s office improved planning and oversight of contract services which DOD components reduced. Advisory and assistance services is a budget category that includes many of the types of contractor services that are considered closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions. This new measure was adopted after a lack of data hindered DOD’s previous attempts to demonstrate compliance. Section 813 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2015 or implemented. All of the military departments achieved funding reductions greater than 20 percent by fiscal year 2014. For example, DOD instructed components to reduce funding for certain programs by 20 percent. Office of Personnel and Readiness that outlines the results of the review and any corrective actions to be taken to ensure that contractors are not performing inherently governmental functions. Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 further reinforced those provisions by requiring DOD to issue guidance instructing components to reduce funding by 10 percent for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 for contracts identified with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions. These functions may include personal services or other positions, according to the Office of Personnel and Readiness. Section 955 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2013 required the Secretary of Defense to ensure that the civilian and service contractor workforces are appropriately sized to support and execute the National Military Strategy. Section 955 further required the secretary of defense to develop an efficiencies plan for those workforces. This annual inventory submission is to include, among other things, the number of contractor full time equivalents and the associated direct labor cost for these positions. It is also to include the associated full time equivalent wages. requires that the efficiencies plan ensures that total funding reductions for the civilian and service contractor workforces are commensurate with reductions in military end strength. We have on-going work assessing DOD’s compliance with section 2330a as well as DOD‘s implementation of section 955. We plan to report the final results in fiscal year 2016. The U.S. Code requires the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to complete a review of the contracts identified in the inventory. activities do not include inherently governmental functions. The review should also ensure that to the maximum extent practicable, the activities don't include any closely associated with inherently government functions. DOD guidance instructs the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to submit an inventory review certification letter to the White House after the review is complete. The inventory review is expected to be completed by the end of the year. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. the aggregate spending limit through fiscal year 2015. Congress has also enacted legislation to improve the availability of information on DOD’s acquisition of services and to help the department make more strategic decisions about the appropriate workforce mix of military, civilian, and contractor personnel. In fiscal year 2002, Congress enacted section 2330a of title 10 of the U.S. Code, which required the Secretary of Defense to establish a data collection system to provide management information on each purchase of services by a military department or defense agency. Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 limited DOD’s total obligations for contract services in fiscal years 2012 through 2014. The limit does not apply to contract services for military construction, research and development, and services funded for overseas contingency operations. DOD may adjust spending above 2010 levels to account for the cost of additional civilian personnel positions over fiscal year 2010 levels. DOD identified an aggregate spending limit of $55.75 billion for fiscalyear 2014, the authors say. They say DOD would still be in compliance with the law if total obligations were less than the aggregate limit. the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. Contact points for our Office of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. The objectives for this review were to determine the extent to which the Department of Defense (DOD) implemented the requirements of section 808 of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for fiscal year 2012, as modified by section 802 of the NDAA. our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the contact named above, W. William Russell (Assistant Director); Beth Reed Fritts; and Suzanne Sterling made significant contributions to this review. Pete Anderson, Virginia Chanley, John Krump, and Roxanna Sun made key contributions to the report. We are happy to share our findings with the public. We hope you will use this information to help with your own audit of your own company. We would like to thank all those who contributed to this report. Navy FMC officials identified two factors that led to the Navy exceeding its target. Officials attributed the remaining $600 million of the $1.07 billion it obligated over its target to a coding error in its financial system. To mitigate this issue for fiscal year 2015, the Navy FMC office began monthly monitoring of contract services obligations, which should help identify potential overages as they occur, officials said. The Navy submitted a waiver request to the Comptroller’s office in June 2014 requesting an additional $263 million. The Air Force obligated $1.45 billion less than its fiscal year 2014 target provided by the Comptroller. The Army and Navy exceeded their spending targets. Air Force officials said that FMC did not have to make adjustments to command’s obligation targets for fiscal year $10.4 billion on contract services for the operations and maintenance account. The monitoring allowed Army budget officials to identify, request, and obtain approval for an additional $200 million from the comptroller. In fiscal year 2013, Navy FMC officials said they do not set command spending targets for contract services, but expect commands to stay within respective budgeted amounts. Navy financial management officials said they manually corrected these coding errors in the past, but decided to forego the manual corrections in fiscal year 2014. The Navy FMC office requested updates to its financial system in August 2013 to correct this coding issue, but the change has not yet been approved. To make progress payments for these types of items, Navy officials explained that these payments are coded as contract services to work around the system limitation. The change is expected to be approved in fiscalyear 2016. In fiscal year 2014, DOD obligated $54.6 billion for contract services. DOD reported obligating $1.17 billion less than the limit. DOD’s methodology for calculating the spending limit contained errors. DOD concurred with this recommendation and has taken steps to address it for fiscal year 2015. The actual limit should be reduced from $55.8 billion to $ 54.9 billion, as shown in figure 1. The Comptroller took steps in fiscal year2014 to improve management of the contract services spending limit. Each of the military departments exceeded their respective Comptroller-provided targets in fiscal year 2012. The departments implemented fiscal controls in fiscal 2013, to varying degrees, which helped the Air Force and Navy adhere to their targets. We concluded that significant discrepancies between the for fiscal year 2014 by seeking input when setting spending targets and implementing a waiver request process to allow for adjustments during the year. We found that DOD obligated $1.72 billion more than the limit in fiscal Year 2012 and about $500 million less than thelimit in fiscalyear 2013. In December 2014, we reported on DOD’s implementation of the section 808 limitations in fiscal years 2012 and 2013. We found DOD exceeded the spending limit in fiscal year 2012 and adhered to the limit in 2013. However, we also identified issues with the DOD Comptroller office’S calculation of the spendinglimit. These issues resulted in an overstated limit in Fiscal years 2012 & 2013. Whatever required reductions that DOD didn’t achieve in those years are required to be taken in 2014 and 2015. limit to allow for unexpected costs during the year. This new process allowed the Comptroller to approve adjustments related to specific requests and allocate portions of the reserved amount among the components. The Comptroller received three waiver requests totaling $607 million for fiscal year 2014. For example, the Navy submitted a waiver request in June 2014 requesting $263 million in additional target allocation to account for additional costs, such as ship and facilities maintenance, ship modernization, and audit readiness. These additional steps allowed the comptroller to ensure that targets were achievable based on components’ input. 2014, as each command was able to manage to their respective target. In fiscal year 2014, the Army obligated $254 million more than its adjusted Comptroller target. Army budget officials attributed a portion of the obligations over its target to coding errors in its financial system. These coding errors include obligations for this step was needed because in fiscal years 2012 and 2013 the Comptroller set the Army’s spending target based solely on its enacted budget amounts for contract services. The Army budget office relies on historical budget data to determine contract services budget estimates for inclusion in the budget request. contract services from overseas contingency operations that are not subject to the spending limit. Army budget officials attributed these errors to limitations with its financial system. Army officials plan to review the fiscal year 2015 obligation data to correct these errors before submitting its data to the Comptroller’s office. One step taken by the Army Budget Office in fiscal year 2014 to better manage contract services was to solicit contract services estimates from commands outside of the regular budgeting process. An Army budget official explained that this step was to help the Army better manage its contract services. military departments’ adherence to obligation targets for fiscal year 2013 signaled that improvements could be made to better manage contract services obligations. The report recommended that the Secretary of Defense evaluate the fiscal controls used by the military departments to identify effective practices to improve the management of contract services. DOD agreed with this recommendation and while the Comptroller’s office has not taken action to implement it, military departments have improved implementation of fiscal controls as discussed later in this report. We also have ongoing work that will further examine DOD”s planning, programming and budgeting process for contracted services. For fiscal year 2014, the military departments continued to improve their management of contract services obligations. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government call for effective control activities that enforce guidance to help ensure stewardship of government resources. The military departments implemented controls such as.adjustments to targets when needed during the year. We found that they used a variety of controls to manage contract services. obligations to ensure compliance with the Comptroller- provided targets. With the Army improving its controls from previous years, we found that the Army improved its controls.