In addition, while the process is mandatory, the implementation details may be tailored and, in some cases, integrated with other acquisition activities and documentation. According to DOD Software Assurance Program officials, the DITSCAP approving authority is not expected to evaluate whether the risks have been identified appropriately. If the program manager has not identified risks from foreign suppliers, the process cannot be expected to mitigate them. DOD also requires weapon programs to protect certain types of information during transfer of technology to foreign entities. be evaluated periodically to assess changes in the status of suppliers and adjustments to program security requirements. Require the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration to work with other organizations as necessary to ensure that weapon program risk assessments include specific attention to software development risks and threats. For example, certification and accreditation processes, such as DITSCAP, should include verification that software is up to snuff. DOD agreed certification activities can assist in addressing insider threats in software development. of information assurance software products, such as firewalls and intrusion detection systems, in accordance with National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Policy No. 11. This policy requires the use of one of three nationally recognized evaluation and validation standards. To assist systems in meeting information assurance requirements, DOD has developed the Defense Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP) This process includes a review by a designated approving official who certifies that the software meets the requirements for information assurance and security. Under the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, all executive agencies, including DOD, are required to ensure that information security policies, procedures, and practices are adequate. DOD is required to carry out an information assurance program that includes the development of essential information assurances technologies and programs. These procedures are intended to mitigate system vulnerabilities from operational threats, such as external hacking and unauthorized access to information systems. But they do not apply to internal threats that could affect the integrity of the software, like the insertion of malicious code during software development. with exploitation or insertion of malicious code with the use of foreign research facilities and software development companies. Multiple requirements and guidance are in place to ensure the protection of U.S. national security interests. They generally acknowledge the inherent risk associated with foreign access to classified and export-controlled information and technology by establishing procedures to manage such access. In addition, 12 of the programs used the Technology Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan to ensure that risks associated withforeign participation on the program were addressed. The process includes a requirement for a threat assessment, but does not articulate how this information should be developed or reported. As such, it does not direct program managers to consider foreign involvement in software development as a risk or threat that needs to be addressed for information system security. The process results in an agreement between the program manager, the intended user of the system being certified, and the approval authorities that defines critical schedule, budget, security, functionality, and performance issues. It does not specify how the threat assessment should be carried out. Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan address the risks associated with the potential release of information to foreign governments. Documents do not provide information on specific suppliers who will be performing work, such as software developers. It evaluates the risk of releasing critical military capability or sensitive information and technology against the benefit of the sale to the United States. The plan also outlines the planning requirements for the possible release of sensitive information to the foreign entities involved in cooperative programs or purchasing military equipment. The documents also outline the risk assessment procedures for releasing sensitive information. limits access to U.S. citizens with appropriate security clearances and establishes eligibility policies for contractors determined to have foreign ownership, control, or influence. Further, an additional DOD directive requires programs containing classified military information to have controls to prevent the unauthorized release of this information to foreign recipients. In addition, the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) controls foreign access to defense articles and services through the establishment of the export license and authorization process. U.s. entities, including defense contractors, may apply to the Department of State for authorization to export controlled information and technology to qualified foreign recipients, The GAO is sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others upon request. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512- 4841. Staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix III. To determine how the Department of Defense (DOD) measures security, visit DOD.gov/security. reviewed. John Neumann, Brian Mullins, Delores Cohen, Shelby S. Oakley, Christopher Miller, Gary Middleton, and Marie Ahearn made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. needed to meet mission requirements. Program offices were most knowledgeable about the foreign-developed software for the onboard portions of their programs. 4 program offices were able to identify all the software produced by foreign suppliers, and 11 program offices could identify at least some of the software. Onboard software is that which actually runs the weapon system, even if that software is not located on the main component. For example, onboard software for a missile system could include software located on a remote platform used to guide the missile toward its target. and contractors reported very little knowledge about the level of foreign involvement for offboard software. This software, sometimes referred to as ground based, interacts with the onboard system to provide updated information in support of operational activity. Offboard software is often used to check for errors or malicious code and to produce, maintain, or verify onboard software. Program officials from 10 of the programs we reviewed indicated they had verylittle knowledge of the offboard component of their programs. For example, one program uses standard mission planning software that interacts with onboard flight software. versions or when software just requires editing and enhancing the older code rather than developing new code. Ten of the programs reviewed accepted legacy software without fully identifying the sources of development. Software is also developed as part of the hardware components it is tasked with managing. This embedded software is used to control other electronic hardware products, either onboard or offboard the weapon system, and is often often used to monitor and control the weapons system's systems. It can also be used as a basis for developing or modifying the new software. Software code that is poorly developed or purposely injected with malicious code could be used to disrupt these and other DOD information systems. DOD has reported that countries hostile to the United States are focusing resources on developing information warfare strategies. In 2001 there was a significant increase in suspicious attempts by foreign entities to access U.S. technology and information and that trend is expected to continue. Information systems technology was the most sought after militarily critical technology by these entities, according to a DSS report. The U.s. defense industry is at the forefront of advanced design and development of weapon systems. To protect the United States, DOD relies on a complex array of computer-dependent and mutually supportive organizational components. These systems are, in turn, connected with other systems operated by contractors, other government agencies, and international organizations. In addition, performance requirements for weapon systems have become increasingly demanding, and breakthroughs in software capability have led to a greater reliance on software to provide more weapon capability, the agency says. The U.S. Department of Defense is responsible for protecting the nation's national security. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. weapon systems based on recommendations from DOD officials and on our internal knowledge of the systems. While our selection of programs cannot be generalized to the population of all DOD systems, the systems selected varied by product type, represented each of the military services, and represented a range of DOD contractors. The systems reviewed were the Abrams System Enhancement Package, AH-64D Apache, Bradley Upgrade, C-130 Avionics Modernization Program, C/17 Globe Master, Comanche Reconnaissance Attack Helicopter (RAH-66) and F/A-18 Super Hornet. or subcontractors to develop, modify, or remediate software code specifically for DOD shall each have a security clearance commensurate with the level of the program in which the software is being used. Primary vendors on DOD contracts may have subcontractors who employ cleared foreign nationals that work only in a certified or accredited environment. DOD software with coding done in foreign environments or by foreign nationals shall be reviewed by software quality assurance personnel for malicious code. Vendors of COTS software that demonstrate efforts to minimize the security risks associated with foreign nationals will be given preference in product selection or evaluation. developers for their offboard software, including those portions that may have been developed by foreign suppliers. Officials for 13 of the programs reviewed had almost no insight into the use of foreign developers for any COTS software placed on their systems. Even when procured directly from a known supplier, program officials could not guarantee whether additional subcontractors were used for software development. Officials from five programs told us that the cost of identifying and managing foreign software suppliers, especially for COTSSoftware, could be substantial. purchased from lower tier subcontractors. While we did not specifically ask for information on foreign suppliers responsible for embedded software, officials for two of the programs reviewed stated that this software tends to include more reused and COTS software. These officials indicated that this could limit the visibility of the software suppliers because acceptance testing was usually only performed to prove functionality. Further, DOD and prime contractor officials told us that it is sometimes difficult to determine whether the actual hardware subcontractor developed embedded software or if it was done by a software developer hired by that subcontractor. In some cases, this information was available early in the proposal process. For example, officials from one program office said they were effective in determining software suppliers at the prime and subcontractor levels. However, only five of the prime contractors reported that they were required to notify the program office concerning their decisions on software subcontracting. Once a winning bidder is selected, it is possible for the government to use that information to make a decision on the software supplier for the project. It is possible to use this information to help the government choose the right software suppliers for a project. selected, more information is often available to the program manager. Some knowledge of foreign software development was available as a result of procedures in place because their programs contained classified or technical program information. Four programs reported they had very few foreign suppliers because handling restrictions for classified information precluded the involvement of such suppliers. While limited information on the supplier and location of foreign entities performing software work was available from export licenses, contractors request approval directly from the State Department, which may not refer the application to DOD or the individual program offices. we solicited information and documentation from the prime contractor for each system using contacts provided by program office officials. We received information from 15 of the prime contractors through written responses, on-site interviews, and other means such as telephone conversations. We also obtained several security and software related documents such as the Program Protection Plan, the Software Development Plan and other program specific documents, like the contract, for the systems we looked at. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. best practice for improving software development and is generally performed to improve the quality and functionality of software code. In terms of security, peer review can reduce the likelihood that an individual programmer can insert malicious or other harmful code. Through dedicated software testing, teams assess the quality of the software to uncover gaps and make it as defect-free as possible. However, on eight of the programs we reviewed, decisions on the amount of code to test were made based upon the risks and benefits to the functionality of the system to be tested. software is increasingly responsible for advances in weapon system capabilities. Current methods of testing focus on the quality of software and related functionality and failures, which will not necessarily uncover malicious intent. As the amount of software on weapon systems increases, it becomes more difficult and costly to test every line of code. Further, DOD cannot afford to monitor all worldwide for software-related risks. It is essential that DOD and program managers take appropriate steps to identify and manage software- related risks. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. the contractors who are developing the system and are therefore more knowledgeable about what functions are needed from the software. Officials from eight of the programs we reviewed said they expect contractors to ensure quality and security on their systems. Because contractors for the weapon systems we reviewed had not received specific direction from program managers to address risks from foreign suppliers in software development, they tended to focus on development efforts aimed at meeting stated requirements, such as software quality and functionality. DOD and SEI officials said that the amount of effort needed to comprehensively test every line of code to ensure complete security could be physically impossible.  SEI experts confirmed that the models they have developed do not include a security element and are not intended to certify that improved processes will be safer. Officials from one contractor we interviewed that employs practices consistent with SEI’s highest level indicated that unless software security is a specific contract requirement, they would not modify their practices to address associated risks.told us that rigorous software development could help improve the quality and functionality of software by decreasing the number of errors in software code. They also said that alone their models should never be expected to completely address software security risks. number of software defects and therefore improve overall software quality, but alone the practices cannot be expected to address malicious software development activities intended to breach security. DOD’s approach to software development and acquisition generally is more cautious than other agencies’. The Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information Integration) and the Federal Aviation Administration Chief Information Office are co- sponsoring a project aimed at developing ways to provide safety and security assurance extensions to integrated software maturity models. The project will be led by SEI and will include the Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and SEI. The Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information Integration) established the position of Deputy Director for Software Assurance in October 2003. Since its inception, the office has initiated working groups intended to focus on.criteria for software intensive systems and the application of software product maturity measures. Another working group is tasked with developing a proposal for a centralized clearinghouse of software best practices, but DOD has not approved any proposals. In October 2003, theOffice of the assistant secretary of defense established a position of deputy director for software Assurance. The Tri-Service Assessment Initiative began in 1999 to strengthen software acquisition and development as well as address repeated performance shortfalls attributed to software. Task forces conducted detailed assessments of software-intensive programs to identity potential improvements in overall software acquisition processes. A source selection criteria working group is tasked with clarifying the policy on source selection. DOD has also begun policy-level initiatives focused on better software management and on identifying and specifying software security processes and technologies to protect systems and network capabilities from various internal and external threats. DOD estimates that it spends about 40 percent of its Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation budget on software. About $8 billion of that amount may be spent on reworking software because of quality-related issues. Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has developed models and methods that define and determine organizations’ software process maturity. Better software development practices are seen as a way to reduce the cost of software development in the U.S. and around the world. the inclusion of acquisition personnel and other organizations as necessary. DOD indicated its intent to develop a database to identify, track, and maintain information on security risks from specific software suppliers. DOD agreed that it should ensure that program risk assessments include specific attention to software development risks, including those from foreign suppliers. However, DOD indicated that centralized information on software suppliers is necessary because the cost of collecting and maintaining this information would require resources and assets beyond those of individual program managers. But we made no change to the recommendation because the program managers should be responsible for collecting this information until such a database is developed. development sources. DOD does not require program managers to identify and manage suppliers or the potential security risks from foreign suppliers. Given the global nature of the software industry, DOD also cannot afford to exclude all foreign suppliers from its programs. While program managers should be allowed discretion in managing their acquisitions, they are responsible for knowing more about who is developing software and where and for working with DOD’s software assurance resources, and other organizations as necessary. Unless this is done early in the process, risks can be identified and assessed accordingly. Despite the risks associated with foreign access to defense systems, DOD acquisition policy does not require program managers to identify and manage the amount of foreign involvement for software development in weapon systems. While DOD has taken steps to strengthen software acquisition practices, it has yet to implement practices to better manage software development security risks in weapon programs. DOD initiatives have presented top level findings and recommendations within DOD and in public forums, but they have not externally published reports or obtained funding for implementing the recommendations. We have previously made recommendations to DOD to adopt more effective software development practices and to increase oversight of software intensive systems. place too much responsibility for risk mitigation on program managers. DOD agreed that software security risks should be defined for DOD weapon programs, but noted that program managers should not be solely responsible for defining security requirements. Instead, DOD stated that program. managers should be able to rely on external resources to gain threat information on suppliers and that. formulation and oversight of security practices should be a collaborative function among several offices within. DOD also provided separate technical comments that we incorporated into the report as appropriate. We do see the value of involving other DOD resources to provide coordinated evaluation of broader security concerns. We recommend that the Secretary of Defense take the following three actions to address risks attributable to software vulnerabilities and threats. Require program managers, working with software assurance experts, acquisition personnel, and other organizations as necessary, to specifically define software security requirements, including those for identifying and managing software suppliers. These requirements should then be communicated as part of the prime development contract, to be used aspart of the criteria to select software suppliers, we say. DOD agreed with our findings that malicious code is a threat that is not adequately addressed in current acquisition policies and security procedures. Killing of the extent of foreign involvement in software development varied greatly for the 16 weapon system programs we reviewed. Overall, the knowledge program managers had was based on the function of the software being developed, the manner in which it was acquired, and the specific handling requirements. While none of these programs could fully identify all foreign-developed software for their systems, six program offices had significant knowledge of foreign software developers. We met with software experts at the Software Engineering Institute of Carnegie Mellon University to obtain information on software development practices. Patriot Missile System, Tactical Tomahawk Missile, and Wideband Gapfiller Satellites. Using their respective command liaisons to initially contact each office, we distributed a structured set of questions to solicit information. To learn more about program practices for managing and mitigating the use of foreign-developed software, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-missile-programs-using-foreign-developed-software-and-how-they-do-it. company wanted to maintain the software expertise within the company. While restricting foreign access solely for economic reasons could result in a decrease in software development security risks, it might also preclude foreign suppliers that could offer new capability or lower costs to the government. For example, contractor officials for three weapon systems told us that they restrict foreign involvement because it costs too much to develop and monitor security procedures to separate foreign nationals from classified and sensitive information. Not because they feel their involvement is a risk to the program. contractor did not want to create dedicated partitions, such as firewalls, required to prevent employees from a foreign subcontractor from accessing unauthorized information in the system design database. Software managers for one program told us that when foreign nationals modify or update software they had developed, it was necessary to isolate test facilities to meet security requirements. The officials said that, in similar cases, contracting decisions might sometimes be made in favor of U.S. suppliers to avoid costs and delays. Because of security requirements, test facilities have to be isolated. impact when integrated with these system level risks and do not specifically focus on foreign suppliers used in software development. Software generally only becomes a concern for program managers as it begins to affect the cost or schedule of the program. For several programs we reviewed, contractors made risk identification and mitigation decisions for business reasons and to avoid additional resource burdens. It is possible that using software development practices to increase efficiency could lead to an increase in security vulnerability by encouraging the use of legacy and COTS software, unless risks are managed appropriately. always the case within the weapon programs where software is developed or acquired. Program officials for most of the systems we reviewed did not make foreign involvement in software development a specific element of their risk identification and mitigation efforts. Risk mitigation efforts emphasized program level risks, such as meeting program cost and schedule goals, instead of software security risks. Because onboard software is the most critical for meeting mission requirements and other program goals, program managers placed greater emphasis on the quality, functionality, and usually, the security of this software. program managers discretion in managing foreign suppliers used for software development. This policy consists of general guidance for meeting overall acquisition management principles. For software acquisition, program managers are encouraged to develop open software systems architectures, use COTS computer system products, and allow incremental improvements based on reusable software. All of these practices, while having the potential to benefit cost and schedule for weapon programs, could result in greater software vulnerabilities by introducing potentially malicious code from unknown software. The policy instructs program managers to use systems engineering practices, when applicable, that focus on cost, schedule, and performance.