they can have in relying on the estimates for determining stock abundance and hence for setting allowable harvests of the fish. With such wide variations, it is important to provide uncertainty ranges, otherwise management may make inappropriate decisions. While assessors told us that their stock assessments included some information about differences in estimated biomass when using the estimates, they said they did not provide such information to the public. The 2003 assessment of bocaccio biomass, however, estimated 6,506 metric tons in 2002—more than doubling the previous estimate. the ocean, but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish; fishing restrictions, such as a total allowable catch, can limit the amount of fish being caught; and catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 40. NOAA commented that the doubling of estimated bocaccio biomass in 2003 was due to factors that would not be addressed in a standard statistical analysis. Although a standard Statistical analysis may uncertainty in assessments. In a review of the 2002 canary assessment, the stock assessment review panel recommended that standard estimates of uncertainty be included in future assessments. However, the bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye assessments did not present a measure of uncertainty associated with the biomass estimates. Without uncertainty ranges, it is difficult for regional councils and NMFS to know how much confidence they have in their biomass estimates, the report says. It is difficult to determine the reliability of the stock Assessment without them.  NMFS says it stands by its conclusions that the five stock assessments were questionable. NOAA provided additional comments to show the usefulness of the assessments, even if some of the input data used in the assessments contained errors, the report says. NMFS added language to the report to address NOAA’s concern. Specifically, we expanded upon the fact that NMFS used the best information available at the time the stock assessmentswere conducted. The report adds that four of the assessment reports did not present the uncertainties associated with the biomass estimates. recommendation to clearly present the uncertainties in the stock assessments. NOAA said it is desirable to have both a quantitative analysis of model uncertainty and an evaluation of the consequences of alternative model scenario. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to develop a comprehensive plan that integrates the stock assessment plan. The methods used and the completeness of the uncertainty characterization varied from assessment to assessment, according to the report. The report was published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) on November 14, 2013. not fully address the doubling of an estimate, an assessment without an uncertainty range does not quantify and communicate any of the uncertainty. For this reason, we did not change the report. In addition to the person named above, Leo G. Acosta, Kristine N. Braaten, Allen T. Chan, David Dornisch, Alan Kasdan, Robert Marek, Cynthia C. Norris, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, and Tama R. Weinberg made key contributions to this report. A 2002 National Research Council report found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance. Such surveys use an unbiased statistical design, control sampling locations, and provide for quality assurance. The non-NMFS data assessors use include commercial catch data and recreational catch data. Northwest Center officials said that to obtain reliable results, each stock assessment should include at least one source ofNMFS-collected data of sufficient scope and accuracy because such surveys are unbiased and scientifically designed. Lacking a standard process, some assessors reviewed the quality of the raw non-NMFS data. Assessors who reviewed for data quality found mistakes that they believed made some of the data unusable or that could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For example, the assessor for the 2002 yelloweye stock assessment found numerous errors in the recreational catch data, such as attributing the catch from an entire fishing vessel to a single fisherman, and thus did not use the data. Commercial catch data frequently have inconsistencies. California, Oregon, and Washington require fishermen to enter catch and location information into logbooks, but logbooks are often incomplete and inaccurate. While the stock assessment review panels evaluated the assessments, the panels did not evaluate the quality of the raw data used in the assessments.doing so could have resulted in overestimating the biomass. According to a Northwest Center official, several assessors have raised concerns about data quality and accessibility in feedback meetings. In response to these concerns, the Northwest Center has recently begun. previous stock assessments, gathers available data about the species being assessed, runs the data through computer-generated models, and estimates the species’ total biomass. Stock assessors use NMFS-collected data, such as stock surveys conducted on NOAA vessels or contracted commercial fishing vessels, as well as data collected by non-NMFS sources. Commercial and recreational fisheries data—the amount and composition of fish caught from a particular stock, whether caught intentionally or not. Stock abundance—surveys of how many fish constitute a stock’s total size or weight. such as commercial and recreational catch data. Catch data do not provide the species’ relative or absolute biomass, according to NMFS officials. For example, catch data alone is insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling the ocean but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish. fishing restrictions, such as a total allowable catch, can limit the amount of fish being caught. catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons, including imprecise accounting for dead fish tossed back into the ocean. and non-NMFS data, we were not implying that non- NMFS organizations could not conduct useful fishery-independent surveys. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 37. We believe the Pacific hake biomass estimates are questionable because the assessment used non-NHFS data that NMFS did not check or subject to standard standards. 38. NMFS generally refers to its data as fisheryindependent data and to non- NHFS data as Fishery-dependent data. four rockfish species we reviewed, although they were based on the best information available at the time the assessments were conducted. Four of the assessments did not have at least one NMFS-collected data source of sufficient scope and accuracy. According to stock assessors, relying solely on survey data from trawlable waters increases the uncertainty of stock assessments. We believe that certain internal control activities, such as a standard process for ensuring data reliability, surveys and ecosystem studies, and the greater the accuracy of the data, the more reliable the results. data sources, four of the five assessments did not use NMFS survey data or the NMFS data used covered only a portion of the species’ habitats. Bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched live in both the trawlable and untrawlable habitats. Yelloweye live almost exclusively in the rocky habitat that NMFS trawl surveys cannot cover. NMFS reported in 2003 that 77 percent of the survey area was trawlables and 23 percent was untrawlables. data reliability testing. Assessors who reviewed raw non-NMFS data for other stock assessments found mistakes that either made some of the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For this reason, we did not change the report. NOAA commented that bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments all obtain adequate abundance trend information from the NMFS bottom trawl surveys. The National Research Council found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance.  stock assessors use a variety of data, including NMFS data and non-NMFS data, in developing their assessments. Two key pieces of NMFS survey data are the shelf and slope bottom trawl survey and the acoustic survey. Other data that assessors sometimes use include larval surveys (data for fish in their earliest stage) and recruitment data.plans to increase the scope and accuracy of its collected data, as additional funds become available; is implementing changes that will help ensure the reliability of non- NMFSData. different data sources (sensitivity analyses), the mathematical model that NMFS uses to estimate biomass does not calculate uncertainty ranges. NMFS is updating the model so that it can compute uncertainty ranges; NMFS expects to use the updated model for all 2005 stock assessments. The Pacific hake assessor used a mathematical model (AD Model Builder) that could compute uncertainty range and included these ranges in the Pacific haKE assessment report. NM FS has taken some steps recommended in the Marine Fisheries Stock Assessment Improvement Plan to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. The Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products. The site features a search engine to help you find the documents you are looking for at a faster and easier rate. GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mails alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading. The list contains links to the full-text document files, as well as key words and phrases to help you locate documents. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to continue collecting more types of data for groundfish assessments where reliable data are now lacking. NOAA said that the reliability of stock assessments will be improved if NMFS survey efforts are expanded and additional NMFS fishery data are collected. NOAA also agreed that it is important to ensure that these interagency data committees continue to highlight the need for standardized quality control procedures for the collection of data. NMFS said, through its west coast fishery science centers, it participates on inter agency data committees, to develop quality assurance protocols and to assess quality of non-NMFS data. The Northwest Center plans to conduct a data quality workshop in July 2004 to formally establish the roles and responsibilities of the data stewards. Data stewards are responsible for helping assessors compile relevant data and for conducting quality assurance and quality control checks on the data. In 1998, the National Research Council recommended that NMFS include realistic measures of uncertainty in its stock assessments. NMFS’ 2001 stock assessment improvement plan also recognized the need to better quantify and communicate the data and its value to the community. The Northwest Center will conduct the workshop in June 2004. does not check or have a standard process to verify that these data have been reviewed for reliability. Some assessors chose to review the raw data, while others did not. Assessors who voluntarily reviewed raw non- NMFS data found mistakes that either made some of the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For these reason, we did not change the report. NOAA commented that it is more pertinent to focus on the degree of standardization of the survey data than the source. NOAA said that while much remains to be done, long-term planning efforts and coordination among field and headquarters are ongoing. NOAA also provided technical comments that we incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution of the report until 7 days from the report date. At that time, we will be able to provide a more detailed response to your questions. The full report is available in the appendix II. The October 2001 stock assessment improvement plan identified three scenarios (tiers) to consider when analyzing the resources needed to improve stock assessments. The three tiers of assessment improvements are as follows: Tier 1—improve stock assessments using existing data without initiating new data collection programs. Tier 2—conduct baseline monitoring of species, which in most cases requires sampling the species at least every 1 to 3 years. Tier 3—implement “next generation” stock assessments by explicitly incorporating ecosystem considerations and environmental effects in assessments. improvement in the quantity of data collected for use in stocks assessments is a key component to achieving Tier 2 status. Northwest Center officials said that the quality of the data improves with more frequent surveys and more randomly selected survey locations. The assessments become more reliable because the data cover a longer period of time, producing better population trend information.interested in stock assessment science. Planning—develop integrated program initiatives by preparing a comprehensive plan that combines the improvement plan with its complementary plans. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The Northwest Center is continuing its efforts to calibrate survey vessel equipment. The improvement plan also recommended that NMFS provide additional training to ensure that qualified NMFS staff are available now and in the future. The plan recommended the development of a comprehensive training program and more professional developmental opportunities for NMFS’ scientific staff. A comprehensive plan would allow NMFS to combine the improvement plan with other complementary plans, such as the NOAA Fisheries Data Acquisition Plan and the NMFS Social Sciences Plan. The Northwest Center officials said they try to meet the training and professional development needs of theirscientific staff. a number of recommendations to improve stock assessments. Data collection: Pursue new initiatives to expand data collection efforts. Communication: Educate constituents about NMFS’ strategies for improving stock assessment. Training: augment existing programs that support graduate students NMFS to better integrate and coordinate program initiatives for improvingStockAssessment.com. Other: Develop partnerships and cooperative research programs with other entities, such as state agencies, commercial and recreational fishing organizations, and individuals to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data collected. Pacific hake, also called Pacific whiting, is generally found off the west coast of North America. It is one of many species of hake distributed in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Fishermen use mid-water trawls and generally fish over the ocean bottom at depths of 100 to 500 meters. Pacific hake was declared overfished in 2002 because the 2002 stock assessment estimated that the species was over-fished.darkblotched rockfish, and yelloweye rockfish. Pacific hake biomass at 700,000 metric tons. By 2004, the biomass was estimated at between 2.7 and 4.2 million metric tons, and Pacific hake is no longer considered overfished. Bocaccio rockfish generally inhabit waters off the coast of northern Baja, Mexico to Alaska. They are commercially fished using trawls, hook-and-line and gillnets. They commonly live over rocky areas or open areas of the ocean’s floor to about 320 meters. rockfish are found in the waters from Santa Catalina Island, California to the Bering Sea on soft bottom areas at about 29 to 549 meters deep. Commercial fishery concentrations are located off the coasts of California and Oregon. Darkblotched rockfish are caught primarily by commercial trawls and contribute to both commercial and recreational fishing. NMFS determined that darkblotches rockfish was overfished in 2000, when the last full stock assessment was conducted; it was updated in 2003. almost exclusively inhabit rocky areas from northern Baja, Mexico to the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. Yelloweye rockfish, found in depths ranging from 15 to 550 meters, are caught using both trawl nets and line gear. NMFS determined that the species was overfished in 2002. The reliability of NMFS’ stock assessments is questionable for the Pacific hake and Pacific tilapia, as well as yelloweye and Pacific bluegill. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the yelloweye biomass at 2,325 metric tons in 2001. Canary rockfish inhabit the northeastern Pacific Ocean, from northern Baja, Mexico to the western Gulf of Alaska. Adult canary rock fish are primarily found along the continental shelf, from 46 to 457 meters deep. Canary rockfish are harvested commercially using trawl nets and hook-and-line and are also considered an important species for recreational fishermen. NMFS declared canaryRockfish as overfished in 2000. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the canary Rockfish biomass at 6,197 metric tons. on the ocean ecosystem, such as water temperature or salinity, plankton composition, or ocean currents. Through 2003, 24 of the 82 species of Pacific groundfish have had a full quantitative stock assessment. Relying on these assessments, NMFS has declared that nine species ofPacific groundfish are overfished. The five species we reviewed in this report include Pacific hake, bocaccio rockfish, canary rockfish and four types of rockfish. We did not review the stock assessments of any of the other west coast Pacificgroundfish species. laws and agency reports and interviewed officials from NMFS. We interviewed an array of government officials and fisheries experts. We did not simulate NMFS’ stock assessment models nor evaluate the mathematical and statistical methodologies used in the models for Pacific hake, bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye. We revised the report to indicate that the Northwest Center is responsible for coordinating groundfish stock assessments and to clarify the shared responsibilities of the west coast science centers. GAO reviewed National Marine Fisheries Service stock assessments for five species of Pacific groundfish. NOAA generally agreed with the report’s accuracy and concurred with the reports recommendations. NOAA said it was concerned about the report's conclusion that the reliability of stock assessments is questionable for the five species reviewed. Report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-3841 or Keith Oleson at (415) 904-2218. Northwest and Southwest Centers. We revised the report to include NOAA’s recommended definition of stock abundance. Bocaccio survey data for untrawlable habitats, as stated in comment 12, was unavailable. For this reason, we did not change the report. The report was updated to more explicitly distinguish the five species related to our report from other overfished Pacific groundfish. It was also revised to more clearly describe the distribution of Pacific hake. And it was revised to clarify the role of the review panel. by commercial and recreational fishermen or unintentionally caught and discarded. Data sources include fishing logbooks, dockside samples, and onboard observations, among others. Data on the abundance of juvenile and larval fish (fish at their earliest stage), which helps scientists forecast the size of a particular stock in the future. Synoptic oceanographic sampling—data data on the relationship between a fish stock and its physical environment, as well the relationship of a fishStock to other species. Data about the age and sex composition of the stock, age at first maturity, fertility, average lifespan and natural mortality. environment within which they exist provides a better understanding of the effects of the ecosystem on the groundfish fisheries. Although research is ongoing to develop ecosystem information, only a limited amount of the data is collected and used in stock assessments. For example, ecosystem data are collected during shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys as time and resources allow. However, this information is not widely incorporated into stock assessment. For the five species we reviewed, only the boccacio assessment used ecosystem data—information on the temperature of the ocean’s surface. Stock assessments form the scientific basis used by regional councils to determine biologically sustainable harvests and guide the monitoring and rebuilding of overfished and threatened stocks. They provide estimates of the species population, which NMFS uses to set harvest limits that allow for sustainability and/or recovery. While stock assessment results often change from assessment report to assessment report, the more types of information used in the assessments the more accurate they are. For each species, the assessor reviews designed to provide a comprehensive framework for Pacific groundfish. GAO: reliability of the five assessments we reviewed is questionable and could easily be misconstrued to mean all these assessments are an unreliable basis for management of the west coast groundfish fishery. NOAA: The five assessments GAO reviewed all passed scientific review and are serving as the basis for formal status determination and fishery management. Without a comprehensive, integrated improvement plan, funding requests and planned actions to improve the stock assessments may not be coordinated, jeopardizing successful and timely implementation of assessment improvements. The Pacific Fishery Management Council (Pacific Council) released its initial Fishery management plan for groundfish in 1982. The Pacific Council’s goal is to have long-range plans for managing groundfish fisheries that will promote a stable planning environment for the seafood industry and will maintain the health of the resource and environment. To help achieve these goals, stock management plans are being developed by the Pacific Council to help protect and restore the fishery's long-term health and stability. The council is also working to develop appropriate plans for conserving and managing fisheries under their jurisdiction. The Northwest Center requested $6.2 million to enhance the calibration of vessel equipment. The Northwest Center did not receive its full funding request, in part, because NMFS didn't receive all the funding it had requested. According to NMFS officials, it is unrealistic for a science center to request more funds than are available in its appropriation, even if it needs more. NMFS allocated $3.6 million (58 percent of funds the Northwest Centre requested) to the Northwest Center to implement marine stock assessment improvements. realistically obtain, rather than the amount the improvements would actually cost, according to NMFS officials. The Northwest Center’s budget requests for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 are preliminary requests submitted before the Northwest Center received its fiscal year 2003 funding. The Center will likely submit revised budget requests that account for both its unfunded needs from fiscal years 2001 through 2003 and items that were unexpectedly funded in fiscal year2003. The preliminary budget requests do not incorporate any unanticipated problems or data gaps that have been identified.  NMFS’ 2001 West Coast Groundfish Research Plan estimated that almost twice as much money would be needed to implement top-priority improvements to Pacific groundfish stock assessments. Using key findings from its December 2003 review of the groundfish program, the Northwest Center plans to update its groundfish research plan, last published in 2001. According to NMFS, the updated groundfishResearch plan should be completed in late 2004. Wildlife, the California Department of Fish and Game, the Pacific Fishery Management Council, and the Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission are involved in the project. The Northwest Center needs at least $8.9 million to complete ongoing and planned improvements to the stock assessments for Pacific groundfish. The actual cost of implementing remaining improvements may be even higher because the Northwest Center’s budget requests primarily reflect the amount of money the Center believed it could realistically obtain. This shortfall occurred in part because NMFS’ need to balance the requests of its six science centers against its program priorities and the available funds. According to NMFS officials, their goal is to achieve parity among the science centers in terms of their capability to conduct scientific work. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing recommendations aimed at obtaining more data. Recommendations aimed at increasing the types of data and improving their quality have not yet been fully implemented for a variety of reasons. According to Northwest Center officials, ecosystem information and coastwide recruitment surveys are two of the most critical data sets needed to ensure continuous improvement of groundfish stock assessments. The Northwest Center conducts ecosystem research as part of its Science for Ecosystem-based Management Initiative. Understanding the complex ecological relationships between fish and the. assessments are conducted on groundfish species to estimate fish populations. Since 1995, the Northwest Center has had lead responsibility for conducting stock assessments on Pacific groundfish. The Northwest Center receives assistance from other NMFS science centers, such as the Southwest Center, which conducted the bocaccio assessment. It also participates in NMFS’ National Sea Grant program to augment a Northwest Center-supported graduate study program at the University of Washington that trains stock assessment scientists. The Sea grant program provides fellowships for students interested in marine research. The Magnuson-Stevens Fisheries Conservation and Management Act granted responsibility for managing marine resources to the Secretary of Commerce. NMFS is part of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The act also established eight regional fishery management councils, each responsible for making recommendations about managing fisheries in federal waters. The eight councils include the Caribbean Council, covering waters off the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The councils are made up of fishing industry participants and state and federal fishery managers. of California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia; Pacific Islands Center, covering the central and western Pacific Ocean; Southwest Center, primarily covering waters off the coast of California and areas throughout the Pacific and Antarctic Oceans. Southeast Center, covers waters along the continental southeastern United States as well as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The Magnuson-Stevens Act, as amended by the Sustainable Fisheries Act, also established national standards for fishery conservation and management. These standards deal with preventing overfishing, using scientific information, using fishery resources efficiently and minimizing bycatch. Gulf of Mexico Council, covering waters off Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and the west coast of Florida. Mid-Atlantic Council covers waters off New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. New England Council covering waters of Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. North Pacific Council covered waters off Alaska; Pacific Council covering California, Oregon, and Washington. Western Pacific Council covers Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and uninhabited islands. U.S. territories in the Western Pacific. NMFS has six regional science centers, which are responsible for generating the scientific information necessary for the conservation, management, and use of each region's marine resources. Alaska Center, covering the coastal oceans off Alaska and parts of the west coast of the United States. Northeast Center covering waters along the Northeast Continental Shelf from the Gulf of Maine to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. Northwest Center covering the northeast Pacific Ocean, primarily waters off the coasts. term, provide a better understanding of the variability inherent in the population distribution and abundance. A better sense of trends and variability allow for improved short-term predictions of the status of the species. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing improvements in data quantity, such as more frequent acoustic, and shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys. Increased the frequency of the Pacific hake acoustic survey from triennially to biennially. Beginning in 2003, the survey was restructured into a single, Recruitment surveys are limited because existing funds support only yearly surveys in selected areas. To achieve the best early predictions of stock status, these officials said, recruitment surveys should be coastwide and conducted twice a year. According to Northwest Center officials, 13 full-time staff are needed to expand these and other high-priority data collection efforts, such as surveys in untrawlable habitat and expanded acoustic surveys. The lack of funding for recruitment surveys has been cited as one of the reasons for their lack of effectiveness. integrated survey with Northwest Center and Canadian officials jointly planning all survey elements. Increased the frequency of the groundfish shelf and slope bottom trawl survey from triennially to annually. Working collaboratively with the fishing industry has afforded fishermen the opportunity to become stakeholders in the data collection process. Extended the geographic range of theGroundfish shelf. and slopeBottom trawl surveys from. triennial to annually, leveraging available resources by cooperatively working with the. fishing industry. Contract with private commercial fishing vessels to conduct the surveys. trawl survey. The surveys are now coastwide from Cape Flattery, Washington to the Mexican border, adding over 300 more miles along the southern California coast. Previous surveys ended at Morro Bay, California. Efforts continue to communicate the strategies needed to improve stock assessments and to augment existing programs aimed at developing future stock assessment scientists. For example, through the Pacific Fishery Management Council, Northwest Center staff meet with their constituents, such as representatives from state agencies and the fishing industry. In addition, the Northwest Center organized a series of public meetings to discuss new initiatives. Northwest Center officials say they are to receive a dedicated research vessel sometime during calendar years 2008 or 2009, at the earliest. The implementation of comprehensive ecosystem research and data collection programs is contingent upon the funding of adedicated research vessel for west coast surveys. Better recruitment information for Pacific groundfish is a priority for Northwest Center officials, who say they hope to have the vessel in place by the end of 2008 or early 2009. The research vessel will be used to conduct shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys on the west coast. that the frequency and range of recruitment surveys are limited. The statement does not address untrawlable habitat. We revised the report to clarify that NMFS “generally uses” NMFS’s staff or contracts with outside experts. We made similar changes, as appropriate, throughout the report. The report includes the year and scope of the task force review. It also includes the “bottom” trawl survey. It includes the number and type of trawl surveys carried out. change the report. We believe that our report has addressed this issue. By referring to the West Coast Groundfish Research Plan by its complete title, we adequately distinguish between the two reports. We changed “health’ to “stock abundance’ and the footnote placement is repositioned in report. The footnote placement and citation are in accordance with GAO guidelines. For this reason, we did not change the report and believe the report adequately addresses the issue of Pacific hake in mid-water. ecosystem research. annotations for projects that do not separate out groundfish funds occur only in items that are annotated as Southwest Center projects. For this reason, we did not change the report. We changed “survivability’ to “sustainability” and added fishery “resources” for clarification. NOAA commented on the changes to the table 2 notes “a’ and “b” in our report already adequately address this issue. revised the report to include assessment “improvements.” 28. As indicated in our report, we illustrate some of the actions that the Northwest Center took to improve data quantity. 29. The example we provided is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all ecosystem research conducted on the west coast. Instead, it illustrates the type of work the Northwest. Center is conducting and the opportunities for improving. 30. We added footnote 16 to clarify the actions taken by the Southwest Center.