NMFS currently inspects approximately 275 domestic seafood facilities that FDA also inspects. FDA does not take into account whether NMFS has already inspected a particular facility when determining how frequently its inspectors should visit that same facility. FDA officials said they do not rely on NMFS in order to satisfy both the USDA and FDA inspectors. At a seafood-processing plant that is inspected by both NMFS and FDA, the manager said that when FDA collects product samples for testing, it does not report test results in a timely fashion. A 1974 agreement between FDA and NMFS recognizes the two agencies’ related responsibilities for inspecting seafood facilities. USDA officials at headquarters said the agency’s inspectors are capable of taking on FDA's inspection responsibilities at jointly regulated facilities. We found that FDA is not using the agreement to minimize its inspections in seafood plants that NMFS has inspected and certified as meeting FDA's safety standards. FDA officials said thegency does not recognize the NMFS inspections as aiding FDA in enforcing pertinent statutes. As a result, FDA is missing opportunities to leverage inspection resources and possibly avoid duplication of effort.  NMFS conducts a fee-for-service inspection, and therefore, FDA officials believe that NMFS could have a conflict of interest because, as a nonregulatory body, it is paid for its services by the industry that it inspects. FDA does not know which firms NMFS is inspecting at any given time. FDA has not used NMFS inspection resources under the terms of the fishery products agreement, nor has the agency used its authority under the Bioterrorism Act to commission NMFS officials. changes, depending on market fluctuations that affect each company’s need for NMFS’ services. FDA officials said that they already have a risk-based system in place to determine which firms to inspect, and at what frequencies. NMFS officials said they maintain an up-to-date inspection report that is up to date and available to the public. The agency also conducts fee-for-service grading and certification of poultry, meat, eggs, and other agricultural commodities. It is similar to USDA's Agricultural Marketing Service.  NMFS is to supply FDA headquarters with a list of all NMFS- inspected processing and packing establishments. FDA is not implementing the agreement, but the agency has recognized the potential benefits of working with NMFS to leverage resources. NMFS readily provided us with a lists of the firms it was inspecting when we spoke with officials during the course of our review. The agreement was most recently revised in January 2005, and includes a number of other items that are not currently being implemented by the FDA. enter into similar agreements with other federal agencies. NMFS officials said the agency would be willing to enter into such an agreement with FDA. Industry associations, food-processing companies, consumer groups, and academic experts we contacted disagree on the significance of overlapping activities in the federal food safety system. Most of these stakeholders agree that the laws and regulations governing the system should be modernized so that science and technological advancements can be used to more effectively and efficiently control current and emerging food safety issues, they say. calls for the agencies to explore the feasibility of granting each other access to appropriate computer-monitoring systems. However, the agencies maintain separate databases, and the inspectors with whom we spoke continue to be largely unaware of a facility’s past history of compliance with the other agency's regulations. Inspectors told us that compliance information might be helpful when inspecting DJEs so that they could focus attention on past violations. Fourth, the agreement calls for the agency to develop and provide appropriate training in the inspectional techniques and processes of each agency. on inspection findings between agencies’ inspection personnel. Lack of a system to track and exchange information when each agency finds instances of noncompliance. Agency efforts to develop and provide training on each other’s inspection techniques and processes did not continue past the first year of the agreement. We continue to believe that the stated purpose of. the agreement—to facilitate an exchange of information permitting more efficient use of. both agencies' resources—has not been maximized. We also found that the agencies' efforts to. develop and provided training onEach other”s inspection methods and processes didn’t continue after the first. year. EPA officials said they had difficulty identifying the agreements they have entered into. Officials also said they are planning to develop an electronic system to identify and track these agreements. EPA said that, if developed, this system could offer one means of tracking and managing information related to, and contained in, interagency agreements. The weaknesses in tracking agreements may also affect the agencies’ ability to determine whether these agreements are still in effect, the report said. The report was published by the Center for American Progress. authorizing FDA to commission other agencies’ officials to conduct FDA’s inspection activities. Other avenues are open to the agencies as well. For example, the two interagency agreements that we examined in detail, could address problems in duplicative inspections if they were more effectively implemented. We are making seven recommendations designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing agreements and make the system more efficient and effective. For more information, go to FDA.gov/Inspections. position on our recommendation for using the Bioterrorism Act authorities. HHS partially concurred with two other recommendations dealing with the implementation of two interagency agreements. EPA did not provide official comments, but it provided minor technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with our recommendation on the use of the Bipartisan Policy Center’s information technology resources. NOAA also provided technical comments which we incorporated in our report, as appropriate, and our detailed response is contained in appendix VI. cooperate more effectively. However, the evaluation also included recommendations to strengthen, clarify, or otherwise improve the agreement’s implementation. The evaluation cited the potential for significant resource savings over time as the agreement is implemented. Since the 2000 evaluation, officials at USDA and FDA said they have not again monitored the agreement's effectiveness, nor have they implemented their recommendations. The agreement is expected to be in place by the end of the first quarter of this year, according to the evaluation. It is not clear when the agreement will be fully implemented. The 2000 evaluation found that more training was needed, particularly at the field level, to achieve the results of the agreement. Although USDA and FDA held 28 joint training sessions during the first year, no additional training has been provided since then. On-site inspectors are often the first agency staff to become aware of deficiencies at a plant, and effective sharing of this type of information depends upon those inspectors being adequately trained. According to the 2000 evaluation, more training is needed at theField level. The 2000 evaluation also found that the contacts for each agency have an appropriate understanding of the working of the other agency. We disagree with USDA’s assertion that implementation of the 1999 interagency agreement has been largely successful. Our report highlights several deficiencies, even as it gives the agencies credit for improved communication in times of crisis. There is merit in examining the feasibility of conducting joint training activities when workable commonalities can be found. We acknowledge that, as used in our report, the term inter agency agreement refers generally to memoranda of understanding, memoranda. of agreement, and interagency agreements identified by USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS. needed and whether specific provisions are still in effect. One-third of the agreements we identified were created decades ago and may no longer be relevant to current needs. Some agencies that were party to the agreements have ceased to exist because of internal reorganizations. The agreements have not been modified to reflect such changes, indicating that the agencies may not be actively monitoring the status and relevance of these agreements. For example, a 1978 agreement between USDA and FDA on education programs to assist is no longer relevant. In 1999, USDA and FDA signed an interagency agreement to background to ensure consistent categorization across the agencies. We selected two inspection-related interagency agreements for in-depth review because the agencies spend most of their resources on inspection activities. In addition, these agreements encompassed a broad range of intended coordination efforts between the agencies involved. If the agencies’ categorization differed with ours, we considered their rationale and changed the categorization as appropriate. The agencies are exchanging some information as called for in the agreements, but they are missing opportunities to make more effective and efficient use of resources. identified seven agreements that focus on seafood inspection and enforcement activities. Signatories to one or more of these agreements include USDA, FDA, NMFS, the Department of Defense, and the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference (ISSC) We recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere identify and inventory all active interagency food safety-related agreements. We provided USDA, HHS, and NMFS with a list of the agreements. NOAA says GAO report does a fair and thorough job of describing food safety activities of NMFS. NOAA says positions expressed in GAO’s previous work continue to be germane to the issue of coordination with FDA on inspections of seafood. NOAA: Unless you publicly release the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. We are sending copies of the report to the Secretary of Agriculture, the GAO said in a statement. also obtained data from the following FDA units: Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for Veterinary Medicine, National Center for Toxicological Research. EPA’s Office of Pesticide Prevention and Office of Water, as well as the NMFS’S Seafood Inspection Program, Office of Sustainable Fisheries also provided data. To assess the reliability of the staffing and expenditure data, we questioned knowledgeable agency officials and reviewed existing documentation regarding the data and the systems that produced them. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of identifying overlaps. Some agreements have not been updated to account for changes in a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. For example, NMFS officials said that the ISSC has taken on some responsibilities that once belonged to NMFS. The 1985 agreement on shellfish-growing waters should be updated to reflect this change. Because the agencies spend money, some agreements should be modified to reflect the fact that the agencies no longer exist, the authors say. The authors say the agencies should also update agreements on animal drug use. own recommendations to realize resource savings. We found that the agencies are not systematically exchanging information about DJEs, as called for in the agreement. In December 2004, FDA headquarters officials provided us a list of 1,451 known DJEs. The number of establishments that were listed ranged from 1,152 to 1,867. The agencies had great difficulty identifying the current number of DJEs to which this agreement pertains, the authors say.. The agreement calls for the district offices of each agency to share certain findings with their counterpart district offices. facilitate the exchange of information between the agencies about food-processing facilities that they both inspect. The agreement was developed in response to a 1997 report by the President’s Food Safety Council, which recommended increased cooperation among agencies. In 2000, USDA and FDA evaluated the agreement and concluded that the experience had been largely successful because the agencies learned about each other's operations and about ways to improve public health protection. It was to be the first step toward allowing FSIS inspectors to conduct FDA's inspections at DJEs, a former USDA senior food safety official said. The agreement calls for the receiving agency to inform the notifying agency of the disposition of the notification, including any actions that it plans or takes, within 30 days. During field visits to three USDA and FDA district offices that, together, are responsible for food safety in 13 states, we found that they are not routinely communicating these findings of mutual concern. We also found that the two agencies have not explored the feasibility of developing a system to track and exchange information when site visits included USDA district offices in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Boulder, Colorado. FDA inspectors visit DJEs less frequently than USDA inspectors. FDA staff could benefit from the compliance information that USDA inspectors collect, authors say. Agreement has helped agency coordination and communication, they say. In one case, FDA learned that a sample of chicken salad tested positive for listeria and alerted USDA, resulting in a voluntary recall, they write. In a second case, USDA and FDA cooperated by exchanging information on a severe rodent infestation at a DJE, they add.. identified to us by all signatory agencies. FDA and EPA provided a copy of an agreement they had entered into with USDA about residues in drugs, pesticides, and environmental contaminants in foods. USDA officials said the agency is not party to any agreement on residues. Of the agencies we reviewed, only USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service maintained a database that allowed us to see the agreements. Forty-one additional agreements were identified to usby only one of the multiple signatories. In addition, we found three agreements—through our prior work or Internet searches—that none of the agencies had identified to ourselves. addition, USDA and FDA district managers were able to assist each other during the recall of beef and beef products, after the December 2003 discovery of a cow infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, also known as mad cow disease) We found that the stated purpose of the agreement—which is to facilitate an exchange of information permitting more efficient use of both agencies’ resources and contributing to improved public health protection—has not been maximized. USDA and FAA are not making better use of each other’s inspection resources to reduce overlap and duplication of effort. The stakeholders we contacted disagree on whether federal agencies’ food safety functions overlap, specifically with regard to inspections. Stakeholders’ views included (1) minor changes to improve coordination among the food safety agencies, and (2) statutory changes to make the system more science and risk based. Some large industry associations saw the need for only minor changes within the existing regulatory framework to enhance communication and coordination among existing agencies. The stakeholders did not agree on what direction this modernization should take, however. similar food safety guidance for (1) consumers on general topics, such as cooking and chilling food, and safe handling practices. These overlapping efforts, caused in part by the agencies’ divisions in jurisdiction, can be confusing to both consumers and industry representatives. These agencies have made some efforts to reduce overlaps in their consumer education activities. For example, USDA and FDA say they receive calls from consumers andindustry representatives to their consumer hotline about FDA-regulated food products. For more information, go to www.fda.gov/foodsafety. facilities. To obtain the views of regulated industry and other stakeholders regarding opportunities to reduce overlap by consolidating federal food safety functions, we contacted a total of 35 stakeholders from food industry associations, food manufacturers, consumer groups, and academic experts. In selecting associations, organizations, and experts, we included contacts from our previous reports and testimonies. We considered recommendations from USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS. To identify which food manufacturers to interview, we used Food Processing’s Top 100 Companies to identify the largest food manufacturers. The majority of stakeholders we contacted said they believed that the federal food safety system needs to be modernized. The quality assurance manager at a dual jurisdiction establishment with whom we spoke said he liked having a “second pair of eyes” inspecting the facilities for food safety. The company produces smoked salmon and the manager noted that having inspections by FDA and NMFS helps to ensure that products are safe and of high quality. American Frozen Food Institute noted that USDA and FDA inspections and their complementary expertise provide value in addressing food safety issues. The Grocery Manufacturers of America said that the food safety system must be flexible enough to allow resources to be directed toward identifying and addressing serious food safety problems. Other stakeholders, including representatives from industry associations, agreed that the system could be enhanced, and perhaps made more efficient, through enhanced interagency coordination.agencies. Some industry officials say that the current foodSafety system protects consumers, and they cited decreases in illnesses caused by foodborne bacteria, such as salmonella and listeria. academia, consumer groups, public policy organizations, and individual food companies—believe that the system needs to be modernized through statutory changes. According to the Consumer Federation of America, a science- or risk-based system should consider not only the risk posed by the food but also the history of the plant. Resources for the Future stated that the current food safety laws undermine a successful food safety system. That is, the laws do not build prevention into the farm-to-table continuum and divide responsibility. Some stakeholders, including the Institute for Food Technologists, believe that modernizing the food safety system could be accomplished by rewriting food safety statutes. The stakeholders we contacted also identified a number of roadblocks to changing the system, whether or not they supported such consolidation. Industry is reluctant to change from a familiar regulatory framework to one that is untested. Some industry associations say a transition to a single agency could create a period of uncertainty for the industry, which could lead to a loss of jobs. Consolidation would eliminate overlap between the agencies, especially at DJEs. It could generate substantial savings in terms of administrative efficiency and overall consistency in the application of policy. The legislative changes needed to accomplish consolidation could also be used as the vehicle for modernizing the food safety statutes or establish a scientific basis for new regulations. The Food Marketing Institute and food safety experts at Kansas State University and the University of Georgia are among those calling for the consolidation of food safety agencies. The Center for Science in the Public Interest and the Consumer Federation of America are also calling for consolidation. of uncertainty, as limited resources are diverted from the existing programs. The transition costs to a single agency would be higher in the short term. Current agency employees would be concerned that a consolidation would adversely change their working lives. Some stakeholders, including the Consumer Federation of America, said that some congressional committees may be reluctant to lose jurisdiction over food safety functions. We recognize that we recognize that food safety is a complex and complex issue. We are committed to working with the FDA to improve food safety. enforcement, research, risk assessment, education and outreach, rulemaking and standard setting, surveillance and monitoring, food security, and administration. Examples of activities under these functions include: inspecting domestic food-processing facilities and imported food items at U.S. ports of entry. In fiscal year 2003, the four of food safety activities contained in the National Academy of Science’s 1998 report Ensuring Safe Food to group the agencies’ foodSafety activities. These categories include: monitoring/surveillance, inspection/enforcement, education/outreach, research and risk assessment. GAO received written comments on the report and its recommendations from USDA, HHS, and NOAA. EPA provided minor technical comments. USDA expressed serious reservations about the report, asserting that it oversimplifies food safety regulatory functions within USDA and FDA. GAO: USDA appears to have misinterpreted the focus of this report, and we disagree with USDA’s characterization. This report examines overlapping activities rather than the regulatory framework that allows these activities to occur. The table does not provide an exhaustive list of all food safety-related laws and amendments, nor does it detail all the food safety provisions for those laws listed. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. To identify overlaps that may exist in the federal food safety system, we collected fiscal year 2003 budget data for food safety-related activities. If you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report, I can be reached at (202) 512-3841, or robinsonr@gao,gov. The full report can be downloaded from the GAo Web site. Many federal agencies, as well as state and local entities, play a part in the U.S. food safety regulatory system. The federal agencies regulate the food production chain from farms to food manufacturers. State and local agencies primarily regulate food safety in retail food establishments. In addition to their established food safety and quality responsibilities, following the events of September 11, 2001, these agencies began to address the potential for deliberate contamination of agriculture and food products. The Department of Homeland Security provides overall coordination on how to prevent deliberate contamination. current statutory authorities require the food safety agencies to carry out regulatory activities that have resulted in some overlapping or duplicative activities. We have recommended in the past that federal food safety statutes be streamlined and that food safety functions be consolidated into a single agency. Even within the current statutory framework, the agencies can take practical steps to reduce overlap and duplication and thereby free resources for more effective oversight of food safety. The Congress has recognized this possibility in the Bioterrorism Act by passing it into law. The federal framework for food safety is based on a patchwork of numerous laws. Table 6 lists the 30 laws that we have identified as the principal federal laws related to food safety. Each law is followed by the agency or agencies that have food safety responsibilities under each law and a brief discussion or example of each law’s food safety-related provisions. The bolded agreements are the two that were analyzed in-depth. The year each agreement became effective and indicates the signatory agencies. The agencies’ food safety authorities stem from 30 principal laws related to food safety. As a result of this division of responsibility, the federal food safety system is fragmented. Both USDA and FDA inspect food-processing facilities that produce foods under the regulatory responsibility of each agency, referred to as dual jurisdiction establishments (DJE) DJEs are those that manufacture or process food products that contain ingredients regulated by more than one federal agency. For a listing of the principal food safety laws, see appendix IV. which more than one agency performed similar activities. Some agencies did not provide expenditures and staffing data for categories such as administration, food security, and rulemaking. In some instances, the agencies estimated budget and staffing levels, or they were unable to separate budget data into specific categories. Twenty-four agreements state the need to reduce duplication of effort, reduce or clarify overlaps, or increase the efficient or effective use of resources between agencies. We solicited all active food safety-related interagency agreements from USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS. The agencies’ ability to take full advantage of these agreements is hampered by the absence of adequate mechanisms for tracking them. Of the 71 interagency agreements we identified, the largest proportion (43 percent) reflect the agencies agreement to increase cooperation on inspection and enforcement activities. 24 agreements specifically highlight the need to reduce duplication of effort by clarifying responsibilities, reducing overlaps, and/or making efficient and effective use of resources. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS do not have adequate mechanisms to track interagency food safety agreements. GAO: USDA and FDA inspections have similar key elements: sanitation, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP compliance oversight. USDA and further disagree with USDA’s comment that our report inaccurately characterizes the Bioterrorism Act. FDA is authorized under the act to enter into an agreement to commission other agency officials, including USDA officials, to carry out inspections on its behalf. GAO: If we modified the title as HHS suggests, we would risk implying that the agencies are literally duplicating efforts in every instance. USDA, FDA, EPA and NMFS have broad food safety-related inspection and enforcement responsibilities. We defined overlaps as similar activities being performed by more than one agency. We believe some economies of scale would be derived from combining overlapping activities, including those that our report highlights. For example, with a single food safety agency, the federal government would not need to have two separate food inspection workforces. We used categories merit and duplication to assess the merit of combining activities.. We agree with HHS’s comment that, if a single agency were to be responsible for the safety of all food products, different organization units within that agency may need to coordinate their activities. features, including the verification of sanitation procedures and good manufacturing practices at food processing facilities that make them candidates for consolidation. USDA’s comments and our detailed response are contained in appendix V. In commenting on a draft of this report, HHS raised concerns about our terminology regarding overlapping activities. We disagree with HHS comment that our report's title should substitute the word duplication for overlap. That is, our report distinguishes between “overlap” and “duplication”. It defines overlap as essentially identical activities performed by more than one agency. We disagree with USDA’s assertion that the agencies’ inspection activities are vastly different. As we identify in the report, these inspections have sufficiently common it exaggerates the extent of regulatory overlap. This report examines overlapping activities rather than the regulatory framework that allows these activities. Nevertheless, the report contains a clear and accurate acknowledgment that agencies operate under a statutory framework that gives them different authorities and responsibilities to regulate different segments of the food supply. We question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, food safety activities. perspective, the most effective inspection strategy would be to combine elements of both agencies’ inspections into a single inspection program. We also disagree with USDA’s assertion that the agencies activities are vastly different. USDA did not comment directly on these recommendations. We believe that USDA mischaracterizes our report in noting that it states that a “significant” overlap in inspection authorities exists. Specifically, our report examines inspection activities, not inspection authorities, and certainly does not identify ‘significant’ overlaps in authorities. assertion, our report does not suggest that USDA (FSIS) and FDA have comparable HACCP regulations. FDA makes a distinction, which the other agencies do not, between interagency agreements and memoranda of understanding. FDA refers to agreements that involve exchanges of funds, personnel, or property as inter Agency agreements. We did not consider this type of agreement in our analysis. Our report acknowledges that while HAC CP principles are the same for both FDA and USDA, the H ACCP plans are different as they address different risks. FDA estimates that it spent between $650,000 and almost $1 million to issue its seafood HACCP rule in 1995. NMFS officials said they spent $5 million to support the FDA rule by developing a model seafood surveillance project. USDA was unable to calculate how much it spent to develop its meat and poultry HAC CP rule. In some cases, the agencies collaborate in the early stages of rulemaking. For example, USDA and FDA participated in a joint Listeria monocytogenes (listeria) risk analysis. We disagree that our report oversimplifies or inaccurately describes federal food safety functions at ports of entry. To provide further clarification on what commodities are currently subject to HACCP regulations, we modified our report to indicate, as USDA suggests, that FDA currently requires HAC CP plans for seafood and juice products only. We believe it is possible to issue broad regulations based on certain sanitation and manufacturing processes, such as certain manufacturing processes. Therefore, we continue to believe that USDA and FDA could consolidate H ACCP-based inspections at these jointly regulated facilities. USDA and FDA inspectors verify that HACCP systems are in place at jointly regulated facilities. FDA could allow USDA inspectors to inspect FDA-regulated food. In doing so, FDA could reduce overlapping inspections and redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole authority. The regulations require the facility to maintain separate HAC CP plans for each product and to develop separate analyses of critical control points and separate strategies to mitigate or eliminate food contaminants. The manager said that although both plans have similar elements, each agency’s inspectors expect different levels of detail for the plans. on common principles that can then be applied to specific products. We have made minor modifications in the report to avoid confusion. Different risks are associated with different food products and, therefore, require different HACCP plans. In addition to those named above Lawrence J. Dyckman, Katheryn Hubbell, Jane Kim, Sara Margraf, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, Michele Fejfar, Amy Webbink, and Katherine Raheb made key contributions to this report. FDA is primarily responsible for the safe production and processing of eggs still in the shell (known as shell eggs) USDA is responsible for food safety at the processing plants where eggs are broken to produce egg products. In 1996, the agencies began work on a joint risk assessment for salmonella in eggs. In 2004, FDA issued a proposed rule that would require shell egg producers to implement measures to help preventSalmonella from contaminating eggs on the farm. Although USDA released a new draft risk assessment in 2004, the department has not yet issued a propose rule to prevent egg contamination. fill in the gaps with samples of food at different points in the distribution chain. USDA and FDA also both conduct risk assessments of foodborne pathogens that can contaminate food products under their respective jurisdictions. The agencies also conduct joint risk assessments when addressing the same pathogen or the same food product. In the case of eggs, regulatory responsibility shifts as eggs make their way from the egg farm to the food chain. The agency also releases a draft risk assessment for Escherichia coli ( E. coli) O157:H7 in ground beef. In 2004, FDA and EPA issued a joint consumer advisory about mercury in fish and shellfish. The advisory recommends different consumption levels, depending on whether the fish is commercially caught (regulated by FDA) or recreationally caught. For fish purchased from a store, the guidance recommends up to 12 ounces per week. For women who might become pregnant, who are pregnant, and who are nursing, the advisory recommends 12 ounces a week. However, for children under the age of five, the recommendation is for no more than 10 ounces. if the fish is recreationally caught, the guidance recommends that women consume up to 6 ounces per week. EPA said that the consumption guidance differs due to different mercury levels in recreationally and commercially caught fish. As the principal agencies responsible for food safety, both USDA and FDA engage in rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes. For example, both agencies’ regulations require food processors to incorporate certain sanitation processes into their HACCP systems. Both agencies also have separate regulations for industry, but there are some similarities. federal agencies spent nearly $1.7 billion on food safety-related activities. USDA and FDA are responsible for most federal food safety resources. These agencies spent about $921 million (55 percent) in fiscal year 2003 on inspection/enforcement functions. The agencies’ expenditures vary by program function (as shown in fig. 3). For example, USDA’s inspection/ Enforcement expenditures made up almost three-quarters of the total spent by these agencies for that program function. That resources on similar food safety activities.  NMFS inspection schedules fluctuate often, according to changes in NMFS’s contracts with individual companies. FDA could decrease or eliminate inspections at facilities that NMFS inspectors find are in compliance with sanitation and HACCP regulations. Both USDA and FDA maintain inspectors at 18 U.S. ports of entry to inspect imported food products. In fiscal year 2003, USDA spent almost $16 million on these inspections, and FDA spent more than $115 million. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. We obtained actual expenditures and staffing level data in full- time equivalents (FTE) from the following USDA units: Agricultural Marketing Service, Agricultural Research Service, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service. Food manufacturers that have facilities that produce food regulated by both USDA and FDA.to perform their food safety responsibilities. Examples of administrative activities include: procurement, human resources support, financial management, travel management, and information technology support; and Rulemaking/Standard setting. As a result of the multiple laws and regulations governing food safety, several federal agencies conduct activities that can serve overlapping, if not identical, purposes. USDA and FDA participate in similar food safety research efforts; that is, both agencies collect and analyze food samples for chemical and biological contaminants. During fiscal year 2003, the agencies spent over $245 million on these effort to conduct a risk assessment of salmonella in eggs and broiler chickens. For example, USDA, FDA, and EPA each develop consumer guidance on chemical food contaminants. USDA spent $7.8 million, while FDA spent about $1.5 million, during fiscal year 2003 to train their food inspection personnel. FDA’s comparatively lower training costs reflect a contractual agreement with a private firm that has produced an online curriculum. Another agency, NMFS, uses 74 of these online courses to train its own seafood inspectors. USDA officials said they are exploring the possibility of entering into an agreement with the company that developed FDA's online curriculum to allow USDA inspectors access to some of this training. A joint USDA-FDA training program could reduce duplication in developing training materials and in providing instruction. Other federal agencies have consolidated training activities that have a common purpose and similar content. In 1970, the Consolidated Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (the Center) brought together the training programs of 75 federal law enforcement agencies that had maintained separate training programs. The Center provides standardized programs for criminal investigators and uniformed police officers across the federal government. While standardizing basic training, the Center also provides specialized training. budget data, we contacted agency budget and program officials to determine what activities were linked to the expenditure and staffing data. We categorized expenditures and staffing and asked agency officials if they considered our categorizations to be appropriate. We adjusted our categorization when agency officials told us it was inaccurate. In some cases, the agencies’ preferred categorization of the same activity varied. For example, FDA considered inspector training as an education/outreach activity, whereas USDA considered it an inspection- related activity. These discrepancies are noted in appendix II.  USDA and FDA had great difficulty identifying the current number of jointly regulated facilities. The magnitude of potential savings is difficult to calculate. We continue to believe that because USDA maintains a daily presence at hundreds of these facilities, FDA could make more effective use of its resources if it redirected its inspectors to other facilities for which FDA has sole jurisdiction. But FDA officials said they do not currently plan to pursue this option and have not conducted any analyses of the costs or savings associated with authorizing USDA officials to conduct FDA inspections at these facilities. FDA does not use that information when deciding which countries to visit. As a result, FDA at times conducts inspections in the same countries that USDA has evaluated. For example, USDA and FDA each visited Brazil, Costa Rica, Germany, Hungary, Mexico, and Canada last year. USDA spent almost $500,000, and FDA spent nearly $5 million, on its foreign country visits in fiscal year 2003.and compliance with HACCP rules—could be useful to FDA in deciding what country to visit when conducting inspections. to USDA officials, are being stored at USDA-approved inspection facilities. We continue to believe that there are opportunities to leverage inspection resources, as we are recommending. USDA’s comment that it shares the results of its overseas equivalency determinations contradicts what USDA and FDA officials told us during the course of our review. However, we note that USDA is now sharing this information. Any successful consolidation of inspectors’ training would of course require work. But we continue to think that, as USDA�s comments suggest, this is a good idea. FDA inspections vary depending on whether the product is a USDA- or FDA-regulated food product. HHS disagreed with our recommendation regarding joint training of USDA and FDA food inspectors. Despite HHS’s disagreement, we continue to believe that such an examination has not yet taken place. We disagree with HHS's comment that the training programs are vastly different. As our report discusses, FDA’S training curriculum includes dozens of courses that address topics common to USDA and FAA.. HHS took no inspections have common key elements: sanitation, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP compliance oversight. FDA officials said these agencies do not share information from their overseas visits because their different statutory responsibilities make such information of little advantage. USDA’s focus during foreign country visits is to evaluate the meat and poultry inspection systems to determine if they are equivalent to that of the United States. FDA focuses its visits on specific companies that produce food under the agency's jurisdiction. Both agencies train inspectors on sanitation requirements, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP, the authors say. They recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture and the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration work together to ensure the implementation of the interagency agreement. the Meat and Poultry Products Inspection Acts, the Secretary of Agriculture is required to certify that countries exporting meat and poultry to the United States have equivalent food safety systems. That information could inform FDA’s decision making about which countries to visit for its overseas inspections. Currently, FDA visits foreign countries to inspect individual food-processing firms. In 2004, USDA determined that the food safety system of 34 countries it evaluated were equivalent to that of the U.S. The main point of our report is that the agencies are not leveraging inspection resources at ports of entry. USDA is responsible for about 80 percent of the U.S. food supply, including imports from 250 countries. FDA has the authority to commission federal officials to conduct inspections at jointly regulated facilities. USDA inspectors have no authority to inspect FDA-regulated products, although USDA inspectors are present at these ports more often than FDA inspectors. FDA could also leverage USDA’s efforts to ensure the safety of imported food by using information that USDA compiles in its determinations that exporting countries’ food safety systems are equivalent. EPA uses USDA and FDA data to inform EPA’s risk assessments on human exposure to pesticides. In 2003, FDA analyzed 11,331 food samples for pesticides and chemical contaminants to help estimate the dietary intake of pesticide residues. In 2000, the most recent year for which data are available, USDA analyzed over 33,000 samples of meat, poultry, and egg products. EPA officials said that the overlap in data collection and analysis adds value because USDA data comes from a well-controlled survey of food samples. both USDA and FDA—or facilities inspected by both FDA and NMFS. However, some overlaps occur outside these establishments. For example, although the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Association’s member companies are primarily inspected and regulated by FDA, companies that sell fruit and vegetables to the school meals programs are also inspected by USDA. UFFVA officials pointed out that USDA inspects fruits and veggies to be included in school lunches; and the companies, already subject to FDA inspections, incur additional expenses. The U.S. Poultry and Egg Association says the regulatory delineations do not always make sense. The FDA regulates an egg farm as a “food factory” within its area of jurisdiction. USDA regulates plants that process eggs into products such as powdered eggs. Other stakeholders do not think the federal agencies’ programs overlap because USDA and FDA have specific, defined areas of responsibility for their industries.contaminants on fruits and vegetables. The American Meat Institute says the FDA and USDA have different areas of jurisdiction for different industries. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS are involved in key program functions related to food safety. While these agencies each perform food safety inspections, the frequency of their inspections varies. For example, USDA inspects a canning facility at least daily if it produces food containing meat and poultry. If the facility also produces canned soups containing beans or seafood, FDA inspects it every 1 to 5 years. According to a senior plant manager, FDA’s inspections place more responsibility for food safety on the company. agencies inspect. Depending on the type and layout of the facility, a USDA inspector may have a more regular presence in an area where FDA-regulated products are maintained. For example, at a plant that produces both meat and seafood products, an inspector could inspect the seafood processing and storage section of the plant. However, because FDA regulates seafood, the USDA inspector does not monitor or Inspect the seafood storage section. The inspector noted that, with minimum training on seafood temperature controls, he could inspect this section. USDA’s carcass-by-carcass organoleptic inspections exemplify the outmoded requirements of the current food safety system. Such inspections waste resources because new technologies are more efficient and effective. Further, the laws prevent risk-based allocation of resources across the federal food safety agencies.and accountability for food safety among federal agencies. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/features/food-safety/index.html#storylink=cpy Firm cans soups and bean products. USDA inspectors did not want the company to paint its sterilization equipment. FDA inspector said it would be easier to identify sanitation problems on lightly painted equipment than on the dark-colored metal. The manager of the facility said the company had to paint and then remove the paint from equipment.are covered by the USDA inspector. The company has not commented on the matter. The incident occurred in the U.S., not the European Union, where the company is based.