Early interpretations suggest the impeachment power was arguably intended to extend to "all" executive officers, and not just Cabinet level officials and other executive officials at the highest levels. But who is an officer? The most thorough elucidation of the definition of "Officers of the United States" can be found in judicial interpretations of the Appointments Clause. The remaining question is whether inferior officers, or those officers who exercise significant authority under the supervision of a principal officer, are subject to impeachment and removal. view would permit Congress to impeach and remove any executive branch "officer," including many deputy political appointees and certain administrative judges. There is some historical evidence, however, to suggest that inferior officers were not meant to be subject to impeachment. For example, a delegate at the North Carolina ratifying convention asserted that "[i]t appears to me ... the most horrid ignorance to suppose that every officer, however trifling his office, is to be impeached for every petty offense" the Constitution , asserting that " all officers of the United states [...] who hold their appointments under the national government, are properly civil officers within the meaning of the constitution, and liable to impeachment" William Rawle reasoned that "civil Officers" included "[ a ] ll executive and judicial officers, fro m the President downwards , from the judges of the Supreme Court to those of the most inferior tribunals" The U.S. Constitution asserts that "all officers" are "properly civil officers," with the exception of officers in the army and navy. under scrutiny holds an office that is subject to impeachment and removal, and second, whether the conduct for which the official is accused constitutes an impeachable offense. The Constitution does not define "civil Officers of the United States" Nor do the debates at the Constitutional Convention provide significant evidence of which individuals (beyond the President and Vice President) the Founders intended to be impeachable. In all of American history, only three members of the executive branch have been impeached: two Presidents and a Secretary of State. Historical precedent provides no examples of the impeachment power being used against lower-level executive officials. The general purposes of impeachment may assist in interpreting the proper scope of "civil Officers of the United States" The congressional power of impeachment constitutes an important aspect of the various checks and balances that were built into the Constitution to preserve the separation of powers. It is important to keep in mind that impeachment is a tool of Congress, not of the executive branch. It can only be used for limited purposes. or oppressive ministers whom the President might seek to shelter. If the impeachment power were meant to ensure that Congress has the ability to impeach and remove corrupt officials that the President was unwilling to dismiss, it would seem arguable that the power should extend to officers exercising a degree of authority. The abuse of the power would be harmful to the separation of powers and good government. The writings of early constitutional commentators also arguably suggest a broad interpretation of "civil Officers of the United States" Joseph Story addressed the reach of the impeachmentPower in his influential Commentaries on Morris, member of the Pennsylvania delegation to the Constitutional Convention, arguably implied that inferior officers would not be subject to impeachment. The authority to resolve any ambiguity in the scope of "civil Officers" for purposes of impeachment lays initially with the House, in adopting articles of impeachment, and with the Senate, in trying the officer. The Constitution describes the grounds of impeachment as "treason, bribery, or other high high crimes and misdemeanors" The House of Representatives has the power to impeach the president. In Edmond , the Court acknowledged that its cases have not set forth an exclusive criterion for distinguishing between principal and inferior officers for Appointments Clause purposes. The clearest statement of the proper standard to be applied in differentiating between the two types of officers appears to have been made in Edmo nd v. United States. In Edmond, the Court said that the President may only appoint inferior officers with the advice and consent of the Senate. It also said that Congress may vest inferior officers in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments. noted that "[g]enerally speaking, the term 'inferior officer' connotes a relationship with some higher ranking officer or officers below the President ... [and] whose work is directed and supervised at some level by others who were appointed by presidential nomination with the advice and consent of the Senate" Court's decisions appear to focus on the extent of the officer's discretion to make autonomous policy choices and the authority of other officials to supervise and to remove the officer. Applying the principles established The amount of authority that an individual exercises will generally determine his classification as either an officer or employee. An officer is "any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the United States," whereas employees are viewed as "lesser functionaries subordinate to the officers" The Supreme Court has further subdivided "officers" into two categories: principal and non-principal. "Officers" are those whose appointment is subject to the requirements of the Clause. "Non-officers," also known as employees, are those who do not exercise significant authority. The Appointments Clause provides that the President shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States. But the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, or in the Courts of Law. The Court has made clear distinctions between these two categories of appointments. The President may not be removed from office without the Senate's consent. managers are then selected to present the matter to the Senate. In recent practice, managers have been appointed by resolution, although historically they occasionally have been elected or appointed by the Speaker of the House. The House will also adopt a resolution in order to notify the Senate of its action. The Senate, after receiving such notification, will then adopt an order informing the House that it is ready to receive the managers. Subsequently, the appointed managers will appear before the bar of the Senate to impeach the individual involved. The House and Senate alone can remove government officials in the other branches of government. The Framers "dwelt repeatedly on the need of power to oust corrupt corrupt officials," according to the New York Times. One commentator has suggested that the Framers recognized, particularly with respect to executive branch officials, that there would be instances in which it may not be in the President's interest to remove a "favorite" from office, even when that individual has violated the public trust. The Supreme Court has the power to remove the President from office if he or she abuses their power. The Senate will determine questions of competency, relevancy, and materiality. The Senate has not adopted standard rules of evidence to be used during an impeachment trial. The Presiding Officer possesses authority to rule on all evidentiary questions. However, any Senator may request that a formal vote be taken on a particular question. Final arguments in the trial will be presented by each side, with the managers for the House of Representatives opening and closing. If the latter option is employed, the committee will present a certified transcript of the proceedings to the full Senate. As President of the United States Senate, the Vice President usually presides at impeachment trials. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court presides over the trial if the President is being tried. In impeachment trials, the full Senate may receive evidence and take testimony, or may order the Presiding Officer to appoint a committee of Senators to serve. The immediate effect of conviction upon an article of impeachment is removal from office, although the Senate may subsequently vote on whether the official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the trial. Exhibit the articles against him or her. After this procedure, the managers would return and make a verbal report to the House. After presentation of the articles and organization of the Senate to consider the impeachment, the Senate will issue a writ of summons to the respondent. On the date established by the Senate, the respondent may appear in person or by phone. The Senate will then decide whether or not to impeach the president. The House of Representatives would then vote on whether to remove the president from office. The respondent may demur, arguing that he or she is not a civil official subject to impeachment. The House has traditionally filed a replication to the respondent's answer, and the pleadings may continue. When pleadings have concluded, the Senate will set a date for the hearing to take place. The respondent may also choose not to appear. In the latter event, the proceedings progress as though a "not guilty" plea were entered. The Senate is expected to vote on whether to impeach the president later this year. The focus of the impeachment inquiry is to determine whether the person involved has engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Impeachment proceedings may be commenced in the House of Representatives by a Member declaring a charge of impeachment on his or her own initiative. The impeachment process may be triggered by non-Members, such as of depositions, the issuance of subpoenas, the disbursement of funds, and the hiring of staff. If a subcommittee or task force is charged with investigating a possible impeachment, the Members can vote to recommend articles of impeachment to the full committee. The House Judiciary Committee usually conducts impeachment investigations. Such matters have occasionally been referred to other committees, such as the House Committee on Reconstruction in the impeachment of President Andrew Johnson. In all prior impeachment proceedings, the House has examined the charges prior to entertaining any vote. If authorized by the House, the Judiciary Committee may designate a subcommittee or task force to investigate whether an individual should be impeached. The resolution also authorized the taking of funding for that purpose. The House passed a resolution authorizing the Judiciary. Committee or a designated subcommittee ortask force to investigation whether Judge Porteous should be. impeached in 2009. A resolution to authorize an investigation as to whether grounds exist for the House to exercise its impeachment power is referred to the House Committee on Rules. The House Judiciary Committee is then referred to investigate whether sufficient grounds exist to impeach President Nixon. H.Res. 803 was called up for immediate consideration as a privileged matter. The resolution authorized the House Judiciary committee to investigate fully if sufficient grounds existed for the impeachment of President Nixon, specified powers which the House could exercise, and the manner in which it could do so. when the Judicial Conference of the United States suggests that the House may wish to consider impeachment of a federal judge. An independent counsel advises the House of any substantial and credible information which he or she believes might constitute grounds for impeachment, by message from the President, by a charge from a state or territorial legislature or grand jury, or by petition. Resolutions regarding impeachment may be of two types. A resolution impeaching a particular individual, who is within the category of impeachable officers under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution, is usually referred directly to the House. be reported to the full House. At the conclusion of debate, the House may consider the resolution as a whole, or may vote on each article separately. The House may vote to impeach even if the House Judiciary Committee does not recommend impeachment. Pursuant to Article I of the Constitution, a vote to impeachment by the House requires a simple majority of those present and voting, upon satisfaction of quorum requirements. If the House votes to impeachment, it must do so within 30 days. The impeachment process, as described in the Constitution, entails two distinct proceedings carried out by the separate houses of Congress. First, a simple majority of the House impeaches or formally approves allegations of wrongdoing amounting to an impeachable offense. The articles of impeachment are then forwarded to the Senate where the second proceeding takes place.at the Constitutional Convention; the debates at the ratifying conventions; English common law and practice; state impeachment practices; analogous case law; and historical commentaries. The term "impeachment" is commonly used to refer to the removal of a government official from office. the resignation of an official under investigation for impeachment often ends impeachment proceedings. For example, no impeachment vote was taken following President Richard Nixon's resignation. And proceedings were ended following the resignation of Judges English, Delahay, and Kent. The Constitution sets forth the general principles which control the procedural aspects of impeachment, vesting the power to impeach in the House of Representatives. Both the Senate and the House have designed procedures to implement these general principles, with the Senate being the one to try impeachments. The Constitution gives Congress the authority to impeach and remove the President, Vice President, and other federal "civil officers" Grounds for impeachment include abuse of the particular powers of government office or a violation of the "public trust" The purpose of impeachment is not to inflict personal punishment for criminal activity. Instead, impeachment is a "remedial" tool; it serves to effectively "maintain constitutional government" by removing individuals unfit for office. The Constitution explicitly makes clear that impeached individuals are not immunized from criminal liability once they are impeached. The Constitution bars the President from using the pardon power to shield individuals from impeachment or removal from office. Convicted individuals are still subject to criminal prosecutions for the same factual situations, and individuals who have already been convicted of crimes may be impeached for same underlying behavior later. If this option is pursued, a simple majority vote is required. If the individual whose conduct is impeached is the same person who was convicted of a crime, the impeachment inquiry is constitutionally appropriate. If it is not, the inquiry is not. all Impeachments. When sitting for that Purpose, they shall be on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside. And no Person shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of the Members present. Judgment in Cases of Impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from Office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any Office of honor, Trust or Profit under the U.S. —Article I, Section 3 The Constitution has concluded, the Senate as a whole meets in closed session to deliberate. Voting on whether to convict on the articles of impeachment commences upon return to open session. A conviction on an article of impeachment requires a two-thirds vote of those Senators present. If the respondent is convicted on one or more of the articles against him or her, the Presiding Officer will pronounce the judgment of conviction and removal. No formal vote is required for removal, as it is a necessary effect of the conviction. has not always voted on every article of impeachment before it. The Senate may subsequently vote on whether the impeached official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the United States. If this option is pursued, a simple majority vote is required. Impeachment proceedings have been challenged in federal court on a number of occasions. Perhaps most significantly, the Supreme Court has ruled in favor of the impeachment of President Andrew Johnson in 1868. The U.S. Senate did not vote on three of the articles of impeachment against Johnson. The decision to impeach an individual rests solely with the House of Representatives. Conviction of an individual requires a two-thirds majority of the present Senators on one of the articles brought by the House. impeachment applies only to the "President, Vice President, and all civil Officers of the United States," and that the grounds for impeachment are limited to "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" The Senate, in turn, has the sole power to try impeachments. The House has impeached 19 individuals: 15 federal judges, one Senator, one Cabinet member, and two Presidents. The Senate has conducted 16 full impeachment trials. Of these, eight individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the Senate. This report briefly surveys the constitutional provisions governing the impeachment power, examines which individuals are subject to impeachment, and explores the potential grounds for impeachment. It also explores the possible grounds for an impeachment trial, and the potential consequences of such a trial being held. The Supreme Court ruled that the Senate has sole authority to decide whether an individual should be acquitted or convicted. The Court noted the important separation of powers concerns that would be implicated if the "final reviewing authority with respect to impeachments [was placed] in the hands of the same body that the impeachment process is meant to regulate" Further, the Court explained that certain certain impeachment cases could not "afford any judicially manageable standard of review of the Senate's actions" The Court reasoned that impeachment functions as the "only check on the Judicial Branch by the Legislature" committee to take evidence and testimony. After the committee completed its proceedings, it presented the full Senate with a transcript and report. The Senate then voted to convict and remove him from office. The judge thereafter brought a suit arguing that the use of a committee to take Evidence violated the Constitution's provision that the Senate "try" all impeachments. The Supreme Court noted that the Constitution grants "the sole Power" to try impeachment "in the Senate and nowhere else" and that the word "try," "lacks sufficient precision to" apply to this case. Judge G. Thomas Porteous brought a suit seeking to bar counsel for the Impeachment Task Force of the House Judiciary Committee from using sworn testimony the judge had provided pursuant to a grant of immunity. The impeachment proceedings were initiated after a judicial investigation of Judge Porteous for alleged corruption on the bench. The Nixon Court noted that here, in contrast, leaving the interpretation of the word "try" with the Senate did not violate any "separate provision" of the Constitution. In addition, several other aspects of the impeachment process have been challenged. to the Special Investigatory Committee under an order granting him immunity from that information being used against him in a criminal case. Judge Porteous argued that the use of his immunized testimony during an impeachment proceeding violated his Fifth Amendment right not to be compelled to serve as a witness against himself. The court rejected his challenge, reasoning that because theUse of such testimony for an impeachment proceedings fell within the legislative sphere, the Speech or Debate Clause prevented the court from ordering the committee staff members to refrain. English, Louderback, and Ritter all involved "misusing their power to appoint and set the fees of bankruptcy receivers for personal profit" Judge Alcee L. Hastings was impeached by the House on 16 articles, including involvement in a conspiracy to accept bribes in return for lenient sentences for defendants. Judge Hastings was convicted by the Senate on eight articles. In addition, Judge Walter L. Nixon Jr. was convicted in a criminal case on two counts of perjury to Judge Hastings. Judge Alcee L. Hastings sought to prevent the House Judiciary Committee from obtaining the records of a grand jury inquiry during the Committee's impeachment investigation. Judge Hastings' argument was grounded in the separation of powers: he claimed that permitting disclosure of grand jury records for an impeachment investigation risked improperly allowing the executive and judicial branches to participate in the impeachment process. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit ruled in favor of Judge Hastings, who was ultimately acquitted of a conspiracy to commit bribery. Judge Walter L. Nixon had been convicted in a criminal trial on two counts of making false statements before a grand jury and was sent to prison. He refused to resign and continued to receive his salary as a judge while in prison. House of Representatives adopted articles of impeachment against the judge and presented the Senate with the articles. Senate invoked Impeachment Rule XI, a Senate procedural rule which permits a judge to be removed from office if he is found guilty of a crime. In Nixon v. United States, the Supreme Court ruled that a challenge to the Senate's use of a trial committee to take evidence posed a nonjusticiable political question. The U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia initially threw out Judge Hastings' Senate impeachment conviction. The decision was vacated on appeal and remanded for reconsideration in light of Nixon v. United States. The district court then dismissed the suit because the Senate had tried his impeachment before a committee rather than the full Senate. The Eleventh Circuit rejected this "absolutist" concept of the separation of powers and held that "a merely generalized assertion of secrecy in grand jury materials must yield to a demonstrated, specific need for evidence in a pending impeachment investigation" individuals on false charges of contempt. The second type of behavior involves misuse of the office for personal gain. Secretary of War William W. Belknap was impeached in 1876 for allegedly receiving payments in return for appointing an individual to maintain a trading post in Indian Territory. In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaching and convicted for using the office to acquire business favors from both litigants in his court and potentiallitigants. And the impeachments of Judges in the office held at the time of the impeachment investigation have, on occasion, been investigated by the House. restricted the power of the President to remove members of the Cabinet without Senate approval. Considering the statute unconstitutional, President Johnson removed Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton. He was impeached shortly thereafter on nine articles relating to his actions. President Johnson was acquitted by a margin by the Supreme Court of the United States on November 14, 1864, after being found guilty by a vote of three to one. The case was the first to be decided by a court of law, rather than a jury, and was the last to be heard by the Senate. bondsmen whereby he received things of value in return for helping bondsman develop corrupt relationships with state court judges. Judge Porteous was convicted by the Senate on all the articles brought against him. Most impeachments have concerned behavior occurring while an individual is in a federal office. However, some have addressed, at least in part, conduct before individuals assumed their positions. For example, in 1912, a resolution impeaching Judge Robert W. Archbald and setting forth 13 articles of impeachment was reported out of the House Judiciary Committee and agreed to by the House. Judge Archbald was impeached by the House and tried by the Senate in the 62 nd Congress. He was convicted on four articles alleging misconduct in his then-current positions as a circuit judge and Commerce Court judge. The articles of impeachment brought against him alleged misconduct in those positions as well as in his previous position as U.S. District Court Judge of the Middle District of Pennsylvania. The article that alleged misconduct was the one that led to his impeachment. The charges against him were dropped the following year. a grand jury concerning his relationship with a man whose son was being prosecuted. The Senate convicted Judge Nixon on two of three articles. In 2010, Judge G. Thomas Porteous Jr. was impeached for participating in a corrupt financial relationship with attorneys in a case before him. He is the first individual to be impeached by the House and convicted by the Senate based in part upon conduct occurring before he began his tenure in federal office. He was convicted on Articles I and II each alleged misconduct beginning while he was a state court judge. as misconduct while he was a federal judge. Article IV alleged that Judge Porteous made false statements to the Senate and FBI in connection with his nomination and confirmation to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana. On December 8, 2010, he was convicted on all four articles, removed from office, and disqualified from holding future federal offices. It does not appear that any President, Vice President, or other civil officer of the United States has been impeached by the House solely on the basis of conduct occurring before he began his tenure. the manifest injury of the people of the United States." A number of individuals have been impeached for official conduct for an improper purpose. The first type of behavior involves vindictive use of the office. For example, in 1826, Judge James Peck was impeachment for charging a lawyer with contempt, imprisoning him, and ordering his disbarment for criticizing one of the judge's decisions. In 1904, Judge Charles Swayne was impeached by the House and acquitted by the Senate. Among the articles of impeachment was the allegation that he had unlawfully imprisoned several people. Judge Harry Claiborne was impeached for providing false information on federal income tax forms. Report: perjury by the President was "just as devastating to our system of government" Report: Both JudgeClaiborne and Judge Nixon were impeached and convicted for perjury and false impeached. The report concluded that judges are only impeachable for behavior incompatible with the nature of the office they hold. and therefore only impeachable when committed by judges."It is "devastating" for the judiciary when judges are perceived as dishonest," the report said. support this notion. Many impeachments approved by the House of Representatives have included conduct that did not involve criminal activity. Less than a third have specifically invoked a criminal statute or used the term "crime" For example, in 1803, Judge John Pickering was impeached and convicted for, among other things, appearing on the bench "in a state of total intoxication" In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaching and convicted of abusing his position as a judge by inducing parties before him to enter financial transactions with him. Two judges were impeached for appearing on the bench in a state of intoxication. Judge Mark H. Delahay was impeached in 1873 for his "personal habits," including being intoxicated on and off the bench. The Senate voted to convict Judge Claiborne on the first, second, and fourth articles. Various other activities incompatible with.the integrity and impartiality of the administration of justice" amounted to a "misdemeanor," according to the Senate's impeachment bill of 1803. In 1862, Judge West H. Humphrey was impeached and convicted for neglecting his duties as a judge and joining the Confederacy. In 1926 Judge George English was impeaching for showing judicial favoritism which eroded the public's confidence in the court. And in 2009, Judge Samuel B. Kent was impeaches for allegedly sexually assaulting two court employees, obstructing the judicial investigation of this behavior, and making false and misleading statements to agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation about the activity. Judge Kent resigned before the Senate trial was completed. could review a congressional decision that the plaintiff was "unqualified" to take his seat. That determination had turned, the Court explained, "on whether the Constitution committed authority to the House to judge its Members' qualifications" The Court noted that while Article I, Section 5, does provide that Congress shall determine the qualifications of its Members, Article I,. Section 2, delineates the three requirements for House membership. Therefore, the Powell Court concluded, the House's claim that it possessed unreviewable authority was defeated by this separate provision. Judicial review of impeachments could create considerable political uncertainty, if, for example, an impeached President sued for judicial review. The Court was careful to distinguish the situation from Powell v. McC ormack , a case also involving congressional procedure where the Court declined to apply the political question doctrine. That case involved a challenge brought by a Member-elect of the House of Representatives, who had been excluded from his seat pursuant to a House Resolution. The precise issue in Powell was whether the judiciary was allowed to review such a decision. it presented a nonjusticiable political question. It was not just a political question, it was a moral one. It had to be decided by a vote of the people, not by a court of law. It is not a political issue, it is a moral issue. It has to be resolved by a ballot box. It's not a legal question, but a moral question. The answer is yes. It must be resolved. It can't be a legal issue, but it must be decided. The minority concluded that both were accused of committing "public misconduct" integral to their "official duties" The Judiciary Committee had rejected an article of impeachment against President Nixon alleging that he committed tax fraud. One of the articles of impeachment recommended by the House Judiciary Committee against President Clinton also alleged abuse of the powers of his office. That article alleged that the President refused to comply with certain congressional requests for information and provided false and misleading information in response to others. The committee report argued that such conduct "showed contempt for the legislative branch and impeded Congress's exercise of its Constitutional responsibility" of one vote in the Senate. In 1974, the House Judiciary Committee recommended articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon. The articles alleged that the President, "using the powers of his high office," attempted to obstruct the investigation of the Watergate Hotel break-in, conceal and protect the perpetrators, and conceal the existence of other illegal activity. Second, that he used the power of the office of the Presidency to violate citizens' constitutional rights, "impair[]" lawful investigations, and "contravene[]" laws applicable to executive branch agencies. a judge would fail to qualify for a non-judicial officer. The impeachment and acquittal of President Clinton illustrates this difficulty. While two articles of impeachment were approved by the House, the Senate acquitted President Clinton on both charges. One reading of the minority's position is that certain behavior might be impeachable conduct for a federal judge, but not for the President. However, generating firm conclusions from this result is quite difficult as there may have been varying motivations for these votes. One possibility is that the Senate voted to acquit the President because of political reasons. that the acquittal occurred because some Senators, though agreeing that such conduct merited impeachment, thought the House Managers failed to prove their case. Another possibility is that neither ideological stance was considered, and voting was conducted solely according to political calculations. Congressional materials have cautioned that the grounds for impeachment "do not all fit neatly and logically into categories" because the remedy of impeachment is intended to "reach a broad variety of conduct by officers that is both serious and incompatible with the duties of the office" statements in matters distinct from their official duties. The report noted the President's perjurious conduct, though seemingly falling outside of his official duties as President, nonetheless constituted grounds for impeachment. The minority emphasized that the President was not impeachable for all potential crimes, no matter how minor. impeachment was reserved for "conduct that constitutes an egregious abuse or subversion of the powers of the executive office," the report said. In contrast, the minority views from the report opposing impeachment reasoned that "not all impeachable offenses are crimes and not all crimes are impeachmentachable offenses" congressional precedents reflect three broad types of conduct thought to constitute grounds for impeachment. The House has impeached several individuals for abusing or exceeding the powers of their office. For example, in 1868, amidst a struggle over Reconstruction policy, the House impeached President Andrew Johnson on allegations that he violated the Tenure of Office Act, which was passed in 1864. The current House is expected to vote on whether to impeach President Barack Obama in the coming weeks. The vote is likely to be close, but the House has a history of impeaching presidents. Some articles of impeachment brought against President Clinton were grounded on alleged behavior considered incompatible with the nature of the office of the Presidency. One article was for allegedly lying to a grand jury, and the second, for allegedly obstructing justice by concealing evidence in a federal civil rights action brought against him. The articles noted that by doing this, "William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of his office, has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed his trust as President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the rule of law and justice" Some have argued that only criminal acts are impeachable offenses under the U.S. Constitution. Julian Zelizer: The notion that onlycriminal conduct can constitute sufficient grounds for impeachment does not, however, comport with historical practice. In accordance with the understanding of "high" offenses in the English tradition, impeachable conduct could include behavior that violates an official's duty to the country, he says. Zelizer says the Constitution does not define "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," but it was adopted from parliamentary impeachments. offenses are "constitutional wrongs that subvert the structure of government, or undermine the integrity of office and even the Constitution itself" "[O]ther high crimes and misdemeanor[s]" are not limited to indictable offenses, but apply to "serious violations of the public trust" The term "Misdemeanor ... does not mean a minor criminal offense as the term is generally employed in the criminal law," but refers instead to the behavior of public officials. "[H]igh Crimes and Misdemeanors" are thus best characterized as "misconduct that damages the state and the operations of government institutions" judges "hold their Offices during good behaviour" One argument posits that these clauses should be read in conjunction. But the "modern view" of Congress appears to be that the phrase "good behavior" simply designates judicial tenure. The House's impeachment of judges was "consistent" with impeachment of "non-judicial officers," the report says. But one might argue that the range of impeachable conduct differs for judges and non-judges, the report adds. The Constitution does not delineate a standard for impeachment and removal for federal judges, it says. conduct that "br[ought] his court into disrepute, to the prejudice of said court and public confidence in the administration of justice" Some have suggested that the standard for impeaching a federal judge differs from an executive branch official. While Article II, Section 1, of the Constitution specifies the grounds for the impeachment of civil officers as "treason, bribery, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors," Article III, Section1, provides that federal judges can be impeached. ground for impeachment, the "good behavior" phrase simply makes clear that federal judges retain their office for life unless they are removed via a proper constitutional mechanism. The "treason, bribery, and high Crimes and Misdemeanors" clause thus serves as the sole standard for impeachable conduct for both executive branch officials and federal judges. A 1973 discussion of impeachment grounds reviewed the history of the phrase and concluded that the "Constitutional Convention ... quite clearly rejected" a "dual standard" for judges and civil officers. between judges and executive branch officials due to the differing nature of each office. For example, one might argue that a federal judge could be impeached for perjury or fraud because of the importance of trustworthiness and impartiality to the judiciary. The same behavior might not constitute impeachable conduct for an executive branch official. However, given the wide variety of factors at issue, it is uncertain if conduct meriting impeachment and conviction for a non-judicial officer has never been convicted by the Senate. The relative paucity of impeachments of non- judicial officers compared to judges. The committee concluded that, at least with regard to federal judges, impeachment was appropriate in several circumstances. The committee left unresolved whether non-criminal conduct outside of the judicial function could support an impeachment charge. The purposes underlying the impeachment were also left unresolved. The Committee concluded that the impeachment of a federal judge was appropriate if the conduct was connected with the judicial office or the exercise of judicial power. The purpose of the impeachment was to remove the judge from office for a period of time. The impeachment of the judge was not to remove him from office.