Some veterans are exempt from the enrollment requirement if they meet special eligibility requirements. Once a veteran is enrolled in the VA health-care system, the veteran remains in the system and does not have to reapply for enrollment annually. Those veterans who have been enrolled in Priority Group 5 must submit a new VA Form 10-10EZ annually with updated financial information demonstrating inability to defray the expenses of necessary care. Eligibility for VA health care is based on delivery of inpatient and outpatient medical care. with no service-connected disabilities and with attributable incomes above an established means test (see Appendix C ). P.L. 104-262 also authorized the VA to establish a patient enrollment system to manage access to VA health care. The provision of health care to veterans was dependent upon the available resources, according to the report language accompanying the bill. The report also stated that the provision of hospital care and medical services would be provided to "the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriations Acts for these purposes" Not every veteran is automatically entitled to medical care from the VA. Prior to eligibility reform in 1996, provisions of law governing eligibility for VA care were complex and not uniform across all levels of care. All veterans were technically "eligible" for hospital care and nursing home care, but eligibility did not by itself ensure access to care. The Veterans' Health Care Eligibility Reform Act of 1996, P.L. 104-262 , established two eligibility categories and required the VHA to manage the program. All outpatient appointment requests must be acted on as soon as possible, but no later than seven calendar days from the date of the request. Priority scheduling of any veteran must not affect the medical care of any other previously scheduled veteran. VHA guidelines state that veterans with service-connected conditions cannot be prioritized over other veterans with more acute health-care needs. The VHA is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue. Although the VHA does not have a budget, it does have a number of funding options. P.L. 104-262 authorized the VA to provide all needed hospital care and medical services to veterans with service-connected disabilities, former prisoners of war, veterans exposed to toxic substances and environmental hazards such as Agent Orange. The VA looks at applicants' income and net worth to determine their specific priority category and whether they have to pay co-payments for nonservice-connected care. The other category of veterans are those disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty. The VA places applicants into one of two categories. The first group is composed of veterans with service-connected disabilities or with incomes below an established means test. These veterans are regarded by the VA as "high priority" veterans and are enrolled in Priority Groups 1-6. The VHA is mandated to provide priority care for non-emergency outpatient medical care for any condition of a service- connected veteran rated 50% or more. According to VHA policies, patients with emergency or urgent medical needs must be provided care. veterans are asked to provide the VA with information on any health insurance coverage they have, including coverage through employment or through a spouse. The VA may bill these payers for treatment of conditions that are not a result of injuries or illnesses incurred or aggravated during military service. The second group of veterans is composed of those who do not fall into one of the first six priority groups.primarily veterans with nonservice-connected medical conditions and with incomes and net worth above the VA-established means test threshold. Under the current co-payment billing process, in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a nonservice-connected condition appears to qualify for billing, the VA sends the bill to the insurance provider. The veteran's co- payment obligation is placed on hold for 90 days pending payment from the third-party payer. If no payment is received from theThird-Party payer within 90 days, a bill is sent to the veteran. Under the Administration's proposal, veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of non-service-connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire co- Payment. Under current law, the VA is authorized to collect from third-party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran. If the VA treats an insured veteran for a nonservice-connected disability, and the veteran is also determined by the VA to have co-payment responsibilities, theVA will apply the payment collected from the insurer to the veteran's care. The VA also established co-payments from veterans for this care. In 1986, Congress authorized theVA to collect payments for the treatment of veterans with nonservices-connected disabilities. who completed the term for which they were called, and who were granted an other than dishonorable discharge, are exempt from the 24 continuous months of active duty requirement. National Guard members who were called to active duty by federal executive order are also exempt from this two-year requirement. When not activated to full-time federal service, members of the reserve components and National Guard have limited eligibility for VA health-care services. Members of the Reserve components may be granted service-connection. The National Guard may be given service- connection. for any injury they incurred or aggravated in the line of duty while attending inactive duty training assemblies, annual training, active duty for training, or while going directly to or returning directly from such duty. Reserve component service members may be granted service-connection for a heart attack or stoke if such an event occurs during these same periods. The granting of service- connection makes them eligible to receive care from the VA for those conditions. National Guard members are not grantedService- connection for any injury, heart attack, or stroke that occurs while performing duty ordered by a governor. Veteran's status is established by active-duty status in the military, naval, or air service and an honorable discharge or release from active military service. People enlisting in one of the armed forces after September 7, 1980, and officers commissioned after October 16, 1981, must have completed two years of active duty or the full period of their initial service obligation to be eligible for VA health-care benefits. Servicemembers discharged at any time because of service-connected disabilities are not held to this requirement. the VHA, an 11.3% increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion. The FY2007 request included $25.5 billion for medical services. For FY2008, the Administration requested $27.2 billion. As in FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007, the administration included several cost-sharing proposals. These legislative proposals are discussed in detail in the " Key Budget Issues " section at the end of this report. H.R. 5385 provided $32.7 billion for the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) for FY2007. $3.6 billion for medical facilities, $25 million above the budget request. $412 million for medical and prosthetic research, a 3.2% increase over the President's request of $399 million (see Table 5 ). $28.7billion for medical services, a 26.0% Increase over the FY2006 enacted amount, and a 12.5% increase. On May 19, 2006, the House passed its version of the Military Construction, Military Quality of Life, and Veterans Affairs Appropriations bill (MIL-CON-QUAL-appropriations bill) for FY2007 ( H.R. 5385 , H.Rept. 109-464 ). The bill provided $32.7 billion for the VHA, a $3.4 billion (11.4%) increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion and about the same as the President's request. On June 14, 2007, the full Senate Appropriations Committee approved the measure. $32.7 billion for the VHA for FY2007, a $14.7 million increase over the President's request. Of the total amount appropriated for VHA, $29.1 billion has been allocated to the medical services account. $2.6 billion was designated as contingent emergency funding and was to be available for obligation only after the President submitted a budget request to Congress. $3.3 billion was allocated to medical and prosthetic research account, which was $15 million above request. On May 24, 2007, the House and Senate approved the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 ( H.R. 2206 ). The bill was signed into law on May 25 ( P.L. 110-28 ). Among other things, the bill provided a total of $1.34 billion for the VHA for FY2007. This amount included $400 million for medical services: $9.4 million for polytrauma residential transition rehabilitation programs. 2007, the House and Senate adopted the Conference Report ( H.Rept. 110-153 ) to accompany the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for FY2008 ( S.Con.Res. 21 ). The conference agreement provided a total of $85.3 billion in budget authority for all veterans benefits and services for FY 2008. Similar language has been included in the Defense Appropriations conference report. In its FY2008 budget request, the Administration has put forward several legislative proposals. These proposals are similar to previous ones included in budget requests for FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007 and rejected by Congress each year. ). The committee did not recommend any fee increases as requested by the Administration's budget proposal for the VHA for FY2008. H.R. 2642 provided $29.0 billion for medical services. This included the transfer of $125 million from the medical administration account to the medical services account. The reason for this transfer was because during House floor debate, Representative Shelley Moore Capito offered an amendment to the bill that would have increased the amount of money spent on medical services from $25 billion to $30 billion. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have expressed concern that the President's budget has not accurately projected the future cost of health care for veterans from FY2008-FY2012. The House Appropriations Committee expressed doubt in the actuarial model currently used to project health-care demand for Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi freedom (OIF) veterans. The Senate Appropriations Committee has included a general provision in H.R. 2642 directing the CBO to submit a CBO report on the issue. above the FY2008 Administration's request ( Table 5 ). All other amounts for the VHA were equal to the committee-recommended funding levels. H.R. 2642 , as amended by the Senate, provided a total of $1.7 billion for VA construction projects. Unlike the House Appropriations Committee, the Senate Appropriations Committee provided funding for specific construction projects requested by the President. However, the committee continued the practice of not earmarking major construction projects that are not requested in the President's budget proposal. levels. H.R. 2642 has provided approximately $2.2 billion for VA construction projects. A large portion of this amount was for construction and building improvements of VA medical facilities. The House Appropriations Committee did not recommended any funding amounts for various construction and projects submitted by Members of Congress or by the Administration. According to H.Rept. 110-186 , "individual project allocations will be considered comprehensively after the Committee has properly analyzed all relevant information" on June 13, 2007. H.R. 2764 was passed by the House on December 17, 2007; the Senate passed the measure the next day, December 18, with an amendment. The House agreed to the McConnell Amendment on December 19. The bill was signed into law ( P.L. 110-161 ) on December 26. The Military Construction and Veterans Affairs and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2008 (MILCON-VA Appropriations Act) provided $37.2 billion for VHA for FY2008. At the end of the 109 th Congress, Congress did not pass the MIL-CON-VA-appropriations bill for FY2007. Congress funded most government agencies, including the VA, through a series of Continuing Appropriations Resolutions. On February 15, 2007, the President signed into law the Revised Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2007 ( H.J.Res. 20 , P.L. 110-5 ). It provided funding for the VA through the remainder of the fiscal year, through September 30, 2007. $2.9 billion for speciality mental health care, $130 million for the homeless veterans grant and per diem program. $100 million for blind rehabilitation services. $3.6 billion for medical administration, $193 million above the Administration's request. $480 million for medical and prosthetic research, a 17% increase over the President's request of $411 million. $12.5 million for expanded outpatient services for the blind, and an additional $15 million for Vet Centers. caseworkers; (3) $20 million for substance abuse treatment programs. $193 million for treatment of Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF) veterans; and (10) $25 million for prosthetics. P.L. 110-28 also provided $326 million for the Construction, Minor Projects account, with specific funding of $36.0 million for construction costs related to establishing polytrauma residential transitional rehabilitation programs. It also included $100 million for enhancement of mental health services. amendment to transfer $5 million to the medical services account for the establishment of an Office of Rural Health within the Office of the Under Secretary for Health. The MILCON-VA appropriations bill, as amended, also provided $3.5 billion for the medical administration account, $68.6 million above the FY2008 request. With this transfer of funds, $29.1 billion would have been available for medical services. All other amounts for the VHA were equal to the committee-recommended funding. The Administration is proposing a tiered annual enrollment fee, which is structured to charge $250 for Priority 7 and 8 veterans with family incomes from $50,000 to $74,999. The VA has estimated that this proposal would contribute more than $138 million to the Treasury annually, beginning in FY2009. The MILCON-VA Appropriation Act ( P.L. 110-161 ) does not include any bill language that would give the VA money for the tiered enrollment fee. VA the authority to impose enrollment fees. At present, veterans in Priority Groups 2-8 pay $8 for a 30-day supply of medication, including over-the-counter medications. The VA estimates that if the current proposal to raise the co-payment were enacted, it would contribute $311 million to the Treasury in FY2008 and will increase revenue by $1.6 billion over five years. The MILCON-VA Appropriation Act ( P.L. 110-161 ) does. The President's FY2008 budget request includes three major policy proposals. Assess a tiered annual enrollment fee for all Priority 7 and 8 veterans based on the family income of the veteran. Increase pharmaceutical co-payments from $8 to $15 (for each 30-day prescription) for all enrolled veterans. Bill veterans receiving treatment for nonservice-connected conditions for the entire co-payment amount. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees. not include any bill language that would give the VA the authority to increase co-payments. According to VA estimates, of the 5.8 million unique patients that it expects to see in 2008, 111,000 may choose not to use the system if an enrollment fee is imposed. The Administration is requesting that Congress amend the VA's statutory authority by eliminating the practice of reducing first-party co-payment debts with third-party health-insurance collections. The VA asserts that this proposal would align the VA with the DOD health-care system for military retirees and with the private sector. the Administration's budget requested consolidating several medical existing collections accounts into one MCCF. The funds would be available for medical services for veterans. These collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended. The purpose of this pilot project is to provide a "comprehensive restructuring of the complete revenue cycle including cash-flow management and accounts receivable" The conferees included this provision because the FY2006 Military Construction, Military Quality of Life and Veterans Affairs Appropriations Act required the VA to establish a revenue improvement demonstration project. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 ( P.L. 105-33 ) gave the VHA the authority to retain these funds in the Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF) Instead of returning the funds to the Treasury, the VA can use them for medical services for veterans without fiscal year limitations. To increase the VA's third-party collections, the act also gave the VA authority to change its basis of billing insurers from "reasonable costs" to "reasonable charges" This change in billing was intended to enhance VA collections to the extent that reasonable charges result in higher payments than reasonable costs. Appropriation Committees were concerned that the VHA was collecting only 41% percent of the billed amounts from third-party insurance companies. The VHA has established a pilot Consolidated Patient Account Center in VISN 6. MCCF collections increased by 31%, from $1.5 billion in FY2003 to $2.0 billion inFY2006. In FY2006, first-party collections represented approximately 43% of total MCCf collections. The Administration requested $32.7 billion for the program in FY2007. appropriations account structure has been subject to change from year to year. The appropriation accounts used to support the VHA traditionally include medical care, medical and prosthetic research, and medical administration. Congress also appropriates funds for construction of medical facilities through a larger appropriations account for construction for all VA facilities. In FY2004, "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," Congress changed VHA's appropriations structure. The Department of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act, 2004 ( P.L. 108-199 ) funded VHA through appropriations to the medical services appropriations. four accounts: (1) medical services, (2) medical administration, (3) medical facilities, and (4) medical and prosthetic research. The medical services account covers expenses for furnishing inpatient and outpatient care and treatment of veterans and certain dependents. In its FY2008 budget request to Congress, the VA requested the transfer of food service operations costs from the medical facilities account to the general account. The general account covers salaries and expenses of employees hired under Title 38, United States Code; and aid to state veterans homes. During FY2007, the VHA had an estimated total enrolled veteran population of 7.9 million. The number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 110,000. The total number of outpatient visits, including visits to Vet Centers, reached 60.2 million during FY2006 and is projected to increase to 64.4 million in FY2007. Unlike Medicare or Medicaid, VA health care is not an entitlement program. The VHA estimates that it will spend approximately 64.8% of its medical services obligations on outpatient care. broad array of veteran-centric health topics, such as treatment of mental health conditions, rehabilitation of veterans with limb loss, traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury. VA researchers receive funding not only through this account but also from the DOD, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and private sources. As a percentage of total VHA funding, report projecting the annual funding level necessary for the VHA to continue providing health care for veterans from FY2009 through FY2012. Appendix A. Priority Groups and Their Eligibility Criteria Appendix B. Financial Income Thresholds for VA Health-Care Benefits Appendix D. VHA Appropriations for FY2005 and FY2006. $2.6 billion was designated as contingent emergency funding and was available for obligation only after the President submitted a budget request to Congress. Table 1 provides funding levels for VA and VHA as included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008. The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules, including disability compensation and pensions, education, and health care. The VA is responsible for providing health care, pensions, disability compensation, and other benefits to veterans. The VA's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts. Mandatory funding supports disability compensation, pension benefits, vocational rehabilitation, and life insurance. Discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services, including medical care. The VHA operates the nation's largest integrated direct health-care delivery system. The VA's health- care system is organized into 21 geographically diverse regions. The agency's budget authority of approximately $80 billion is about 48.1% of the total VA budget authority. International Classification of Diseases-9 th Revision (ICD—9) codes to better reflect the TBI patient population within both DOD and VA. Beginning with FY2009, the appropriators are directing the Administration to include TBI as a select program within the medical services account. The Appropriation Committees expressed concern about insufficient funding levels for mental health and substance abuse services in the FY2008 budget request. The Administration's budget request had included a reduction in the number of inpatient beds for psychiatric care and an anticipated increase of less than one. The Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2764 , P.L. 110-161 ) includes increased funding for substance abuse services. The appropriators also directed the VA to reexamine the policy for a reduction in psychiatric inpatient care, taking into account the needs of returning OIF and OEF veterans. Furthermore, the bill directs the VA not to reduce the number of inpatient psychiatric beds at any facility that currently has a waiting list. The bill is expected to become law by the end of the year. have urged both DOD and VA to seek every opportunity to partner to improve the continuity of care for veterans. Joint clinics; joint Centers of Excellence for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Joint research and/or treatment; and the development of joint clinical practice guidelines for polytrauma injury, TBI, burns, and amputee care, among other things. Currently, there is no medical diagnostic code specific to TBI. It is a challenge to quantify the number of TBI cases. in remote rural areas has been a long standing issue. To address this issue the appropriators have directed the VA to provide a report to the committees that includes a description of the unique challenges and costs faced by veterans. The report should also identify the need to fund alternative sources of medical services in areas where VA medical facilities are not accessible to veterans without them leaving such areas. Moreover, the report should identify the needs for funding to provide care in these areas without the need for veterans to leave the area. The Consolidated Appropriations Act directs the DOD and VA to provide a joint report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing the actions being taken by each Department to achieve an interoperable electronic medical record (EMR) system. The report should also contain an assessment of the potential for increasing local access to medical services for veterans in remote rural areas through strategic partnerships with other government and local private health care providers. The bill was passed on a bipartisan basis and is expected to be signed into law by President Barack Obama. training and rehabilitation services, hospital and medical care, assistance to homeless veterans, home loan guarantees, and death benefits that cover burial expenses. The VA carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals (BVA) The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) is responsible for health-care services and medical research programs. The Veterans Benefits Administration is responsible, among other things, for providing compensations, pensions, and education assistance. The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) isresponsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries. In FY2007, the VHA operated 155 medical centers, 135 nursing homes, 717 ambulatory care and community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs) The VHA also pays for care provided to veterans by private-sector providers on a fee basis under certain circumstances. Inpatient and outpatient care is also provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA) In addition to the grants for construction of state-owned nursing homes and defined Veterans Integrated Service Networks (VISNs) Although policies and guidelines are developed at VA headquarters to be applied throughout the VA health-care system, management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to the VISNs. Congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to VISNs based on the Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) system, which generally bases funding on patient workload. Prior to the implementation of the VERA system, resources were allocated to facilities primarily on the basis of their historical expenditures.