Allegations that defendants had "played a critical role in the September 11 attacks by funding Muslim charities that, in turn, funded al Qaeda" Appeals court in 2008 affirmed dismissals of the first three sets of claims for lack of subject. In 2008, the appeals court dismissed claims against four Saudi princes in their official capacities and a banker in their personal capacities. The appeals court also dismissed the claims against the Saudi High Commission for Relief to Bosnia and Herzegovina (the SHC), a charitable organization. the entity holds exclusive rights to some right in the [foreign] country; and (5) how the entity is treated under foreign state law. The plaintiffs sued four Saudi princes for actions taken within their official capacities. All four princes held positions of power in the SHC; three of the princes were members of the country's "Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs" The court held that the Saudi government had formed SHC and paid its employees, and that it was an organ of the Kingdom. the laws of a third country. Whether the SHC was an agency or instrumentality turned on whether it was an "organ" of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The court applied a multi-factor test, derived from a previous Second Circuit decision and from decisions from other circuits. Specifically, the court applied the following five criteria: "(1) whether the foreign state created the entity for a national purpose; (2) whetherThe foreign state actively supervises the entity, (3) whether it requires the hiring of public employees and pays their salaries, (4) whether applied to the charities also commanded immunity for the Kingdom and the SHC. The plaintiffs, recognizing that their allegations about indirect funding for the attacks would not satisfy the tort exception, sought to allege that the activities of certain "operational level agents and alter-egos" of Saudi Arabia within the United States in connection with the attacks are attributable to Saudi Arabia. The court found that there was an insufficient factual basis to conclude that any of these individuals were employees of Saudi Saudi Arabia when they carried out the allegedly tortious activities in the U.S. In 2005, a district court ruled that Saudi Arabia's funding of Islamic charities was a matter of public policy. The previous judge had explained that "SHC's alleged misuse of funds and/or inadequate record-keeping" was the result of a discretionary function and cannot be the basis for a lawsuit against Saudi Arabia. He noted the 2005 district court decision in Terrorist Attacks I granting the defendants immunity for decisions involving which charities to fund, specifically, the holding that "Saudi Arabia's treatment of and decisions to support Islamic charities are purely planning level" did not appear to foreclose a finding of jurisdiction unless all conduct associated with the injury occurs wholly within the United States. In the case of the Saudi charities, the appellate court stated that all of the defendants' conduct had occurred abroad. Although the September 11, 2001 attacks constitute a "tort," the SJRC and the SRC are not alleged to have participated in that "Tort" Instead, the "torts" allegedly committed by the SJ RC and SRC only involve giving money and aid to purported charities that supported al Qaeda. Victims seeking to establish liability in U.S. courts against, and recover damages from, the terrorists. Victims have sued numerous individuals and groups with less direct ties to the attackers. In r e Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001 , is a consolidated case that includes, among other claims, claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The case is being heard by the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which is expected to hear the case later this year. The Supreme Court later abrogated the first of these holdings. The Second Circuit reversed its own position with respect to the tort exception to foreign sovereign immunity. The case is on appeal at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. If the appellate court reverses the district court's dismissal of the suit on "entire tort" grounds, the case will likely return to the districtCourt for a determination of whether the alleged tortious acts retain immunity as discretionary functions. In re Terrorist as at most a separate tort or as a discretionary act. Attacks ) is a case consolidated for pre-trial purposes in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals' opinion reviewed dismissals of only a subset of the claims at issue in the case. Plaintiffs in In r e Terrorist Attacks are individuals and businesses injured by the September 11 terrorist attacks. They brought claims based on state and federal tort law and various federal laws, including the Torture Victim Protection Act. The dismissed claims fall into four categories: Plaintiffs in the case were victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks. They alleged that the Saudi defendants had supported Al Qaeda's financial backers prior to the attacks and were therefore civilly liable for plaintiffs' injuries. In August 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit (Second Circuit) affirmed dismissals of claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, a Saudi charity, Saudi princes, and a Saudi banker in In r e Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001. protected as an agent or instrumentality. Only the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit (Seventh Circuit) had reached the opposite conclusion. The Supreme Court granted review and established the minority position as the correct one. Consequently, jurisdiction over remaining Saudi officials is subject to the same inquiry that applies to other individuals and possibly a determination as to whether common law immunity applies. Because the officials dismissed from this case were Saudi nationals, they are not covered by the law of Saudi Arabia. S. 2040 would provide for exclusive federal court jurisdiction over foreign states under the new FSIA provision. It would clarify the relationship between the FSIA exception and the ATA's civil liability exception precluding suits against foreign officials. Aliens as well as U.S. nationals would likely be able to bring lawsuits under causes of action other than the ATa if jurisdiction is available under theNew FSIA clause.rise to jurisdiction where it constitutes "mere negligence" If the newFSIA exception applies, a U.s. national could pursue an ATA lawsuit against the foreign state. The FSIA authorizes jurisdiction over foreign nations in several exceptions. A foreign state is not immune from U.S. courts' jurisdiction where it has waived its immunity. For claims against foreign non-state defendants to whom the FSIA does not apply, federal law authorizes subject matter jurisdiction as long as the "amount in controversy" exceeds $75,000. The FSIA is a jurisdictional gatekeeper for claims againstForeign states and their instrumentalities. The federal courts have the power to deny jurisdiction to foreign defendants entitled to immunity. court, however, and is once again on appeal at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. This report explains the legal bases for the dismissals and provides an update to the status of the case. To address some issues involving the interpretation of the FSIA, Congress is considering the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act ( S. 2040 , H.R. 3815 ). The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act applies to all foreign states and their "agencies and instrumentalities" Individual foreign officials are not covered by the FSIA if they are sued in their capacity as individuals. One such defendant, the former president of two of the Saudi-run charities sued for alleged involvement in funding the 9/11 terrorist attacks, prevailed in a motion to dismiss the lawsuit against him on the basis of common-law foreign sovereign immunity. Personal jurisdiction is the second threshold hurdle for assertion of judicial authority in cases involving foreign defendants. Whereas subject matter jurisdiction governs courts' power over particular. giving both within and outside the Kingdom"; and the fourth prince was the SHC's president, in addition to his roles as a provincial governor and crown prince. Although several other federal courts of appeals had ruled on the extension of foreign sovereign immunity to foreign officials, treatment of officials under the FSIA was a question of first impression for the Second Circuit. The court held that individuals acting within their official capacities were indeed "agencies" of their states and were therefore entitled to immunity under theFSIA. The court noted that at the time the FSIA was enacted, Congress expressed a desire to codify common law principles. The court also emphasized the potential erosion of immunity for foreign states if immunity extended only to government actions distinct from the actions of officials as individuals. The state cannot act except through individuals, the court said. The Second Circuit's holding was consistent with the conclusions of five of the six other federal courts of appeals that had considered whether an individual may be immune from prosecution, it said. instrumentality" is entitled to the same immunity to which the state itself is entitled under the FSIA. The key threshold question was whether the SHC and the princes sued in their official capacities qualified as agencies or instrumentalities. The FSIA defines "agency or instrumentality" as any entity which is (1) a "separate legal person, corporate or otherwise"; (2) "an organ of a foreign state or political subdivision thereof"; and (3) not a U.S. citizen or created under. claims, personal jurisdiction governs courts' power over particular defendants. Even if a court establishes jurisdiction over the subject matter of a claim, it cannot exercise its authority over a defendant for whom it lacks personal jurisdiction. Personal jurisdiction requires both statutory authority and satisfaction of Fifth Amendment due process standards. As with subject matter jurisdiction, statutory authority for personal jurisdiction over foreign defendants follows one of two distinct routes according to the FSIA's application. For a defendant who is not a foreign state or its agency or instrumentality, the ordinary procedure for obtaining personal jurisdiction applies. The type and quantity of contacts necessary to constitute "minimum contacts" differ according to the type of personal jurisdiction. General jurisdiction, which allows a court to exercise jurisdiction over a foreign defendant for any claim, does not require contacts related to the specific claim in the case. Conversely, specific jurisdiction involves no "continuous and systematic" requirement; instead, it requires that a defendant's contacts with the forum "relate to" or "arise out of""Justice" is a term used to refer to a court's jurisdiction over foreign defendants. Conspiracy gives rise to civil liability when it consists of an agreement between two or more persons. A defendant must be generally aware of his role as part of an overall illegal or tortious activity at the time that he provides the assistance. The defendant must knowingly and substantially assist the principal violation, according to the D.C. Circuit. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Washington, which heard the case on November 14. The jury deliberated for less than two hours. Secondary liability would attach under the Senate bill to any person who "aids and abets, by knowingly providing substantial assistance" The House bill would authorize secondary liability against anyone who aided, abetted, or conspired with the perpetrator. Neither bill would explicitly elucidate whether criminal liability under the material support provisions of the law would be covered by secondary liability. The bill would also clarify what type of intent or knowledge would be necessary to establish liability.that gives rise to the lawsuit. the defendant state to resolve the claims. The court would be authorized to issue a stay for 180 days, which could be renewed for additional 180-day periods if the Secretary of State certifies that such negotiations remain ongoing. All current versions of JASTA include a finding by Congress that expresses approval in the context of civil liability under the ATA for the test established by the D.C. Circuit for aiding and abetting and conspiracy liability. The test is that the party whom the defendant aids must perform a wrongful act. commercial conduct or a particular commercial transaction or act" The court noted the "circularity" of this definition. It relied upon the Supreme Court's definition of "commercial activity" as "the type of actions by which a private party engages in 'trade and traffic or commerce" With this framework, the court upheld the district court's finding that defendants' "charitable contributions" fell outside the scope of the commercial activities. The case is the first of its kind in the U.S. S. 1894 was ordered to be reported favorably out of the Senate Judiciary Committee in September 2012. A companion bill, H.R. 5904 , did not receive further action. Identical versions of the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act were introduced in the 113 th Congress as S. 1535 and H. R. 3143. The bill was introduced to reduce some of the burdens faced by victims of state-sponsored terrorism in the United States who seek to bring lawsuits against foreign officials. in civil actions for terrorist acts no matter where they occur. H.R. 3143 would have included the provision of material support for terrorism in the jurisdiction provision. The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act (JASTA) has returned to the 114 th Congress as S. 2040. The Senate passed the bill by voice vote on May 17, 2016, after accepting it as an amendment to the ATA cause of action. The amended version of Section 2337 would have exempted only U.S. officials. S. 2040 would create a new exception to the FSIA for acts of international terrorism that occur on U.S. territory. "International terrorism" is defined with reference to the ATA, including the exclusion for "acts of war" The amendment would dispense with the "entire tort" rule and the statutory discretionary act exclusion for such cases only. The bill would include among congressional findings that "no country has the discretion to engage knowingly in the financing or sponsorship of terrorism, whether directly or indirectly" S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) would leave the foreign official exclusion under the ATA intact, but, as noted above, would remove the immunity from prosecution for acts of international terrorism in which a U.S. national is injured. The bill would also extend the immunity to the maximum extent permissible under the 5 th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. It would apply to any person who commits or aids and abets an act of internationalterrorism or otherwise sponsors such act or the person who committed such act. act was done pursuant to and in furtherance of the common scheme. The bills would implement secondary liability in somewhat different ways. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) and H.R. 3815 would amend the ATA to provide for secondary liability. The House bill would also apply liability in the case of an entity designated as a foreign terrorist organization as a result of the attack. The Senate bill would provide secondary liability for an act of international terrorism planned, committed, or authorized by an entity. ATA would also establish civil liability, as some courts have found. Language in the findings section suggest the intent that the knowing or reckless provision of material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization, whether directly or indirectly, should give rise to liability. H.R. 3815 would remove the immunity of foreign officials from lawsuits as currently provided in 18 U.S.C. §2337(2) It would also add a provision to the ATA to address issues plaintiffs have confronted in establishing personal jurisdiction over foreign nationals.  exception for designated state sponsors of terrorism provides jurisdiction over cases involving designated "state sponsor[s] of terrorism" in suits involving "personal injury or death that was caused by an act of torture, extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking" However, the exception seems to apply only to countries designated as "state sponsors" of terrorism by the U.S. government. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution this week condemning the use of torture and extrajudicial killings as terrorist acts. The resolution calls for an end to such practices. by the U.S. Department of State as state sponsors of terrorism. This list currently includes Iran, Sudan, and Syria. At the time suit was brought in the In re Terrorist Attacks litigation, the previous terrorism exception remained in force. Before asserting jurisdiction to accept a case, a federal court must establish its authority over the dispute involved and the parties to the litigation. For cases involving foreign defendants, the analyses for subject matter and personal jurisdiction differ according to the court's jurisdiction analysis. U.S. State Department has not designated the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as a state sponsor of terrorism. The plaintiffs characterized defendants' charitable contributions to Muslim groups as a form of money laundering. The court rejected this characterization as incompatible with the Supreme Court's interpretation of the commercial activities exception. The FSIA defines "commercial activity" as "a regular course of activity" in the U.S., the court said in its ruling on the In r e Terrorist Attacks plaintiffs' case. It also said the commercial activity exception should apply to the Saudi defendants. that international terrorism did not meet this standard as of September 11, 2001. Quoting its 2003 opinion in United States v. Yousef , the court stated the following: We regrettably are no closer now ... to an international consensus on the definition of terrorism or even its proscription. The mere existence of the phrase "state-sponsored terrorism" proves the absence of agreement on basic terms among a large number of States that terrorism violates [customary] international law, the court said. with the forum to permit personal jurisdiction under the constitutional "minimum contacts" standard. Plaintiffs argued that the minimum contacts test was satisfied because the defendants had purposefully directed activity at the judicial forum by supporting the attacks. The court rejected this argument, acknowledging that it had been a successful argument in cases where defendants were "primary participants" in the terrorist acts but holding that the banker and princes' activities were too attenuated from the actual attacks to satisfy due process requirements. Similarly, the court rejected the plaintiff's argument that potential foreseeability of the terrorist attacks was a sufficient basis for personal jurisdiction. The court held that U.S. courts lack jurisdiction over the claims against the Saudi defendants. The legal bases for this holding were lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA and lack of personal jurisdiction. Because a foreign state's "agency or instrumentality" were not part of the motion to vacate, plaintiffs did not have an opportunity to pursue their lawsuit against them on remand. Claims against them in their official capacity would likely be deemed to be claimsagainst the state or its instrumentality in any event. The Supreme Court has described the tort exception as "cover[ing] only torts occurring within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States" The Second Circuit applies the so-called "entire tort" rule to determine whether the conduct of a foreign government or its instrumentality is subject to the FSIA tort exception. It is insufficient to overcome immunity to allege that an injury or damage occurred within the U.S.; it must also be demonstrated that the defendant's tortious conduct occurred in the United states. The constitutional standard requires "intentional" conduct "expressly aimed" at residents in the forum. the "entire tort" rule would apply, in which case the fact that the relevant Saudi government activity took place outside the United States would make the tort exception inapplicable. For claims made against a Saudi banker and against several Saudi princes for actions taken in their personal capacities, subject matter jurisdiction was not precluded by the FSIA. However, the appeals court upheld the district court's determination that it lacked personal jurisdiction over the Saudi defendants sued in theirpersonal capacities. Specifically, the court concurred with the districtCourt's finding that the princes sued in his personal capacities lacked sufficient contacts. exception by reason of their non-commercial nature, regardless of the contributions' alleged money laundering purpose. This portion of the decision remains undisturbed. Finally, the court of appeals rejected the tort exception as inapplicable to claims against the Saudi defendants. It emphasized that if the exception were expanded to include all conduct conceivably, it would not apply to the Saudi case. The court was concerned about the effect that an expanded tort exception would have on the other FSIA exceptions. calculated to result in injury or death to a particular individual or individuals, made for whatever reason, would be one most assuredly involving policy judgment and decision and thus exempt as a discretionary act. As it has been recognized, there is no discretion to commit, or to have one's officers or agents commit, an illegal act. The Ninth Circuit has held that the discretionary act exclusion does not apply in the case of a foreign official who, while acting in his home country, orders a killing. in the United States that would be a violation of the domestic law of that country. Courts may tend to view direct involvement on the part of a foreign official overseas in tortious activity that takes place on U.S. territory as included in the same tort. indirect contribution by means of lawful conduct could be viewed as part of the "entire tort" rule. Both of these cases applied the tort exception to injuries in the US orchestrated from abroad, suggesting that the rule is not in use in these appellate circuits. out of an act of extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, terrorism, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act. It would also eliminate the "entire tort" rule by providing that the non-commercial tort exception covers physical injuries, deaths, and property damage or loss occurring in the United States "regardless of where the underlying tortious act or omission occurs" The discretionary function exclusion would remain, but the exception would not apply to the executive branch. Some courts have found the discretionary act exclusion inapplicable to tortious acts in the United States that amounted to illegal conduct. A district court in the D.C. Circuit found in Letelier v. Republic of Chile that an assassination occurring on U.S. soil under the direction of a foreign government was not a discretionary act within the meaning of the FSIA tort exception. While it seems apparent that a decision would overcome SHC's immunity, it is not clear that this would happen. Several bills have been introduced in Congress that would broaden the FSIA tort exception explicitly to cover terrorist acts that occur within the United States. The bills would have amended the tort exception to theFSIA expressly to include "any statutory or common law tort claim arising out of an act of extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, terrorism, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act" S. 2930 was reported favorably out of the Senate Judiciary Committee with some amendments to the findings and provisions addressing aiding and abetting liability. H.R. 3815 would amend the FSIA tort exception in 28 U.S.C. §1605(a)(5) by limiting the type of injury to "physical injury" rather than "personal injury" It would specifically exclude "any claim for emotional distress or derivative injury suffered as a result of an event or injury to another person that occurs outside of the United States" The amendment was introduced late in 2015 and referred to the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitution and Civil Justice. Under the bill, a plaintiff could seek money damages from a foreign state for physical injury to person or property or death caused by an act of international terrorism. The bill would also clarify that a tortious act or omission would not give the plaintiff money damages in other cases. With respect to the FSIA non-commercial tort exception, the bill would clarify that the exception would not apply to foreign states acting within the scope of his or her employment, regardless of where the tortious conduct took place. state a claim on which relief could be granted. Plaintiffs brought claims against these defendants under a common-law tort theory as well as the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA), the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), and the Torture Victims' Protection Act (TVPA) The ATA provides that U.S. nationals injured in their person, property, or business "by reason of an act of international terrorism" can recover treble damages, plus costs, but does not provide a specific amount. In Terrorist Attacks III , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit adopted narrow interpretations of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under the FSIA. Plaintiffs' efforts to hold non-government financial institutions liable for providing material to terrorist organizations have also seemingly been stymied by the courts' interpretations of ATA as the defendants breached any duty of care owed to the plaintiffs or that their actions proximately caused the plaintiffs' injuries. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. not describe who can be held liable. The plaintiffs in this case alleged that the defendants were liable for knowingly providing financial support and services to charities that supported Al Qaeda. Citing its recent holding in Rothstein v. UBS AG, the appellate court held that the ATA does not encompass liability on an aiding-and-abetting theory. The Supreme Court's interpretation of the phrase "by reason of," requires a showing of proximate cause. The Alien Tort Statute provides federal jurisdiction. characterized as tortious, the tort exception would "vitiate" the terrorist state exception's limitation to designated terrorist states. In a separate case, a later panel of the appellate court disagreed with this aspect of the decision, however, effectively overturning it for the Second Circuit. It is possible that other courts could read the terrorism exception as foreclosing suits against states not designated as sponsors of terrorism. The bills would have expanded liability for foreign government officials, as well as foreign governments. The Supreme Court in 2004 held that the statute does not provide a cause of action for such lawsuits. It permitted courts to give effect to the statute for civil actions arising from the violation of a very narrow class of international norms "defined with a specificity comparable to the features of the 18 th century paradigms" The Second Circuit concluded that the ATS's drafting in 1789 was understood to govern at the time of the case's drafting. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in the case. The court also rejected the plaintiffs' reliance on the Torture Victim Protection Act for a cause of action. The court rejected complaints based on common law tort theories, holding that they did not demonstrate that they do not apply to terrorism. We thus conclude ... that terrorism—unlike piracy, war crimes, and crimes against humanity—does not provide a basis for universal jurisdiction [under customary international law]," the court said. of the cliché that "one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter"