The General Mining Law of 1872 (17 Stat. 91) can be traced to 16 th Century English and Spanish property and mineral rights laws and customs. One of the earliest statutes was the "Royal Code of 1783" This Spanish law became the basis for acquiring mineral rights in Spanish colonies in the U.S. The law encompasses many other issues, such as whether public domain lands should be patented, which are not addressed in this report. It was passed in 1872 to protect the rights to lands including those containing minerals. a claim holder could obtain title—called a patent—to the land and mineral rights upon demonstrating the discovery of economically recoverable minerals. The claim holder may also claim and patent nonmineral, noncontiguous lands to mill and process the ores. As noted, the General Mining Law was enacted to promote westward migration and the economic development of the West. The land and mining rushes that followed further accelerated the great Westward settlement and expansion. Originally, the Mining Law applied only to minerals. The Lode Law of 1866 provided free and open access to federal lands with lode deposits for prospecting, claiming, and patenting. The Placer Act of 1870 applied the same provisions to placer deposits. The General Mining Law was approved by President Ulysses S. Grant on May 10, 1872. It was the consolidation of amended versions of both the 1866 Lode law and the 1870 Placer act. Under the law, gold mining was legal in the United States. Land charters issued by England to the original thirteen colonies provided generally that 1/5 th of the minerals on chartered lands were reserved for the crown. Several ordinances were enacted but these did not address the question of mineral royalties specifically. The "California gold rush" of 1849 and the "Golden Age of Mining" of the late 1800s led to a change in the rules on mineral royalties in the U.S. The first royalties were paid in 1841, and the second in 1852. silver strike in Nevada of 1860 caused a significant westward population migration for the purposes of prospecting and claiming public domain lands. During this pre-Mining Law period, the issue of land ownership and easy and free access to federal lands was very controversial and fiercely debated. The Congress had approved several temporary leasing or land sales acts for gold, silver, lead, and iron. But prospectors disregarded them, trespassed onto federal lands, laid their claims anyway, and paid no royalty to the federal government. mine shafts) generally ranked fairly low, relative to assets used in other industries. mining companies pay a variety of claims fees (location fees, Bureau of Land Management processing fees, annual maintenance fees) These are charges for specific types of administrative services provided by the BLM. The claims location fee is presently $30 per claim, which is about 20 acres. The annual maintenance (or holding) fee, necessary to hold a claim on public land, is currently $125 per claim. This fee applies to claim holders with 11 acres or more. The location fee and the annual maintenance fee are adjusted for inflation. The BLM also assesses a processing fee of $15. These fees help the BLM cover its costs of administering the mining law and regulations. They cover costs for such actions as processing and recording applications, certain exploration permits, name changes, and corporate mergers. On November 1, 2007, the United States House of Representatives approved a substitute version of H.R. 2262 (with amendments), the Hardrock Mining and Reclamation Act. lands; create an abandoned mine reclamation program similar to the one currently in place for coal sites; make the income from hardrock mining fees and royalties available, subject to appropriation, to support reclamation programs and to provide assistance to certain state, local, and tribal governments. 50% of the cleanup funding would be directed to the state in which the royalties were generated; direct the Secretary of the Interior to prioritize reclamation projects that protect public health and safety, particularly from water pollution, and for projects that restore wildlife habitat. the Committee bill, watershed areas would be designated as eligible reclamation projects and among the top priorities for receiving cleanup funds. establish environmental standards specific to the hardrock mining industry. establish a new definition of "undue degradation" of public lands and resources and give the Secretary of the Interior broader authority to block mining operations that would cause such harm. allow Native American tribes to petition the federal government to withdraw federal lands with cultural and religious values. The substitute version of H.R. 2262 would be less prescriptive and more performance-oriented than the original bill. from mining activities (similar language has been in place for states and localities) Set guidelines for administrative and judicial review of actions authorizing mining on public lands. Allow citizen lawsuits challenging federal decisions. Set guidelines to allow citizen lawsuits against federal decisions on mining activities. Allow for citizen lawsuits to challenge federal decisions about mining activities on public land. Allow state and local governments to sue the federal government to stop mining on their land. For more information on the bill, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/mineral-mining/index.html. the current and past royalty debates and is the base proposed in H.R. 2262. The main reason for suggesting this royalty base is that not only is gross income under the tax depletion rules consistent with the economic concept of an ad-valorem royalty, but the legal and regulatory apparatus has been in place since 1932, the year that percentage depletion first became available to the hardrock mining industry. This would tend to reduce the costs of industry compliance and government administration of the royalty system. Most of the revenues estimated under H.R. 2262 would come from existing claims. The 8% royalty on new claims is unlikely to generate significant revenues during the forecast period (2008-2017) It typically takes at least 10 years for a hardrock mine to begin production. No royalties would be paid in 2008 due to a provision that would defer royalties during the first 12 months after enacting the bill. The bill would also reauthorize and raise both the claim's location fee and the annual maintenance or payment of a royalty to the federal government for the services from the mineral land would increase federal revenues. The Congressional Budget Office has estimated the budgetary effects, revenue and spending, of H.R. 2262. The estimates are replicated in Table 3 , which shows both revenue effects of the 8% and 4% royalty and from the proposed higher fees. As noted, the bill would establish, beginning after its enactment, a 4% royalties on existing claims, and an 8% royalty on new claims. bills were introduced in the 103 rd Congress to impose a royalty. H.R. 322 went to conference in 1994 but was not approved reportedly because of opposition from Western lawmakers. In 1995, there was an unsuccessful attempt to incorporate a royalty as part of the FY1996 budget. S. 775 passed the Senate in May 1993 and was incorporated into H. R. 322 which was approved by the House in November 1993. In its 1993 session of Congress, the House of Representatives passed a bill that would have imposed a royalty on the U.S. Virgin Islands. a 4% royalty. On October 2, 2007, the Subcommittee on Energy and Minerals of the House Natural Resources Committee held a hearing on this bill. A substitute bill was marked up and approved by the full committee on October 23. The House approved this committee bill, with minor amendments, on November 1 by a vote of 244 to 166. The comparable bill in the Senate is S. 2750 , which also proposes an 8% royalty, and also also proposes a 4% royalties. The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 introduced a leasing system for coal, oil, and gas, and certain other minerals. But over time all but the hardrock or "locatable" minerals were removed from the law's purview. Where there is competition, the minerals are alienated through a bonus bidding process. In 1955, the Mineral Materials Act of 1947 instituted a leasingsystem for the non-hardrock and non-locatable minerals. The act also provided for an annual rental per acre and a fixed royalty of so many cents per ton. non-energy minerals—the common and less valuable minerals such as sand and gravel. For coal, this system of leasing continued until the early 1970s, when the Arab oil embargo and shortages of petroleum reserves focused attention on the vast coal deposits in the western states. In 1976 the Federal Coal Leasing Amendments Act was enacted, which among other changes, replaced the fixed royalty with an ad-valorem royalty of 12.5% for surface mines and 8% for underground mines. This kind of royalty payment system is now also used by the federal government in leasing oil and gas. For geothermal resources, the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (as amended) instituted a 10%-15% royalty on federal leases based on the value of the steam or any other form of heat or energy produced and sold. Under amendments made by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-58 ), if the geothermal energy is not sold but is instead used to create a marketable product, the costs are deductible. These rules for oil, gas, and coal clarify that value is determined as close to the mine as possible. Law has been made almost from the time it was signed by President Grant. Many Presidents have endeavored to reform the law. The law makes no provision for the payment of a royalty on the production of the hardrock minerals from federal lands. The royalty-free treatment is unlike mining arrangements (leases) on private and state lands, mining of the leasable energy minerals (coal, oil, and gas) on federal lands, and even unlike this law, as amended, public lands with hard rock minerals. Since 1872, hardrock mining on federal lands has been governed by the General Mining Law. The law allows virtually free access to open public domain lands for mineral prospecting, staking claims, exploration and development, and extraction without payment of a royalty. Until 1994, claimants on hardrock mineral lands could take title to both the mineral rights and the land, after paying to the U.S. Department of Interior (DOI) the required fee or either $2.50 or $5.00 per acre. hardrock minerals on acquired (as contrasted with public) federal lands, all of which provide for a royalty payment to the landowner. In recent years, the Congress has repeatedly considered, but not passed, reform of the Mining Law, including, in part, to require the payment of royalties. In 1990, committees held several hearings on proposed Mining Law reform, e.g., on S. 1126 (101 st Congress) which among other things would have imposed an 8% ad-valorem royalty. In 1993, President Clinton's comprehensive economic proposal, part of the State of the Union Address, included claims fees and a 12.5%. The major reform bill in the House is H.R. 2262. It would impose an 8% ad-valorem royalty based on the value of the minerals. The proceeds would be used for the cleanup of abandoned sites. The 8% royalty would apply to new production, and existing mining operations would pay the same. The bill has not been passed by the Senate. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill this week, but it's not certain if it will be passed. of 2007. This bill would: establish a new regulatory framework for administering permits to develop hardrock minerals. permanently end the sale or "patenting" of public lands for mining, which has been under moratorium since the early 1990s. Use 75% of the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites; impose an 8% gross income royalty future hardrock mining operations, and an 4% royalty rate on current mining operations; require miners to seek additional permits to explore for and develop mineral resources and meet certain standards related to reclamation of mined. For oil, gas, and coal, federal royalties are calculated on the gross proceeds (or gross sales revenues) from the contract sale. As a factor payment, this type of royalty makes little economic sense, being equivalent to charging fixed interest payments on capital regardless of the value of the capital loaned. Being assessed on only one variable, rather than price and output, does, however, avoid the usual complexities associated with determining value (price), costs, or even profits. For oil and gas this generally occurs close to the end of the contract. Royalties on coal extracted from federal lands, at the 8% or 12% royalty rate, are also assessed on the "gross proceeds" from the sale of the coal. The price is determined at the point of sale, which for coal is typically at or near the mine-mouth when the coal is weighed and loaded. Transportation and washing costs, and other costs not deemed to be mining or production.deducted to determine gross proceeds for royalty purposes. The royalty rate is 8% to 12%. wellhead, and so the contract price is used to determine gross proceeds. In situations where oil is not sold in an arm's-length transaction, or is sold without a contract, royalties are based on various types of benchmarks such as comparable sales or even local spot-market oil prices, adjusted for any quality differences and transportation costs. In cases where the oil or gas is transported before it is sold, then transportation charges are generally used to calculate the royalty figure. The price at which oil and gas is sold to a pipeline company is the price on which the royalty is based. or the return, to land as both a marketable capital asset and input to production. It is a payment made by the renter of the land to the landowner (whether private or public) in a voluntary exchange for the flow of services provided by that land over time. As a factor payment, the royalty is analogous to the wage rate, or the interest rate, for the services of capital. The exception to this rule has been the case of locatable minerals on public (or federal) lands in the United States. bonus bids and annual rentals depends primarily upon how production risk is shared between landowner and mineral producer. The royalty becomes a way of allowing for mineral land rents to be paid, for the landowner to earn a return on the land. As a land rental, then, an ad-valorem royalty protects the mineral producer against excessive royalty payments (overestimation of rents) and the government against underestimation of economic rents. A royalty is not a tax, which is a compulsory levy on individuals. rentals, or a royalty, or in various combinations of these depending on the type of mineral, and whether there is a lease or not. For example, under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953, as amended, the federal government leases lands for oil and gas development in return for a bonus bid, annual rents, and royalties. Lease sales are conducted through a competitive bidding process, and leases are awarded to the highest bidder, who makes an up-front cash payment.  mineral rents are an attempt to capture the returns to the land above and beyond the returns paid to labor (wages), capital (interest), entrepreneurship (profits), and other factors. Annual rents range from $5 to $9.50 per acre, with lease sizes ranging form 2,500 to nearly 6,000 acres, and royalty rates are either 12.5% or 16.67%. With perfect knowledge and no risks, the rents resulting from mineral lands could be captured by the landowner as up-front payments. A factor payment in a competitive market for a royalty to be based on other than market value minus the costs of obtaining it. For example, if instead of payments in kind (deer or crops or precious metals) the landowner were to be paid in money, one would expect him to receive the monetary equivalent of the value of the output. Rational landowners would not settle for less than what the deer, crop, or metal is worth because they could always have the deer and crops taken to market and sold for at least that amount. The ad-valorem royalty appears to be economically the most efficient type of royalty. But the question becomes to what base specifically should the royalty rate apply? The aggregate value of a commodity being the product of a price (value/unit) and a total output, the questions are what is the appropriate royalty rate for this commodity? The answer is that it should be based on the aggregate value, rather than the price/unit, of the commodity as a whole. If the renter wanted less rent, then presumably that would have been negotiated as a smaller share. and businesses to finance the cost of government for the common welfare and not a return to a factor of production in exchange for specific services provided. This is an important point, one that might be used, for example, to argue against proposals to impose a royalty based on net profits. The distinction between a tax and the rental payment also distinguishes between the federal government as a sovereign entity with the power to tax, and as a landowner or proprietor with the right to pay a rental payment. Forgoing royalty and other payments through the location system in effect means that the services of a factor of production are provided free of charge. In economic terms, this is comparable to the free provision of labor or capital equipment. Economic theory suggests that a consequence of providing factor services for free that would otherwise have economic value would be to distort the value of the land.earn a return on that land for the public. The services of federal land are provided for free to the producer by virtue of the fact that no royalty is ever collected from its use. allocation of resources. This theory holds that if a factor is provided to a firm without charge, too much of that factor would be hired and the output of the firm would exceed the socially desirable amount. From another perspective, the federal government is the steward of the public lands which it holds as trustee of American public. The development of public resources should only occur at a fair market value return to the nation, it is argued. An implication of the location system on federal lands is that all. economic surplus that may be earned by the industry in the long run is retained by industry rather than allocated to society at large. These profits are excess or surplus returns to a resource owner above the level required to produce or supply the resource, i.e., above the normal rate of return. In theory, they accrue naturally to the owner of any natural resource but are not necessary to secure the continued supply of the resource. Only a normal long-run return is necessary to ensure such a supply. This is an important rationale for the payment of bonus bids. rate. Much land is also privately owned or owned by state or local governments or Indian tribes, which suggests that the market-determined royalty rates might be a reliable indicator of competitive rates. As to the hardrock mineral industry structure, available data suggest that the industry, both in the United States and throughout the world, is somewhat concentrated. Hardrock mining is a highly capital intensive business and large enterprises can operate more efficiently. In the U.S., many of the mining firms are large multinational mining conglomerates. Five of the top ten claim holders (who hold more than $1 billion) are multinationals. 16% of all claims on western public lands are foreign corporations. The hardrock mining industry is dominated by about 40 companies. The top four account for 35% of total market capitalization. This would suggest that the market-determined royalty rate might actually be too low. On balance, it might be the case that the above two opposing forces tend to offset each other and the government would want to use the more appropriate competitive rate. This is more consistent with economic efficiency, and social welfare, than a zero rate. cannot be shifted. This would further add somewhat to financial pressures for the marginally profitable mining company. On the other hand, the hardrock mining industry has been booming over the last four years. One indicator of this is the growth in metals and minerals prices, which have increased overall and have contributed to industry profitability. According to the Department of Commerce, relative to its size in the economy, the mining industry group generally was the largest contributor to growth in the Gross Domestic Product price index in 2007. 2006, accounting for 6.6% of price growth, more than three times its share of current-dollar GDP. PricewaterhouseCoopers predicted that 2007 should bring with it both record financial results and further consolidation within the industry. rates of return on capital for the U.S. mining industry have also been higher as compared with many other industries. These negative industry and regional effects would be a natural and unavoidable part of the transition from a policy of resource subsidization to a Policy of resource neutrality. Subsidies for hardrock mining clearly produce economic benefits to the industry receiving the subsidy and to the communities dependent upon that industry. But these benefits are not external benefits that the markets are not capable of taking into account. When resources are scarce, a condition that affects all economic systems and all countries alike, the use of resources in one sector means the loss of the resource in another sector. The loss of economic efficiency implies that the private benefits are smaller than the private costs to the hard rock mining industry. There is another side to the externality concept: external costs. It appears that some external effects associated with hardrock mineral production are net "external costs" rather than net external benefits. Without land reclamation, there would presumably be damage to the environment, which is an external cost to society. This is a cost that the typical profit-maximizing hard rock mineral producer does not usually account for in its decision-making. The external costs from hardrock Mineral production are the degradation of the environment. Arguments are made that the economic stimulus to the industry resulting from royalty-free treatment produces benefits. It is argued that imposition of a federal royalty on hardrock mining would damage most of the American hardrock industry. Some argue that there is a national security aspect to subsidizing certain hardrock minerals, although there is no presumption that royalty- free treatment is the appropriate way to address these concerns. It was also pointed out that damage to theindustry would harm those western communities that are economically dependent upon the industry. imported oil, and often used to justify subsidies for the domestic oil industry. Some argue that the threat of a domestic supply disruption might be better met with a stockpiling of that mineral. It seems clear also that not all hardrock minerals are of U.S. national security concern. In any event, if a financial subsidy for certain strategic hard rock minerals industries was appropriate, a tax subsidy would probably be more efficient than total forgiveness of royalty payments. (The current tax subsidies for hardrock mineral industry are discussed in the section "Federal Tax Treatment of the Hardrock Mining Industry," below). policy of free access (i.e., royalty forgiveness) involves a trade-off: Policymakers choose the benefits to the hardrock mineral industry above the benefits that would accrue to another domestic economic sector. A policy of royalty (or other rental) payments would be more neutral; it would let the markets be the arbiter of the relative size of the various economic sectors. Even if the health and competitiveness of the domestic hardrock Mineral industry is of sufficient concern to warrant federal subsidies, there may be more economically efficient ways of providing these subsidies. to other sectors. This suggests that removal of the subsidies would produce a net welfare gain to citizens of the United States. As to the national security argument, there are minerals that are often referred to as "strategic minerals"—cobalt, columbium, chromium, manganese, platinum, and others. Excessive dependence upon foreign producers of these and other economically vital minerals might pose an economic disruption or national security threat to the U.S. These arguments are similar to those made about the U.-S. dependence upon other countries. The royalty rates currently in effect on various types of minerals, both leasable and locatable, from federal lands are shown. Under an ad-valorem royalty, the royalty payments are based on the value of the mineral. In most types of private royalty arrangements in the early 1990s, the most common type of royalty was the ad-Valorem royalty at rates ranging from 2-8%, with an average rate of 5%. Even for hardrock minerals on acquired lands (as opposed to public domain lands, which are governed by the 1872 Mining Law), the Congress has established a 5% royalty rate. If there is to be an ad-valorem royalty based on price or value, at what stage in the mineral producing process should value (or price) be measured? Should it be based on gross income (value of the mineral at the mine) or net smelter return (the value at the smalter less certain deductions)? When does a mining company produce a saleable or marketable product whose mineral, etc. is the ad-Valorem royalty? If there is a royalty, payments are made in installments over the life of the mine, rather than partially up front. on new production and a 4% royalty on production from existing leases. This report analyzes the economic issues underlying proposals to impose a royalty on hardrock (locatable) minerals on public domain lands. It also discusses the federal tax treatment of the hardrock mineral industry. In particular, the report addresses the following questions: What exactly is a royalty, and how does a royalty differ from other rental payments or, for that matter, taxes? Were a royalty imposed, what would be the best way to structure such a royalty? be too low. These are complex issues which are difficult to analyze. Much of the land from which hardrock minerals are produced is owned by the federal government. It might be in a position to take advantage of its power to obtain royalty payments above the competitively determined rates. Such payments, combined with the bonus bids, would appropriate for society the economic rents—the abnormal or excess profits (i.e., windfalls)—from the production of scarce natural resources. In reality, of course, the government policy is just the reverse: It charges a royalty rate of zero, which is definitely below the market-determined rates. value can be measured? What deductions, if any, should be allowed from that price? What should the royalty rate be? And how does Congress decide what a fair royalty rate is? How does one balance the various considerations, such as efficiency and administrative considerations in deciding whether to impose a royalty? What would be the economic effects of introducing a system of royalty payments and other rental payments where one did not exist? Would a royalty harm the domestic and international competitiveness of the U.S. hardrock mining industry? Finally, what taxes and fees does the hardrock mineral industry pay? The location system for the hardrock minerals industry has remained essentially unchanged since 1872. Part of the problem is confusion over just what a royalty is and what it is not. Economics is very clear on this: A royalty is a factor payment, part of the rent paid, and other rental payments. The theory suggests that any pure economic surplus return from a natural resource should accrue to society. The type of royalty that most closely is intended to capture the rents from mineral lands whose future productivity cannot be precisely determined due to risk. Hardrock mineral production would be lower as marginal mines closed. This would also adversely affect those parts of the U.S. that rely on these industries. The payment of royalties combined with higher fees could also alter the competitive balance among mineral producers both domestically and internationally. The hardrock mineral industry generally would be less competitive in relation to other domestic mineral producers and with international mineral producers. Hardrock mineral prices would probably not increase very much because for most minerals, prices are determined in the international market. The policy of introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals would be expected to have positive economic effects in other sectors. Less land would be mined and fewer U.S. hardrock minerals would being produced. But more of other, higher-valued commodities would be produced. This would likely contribute to a more economically efficient use of the nation's resources, which would tend to promote the welfare of society. The current discussion suggests, however, the current royalty system is not a good idea. If there are sufficient positive economic and social effects from the use of public lands for mining, there might be an economic rationale for charging the mineral producer a lower than market rate. Such externality arguments were apparently a principal rationale for the location system involving no royalties and other rent payments established in 1872. But these arguments may not be valid in today's economy. The hardrock minerals industry is not an infant industry, and there is no longer a need for settling in the American West. mineral rights, for example. However, mineral production, like all business, is risky. It is difficult to know in advance of production precisely the quantity and quality of the mineral. There are long lead times between exploration, discovery, and actual production. These and other uncertainties make it risky for both the hardrock mineral producer and landowner to predict up front what rents would be earned by mineral lands. In general, the precise division between royalties or royalties or mineral rights is not known. windfall profits) the more net smelter returns diverge from gross income. Reducing royalty payments to the federal government might be a major reason that it is supported by much of the hardrock mining industry and its supporters. This method could create incentives for mining companies to claim significant deductions from their income such that there would rarely be a profit against which to levy the royalty. Depending upon the royalty rate this could lead not only to smaller royalty payments than either a gross income or net smalter return royalty, but perhaps to no royalty at all. after-tax profit type of royalty, for example the 1993 bill S. 775 , would have measured net profits at the mine mouth. Further, a net profit royalty at the minemouth creates complications in allocating costs between extraction and other mining processing. Another effect of a net-profit type of royalties on hardrock minerals would be to expose the federal government to the risks of an investor—much like investors in stock are as owners subject to risks—rather than the much less risky status of landowner. arrangement would not serve to impose the market-determined factor costs (royalties) on the mining operations. If net profit were to mean net before-tax profits, then the royalty would essentially operate like an income tax. This would not be consistent with mainstream economic theory that a royalty is not a tax, but a factor payment. Yet another royalty base, one which is used less frequently, is the royalty based on a constant rate per unit, say $5/ton, of mineral output (i.e., the ore concentrate) royalty rate should apply to all hardrock minerals or whether the rate should vary by type of mineral in some logical way. More valuable minerals pay greater absolute royalties per unit. Introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals could have an adverse economic and financial effect on the producers of these minerals, particularly on marginal producers. Both average and marginal costs would increase, and profits and employment in the hardrock mineral industry would decrease. For example, lead and zinc, which qualify for a 22% depletion rate, would have a higher royalty burden than gold or silver. mineral's price. Column (6) of Table 2 shows one hypothetical schedule of such rates beginning at 8% for platinum, the most valuable metal, and declining in steps of 1 percentage point to 1% for aluminum. With such a schedule the absolute amount of royalty payments declines even more rapidly as the value of a mineral declines. Another possibility would be to vary the royalty rates in direct proportion to the percentage depletion rates applicable to gross income from mining as shown in Table 3. Such a royalty rate structure would produce a different pattern of absolute royalty payments than the current schedule. on federal lands, the statutory royalty rates range from 5%-16.67%. For oil and gas, the royalty rate is either a 1/8 (12.5%) or 1/6 ( 16.67%) share of the value of the mineral. On some leases, the rate could be higher than 1-6. For coal, the royalties are either 12% (surface mines) or 8% (underground mines) The royalty could be paid "in-kind" rather than of the price. A constant royalty rate tends to minimize both economic distortions and administrative costs. Private royalty agreements, which are negotiated on a case-by-case basis, have widely varying royalty rates. These can range from 1-10%, and differ by mineral types. Under one possible structure that has been suggested, the royalty rate itself would be a function of—it would vary positively with—the amount of such costs. The figures do not represent either net smelter returns or gross income from mining, both of which would be less by the amount ofSuch costs. mitigate against the use of the market-determined royalty rate. If private landowners exercise monopoly power or some other type of market power, then it would be possible to extract from the mining companies higher than competitive royalty rates. In the second case, if the mining industry is concentrated and exercises market power—control over prices, for example—it might lead to underpayment of royalties. The market- determined royalty rates might actually be higher than they appear to be, the authors say. generate electricity—in most cases it is. The royalty is between 1% and 2.5% and it is based on the gross proceeds from the sale of electricity rather than the value or volume of geothermal energy used in the generation of electricity. In some cases, a deduction against gross proceeds for transmission and wheeling costs is allowed. With regard to a specific royalty rate, economic theory is less clear beyond the implication that a royalty rate determined in the competitive marketplace is generally the most economically efficient rate. the normal business decisionmaking process. Consequently, since the accountable business costs are lower than the real costs (including external costs) prices are lower. Under this reasoning, if the presence of external benefits is dismissed and the Presence of external costs is considered significant, the appropriate federal policy would be a tax. This is the economic rationale for the abandoned mineland reclamation fee under SMCRA, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. Two other conditions might be required for the fee to be reinstated. This provision allows mining companies to deduct the costs of mine closing and land reclamation in advance of the actual closing and reclamations, i.e., before the occurrence of the activity giving rise to the expenses. This provision is contrary to the general tax rule. Under the cash method of accounting, expenses can only be deducted when the payment is actually made. under the accrual method ofAccounting, expenses to be incurred in the future cannot be deducted currently. Under this provision, the company can deduct the cost of the reclamation before the actual reclamation takes place. companies incur geological and geophysical (or surveying, and reconnaissance investigation) costs. These include the costs of staking the claim, removal of property line obstructions, limited removal of overburden, and limited sluicing. The costs of exploratory drilling to ascertain the extent of commercially marketable ores are treated by the tax law as a mineral exploration cost. Expenditures made after the existence of ores or minerals has been disclosed are considered mine development expenditures. These types of costs are all deductible rather than capitalized. also qualify for expensing treatment. These are costs associated with bringing the mine to production. Activities associated with development are building roads, clearing the land, and other activities to prepare a site for the production stage. Expensing applies only to domestic mines; exploration and development cost of foreign properties must be either depleted or amortized over a 10-year period using straight-line method. The costs of constructing or sinking a mine shaft, or the costs of driving tunnels and galleries, are development costs, which may be expensed. amortization. Mining companies may only expense 70% of the exploration and development; the remaining 30% must be amortized over five years. Recapture is accomplished by either including the amount expensed as ordinary income or by subtracting it from the percentage depletion allowance. This makes it especially important for mining companies to determine when exploration ends and development begins, as well as when production commences and when the mine is sold. It is also important to know when exploration begins and development ends, so that the company can determine when to recapture costs. Mining companies are allowed a depletion deduction, at varying percentages, based on the gross income from mining. Because value is added as mining production moves from the extraction or quarrying state to the smeltering stage, a net price (such as net smelter return) further downstream would generally be greater than a gross price further upstream. If the mining.is further complicated when the firm or industry is vertically integrated, there may not actually be a sale throughout the mining-production-processing-marketing (sale) stage. physical and other requirements are such that the ore or mineral must be transported a greater distance to such plants or mills [IRC §613(c)(2)." Also under subparagraph (5) of IRC§613(C) the following treatment processes are not considered to be mining processes and are thus NOT included in gross income. "Electrolytic deposition, roasting, calcining, thermal or electric smelting, refining, polishing, fine pulverization, blending with other materials, treatment effecting a chemical change, thermal action, and molding or shaping" The term "gross income" as used for purposes of percentage depletion is somewhat confusing. While the term is intended to measure only sales revenue from mining operations, income in the context of a business generally refers to profits and not sales. The term may be misleading because it may suggest a larger percentage depletion deduction, and therefore a larger royalty payment than a "net" royalty. But, in fact, whether a gross royalty base is smaller or bigger than a net royalty base depends on the point in the production stage the price is. firm is an integrated producer, i.e., it has smelting/refining operations, and also applies non-mining processes to the ore concentrate before the mineral is sold. There may be no sale of either the raw ore, or ore concentrate, and hence no price for the mineral firm's output until the final metal (gold, for example) is sold in the commodities markets. In these cases, percentage depletion is based not on actual gross income but what is called "constructive" gross income. This is income derived from or approximated by using representative market prices elsewhere in that particular market. The present depreciation treatment is known as the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System. Under this system, assets are depreciated for regular tax purposes over a specified recovery period. The applicable recovery periods are prescribed for each property class. Mining equipment, assets used in the mining, quarrying, milling, and other industries are included in this class of property. The annual depreciation deductions are determined by applying this formula to the assigned recovery period, as well as the 200% declining balance method or formula. Hardrock mineral producers are highly capital intensive and highly capital-intensive. This system also allows producers to use a depreciation method that maximizes the value of the deduction over time. This is more advantageous than the theoretical treatment, which would call for a depreciation schedule based on the actual economic depreciation. It also reduces the effective marginal tax rate on the income generated by the equipment. It is a more advantageous system than a theoretical treatment that would have a longer recovery period and a less accelerated formula, which increases the tax value. amounts that can be recovered through percentage depletion generally exceed the total investment cost of the property. This is true even with the net-income limitation, which limits the deduction to 50% of the taxable income from the mine. Percentage depletion rates range from 5% for stone and clay to 22% for uranium and beryllium. Most of the hardrock minerals have a depletion rate of 22%, and several have either a 15% or 14% rate. The allowance is available to virtually all mineral producers except integrated oil and gas producers. The percentage depletion allowance is a tax deduction against the federal income tax available to a mining firm. It is intended to give the mineral producer a deduction for the depletion of the investment in the mine. Any depletion deduction in excess of cost depletion is considered by economists to be a tax subsidy or incentive because the present value of the total amount deducted typically exceeds the initial investment. The percentage depletion deduction for a mine is calculated as a percentage of "gross income" (annual sales revenue) irrespective of the actual investment. the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 ( P.L. 97-248 ). In effect this limitation reduces the 22% depletion rate to an effective depletion rate of between 17.6% and 22%, depending upon the amount of cost depletion. As noted above, the imposition of a royalty, where none existed before, would increase a mining firm's operating costs and reduce profitability. Further, due to the deductibility of the royalty (as an operating cost of doing business) against the federal income tax, the deduction reduces tax liability. marginal tax rate; the same royalty however is effectively a 6.44% royalty with a gross income offset if the percentage depletion allowance is 22%. Equations (2) and (3) are the same as equation (1) In equation (3), the effective royalty is shown as a gross royalty, the r term, and the offset term - rt. For example, a 4% royalty without the gross Income offset is effectively 3% royalty at a 25% marginal tax rate. such as hardrock mining companies, the current deduction of 6% is equivalent to a marginal corporate income tax rate of 32.9% (35% x 0.94) rather than 35%. Another untargeted or general tax provision that is important to the hardrock mineral companies is accelerated depreciation. In addition, at the federal level there are three special, or targeted, tax preferences available to the mining industry generally, that are also available to hard rock mining firms. It is analogous to the cost depletion allowance for investment in a mineral deposit (as discussed that the equipment used can cost tens of millions of dollars) trigger the minimum tax, and thereby reduce the value of the special tax provisions. These special tax preferences or subsidies, combined with accelerated depreciation (a significant tax benefit for highly capital intensive business such as hardrock mining) have historically resulted in relatively low effective average and marginal tax rates. Thus, firms that mine hardrock minerals on public domain lands pay no royalty, and benefit from fairly significant tax subsidies. For example, CBO recently published a study of effective tax rates on different types of assets, and those used in mining. fully phased in by 2010. For the domestic mining industry (which includes the oil and gas industry), the deduction applies to any primary product "manufactured, produced, or extracted in whole or in significant part in the United States" Note that extraction is considered to be manufacturing for purposes of this deduction. Effectively, the deduction is equivalent to a reduced marginal tax rate. For example, at the top marginal corporate tax rate of 35%, which typically applies to large corporations, this would be a 35% deduction. holding fee, from $30 to $50 per claim, and from $125 to $150 per claim respectively. Under federal budget rules fees collected by federal agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, are considered as offsetting budget receipts, or negative spending. Such receipts reduce the agencies' outlays. The U.S. hardrock minerals industry is a major source of revenue for the federal government. The revenue estimates are net of federal income tax revenues due to the deductibility of royalty payments and fees against business taxes. subject to the same income tax laws which apply to all other for-profit businesses, paying federal income, payroll, and other federal taxes. The federal corporate income tax applies a 35% rate to most corporate taxable income. Reduced tax rates, either 15%, 25%, or 34%, apply to "smaller" corporations, those earning less than $10 million of income. In addition, corporate stockholders pay individual income taxes on their corporate-source capital gains and dividends. As business entities, hardrock mining companies benefit from many different different tax rates. from these three provisions over five years is $1.8 billion, an average of $360 million/year. This is the amount by which the industry lowered its tax burden, or conversely, the loss in tax revenues to the federal government. The bulk of these preferences is claimed by corporations, only a small share is claimed for proprietorships and partnerships. There is another provision of the current IRC that attempts to limit the benefits from the special tax breaks available to the mining industry and other industries. future expenses may be deducted in advance of actual payment but not before economic activity that gives rise to the expenses. The Joint Tax Committee estimates the revenue losses from the above three special tax preferences or subsidies. The latest five-year estimates (from FY2007-2011) are as follows: $0.5 billion for expensing of mine exploration and development costs, $1.1 billion for the excess of percentage over cost depletion, and $ 0.2 billion for mine reclamation reserves deduction. items are tax breaks that are important to the mining industry. Excess of percentage depletion over cost depletion, and the excess of the exploration and development cost deduction over a hypothetical deduction. A third item of tax preference that the mining firm would have to include in its list of tax preferences is accelerated depreciation over straight line depreciation. To the extent to which mining companies use these and other items of tax preference, this could have a significant impact on their tax bills in the future. It could also have a negative impact on the mining sector as a whole. types of untargeted tax incentives, provisions that are generally available to non-mining businesses, as well as some tax provisions specifically targeted toward mining. Under IRC §199, "manufacturing" businesses are allowed a deduction, as a business expense, for a specified percentage of the qualified production activity's income. The deduction was 3% of income for 2006, is currently 6%, and is scheduled to increase to 9% when it goes into effect in 2009. The tax benefits are the §199 manufacturing deduction and accelerated depreciation. The deductions are subject to a limit of 50% of the wages paid that are allocable to the domestic production. industry—there may be several different types of mineral products with value. Does the mine produce the raw mineral ore, the ore concentrate, or the final metal or mineral sold to wholesalers? Further, even if the output of the mine can be determined, there is the problem of what is the value or price of that output. For example, copper is traded in many forms that relate to different stages of processing: at the mine, copper may be sold as ore or precipitate. are: At what point can the value of a mine's output first be determined? Further, since throughout the production stage value is added or increased, at what stage does mining value end, and non-mining value begin? Production of valuable mineral products from raw hardrock minerals (e.g., metals such as iron, copper, aluminum, gold, lead) generally involves various stages: extraction or quarrying of the raw minerals, delivery to a plant or mill in order to produce valuable products. Production stages are shown for the typical case or mineral in Figure 1. Within these production stages, from extraction to the first sale to manufacturers, there may be various points at which there is created a valuable output. At this stage, there is a demand for the mineral ore concentrate as an input into the smelting/refining process for final sale in the wholesale commodities or manufacturing markets. Consider gold, for example. Raw gold is usually delivered to the refiner where it is purchased from the miner, processed, and refined. For most hardrock minerals extraction produces a raw mineral ore, which of itself has little value and is generally not marketed. For most minerals, after the ore is mined it is sent to a mill or plant to be crushed and ground, and in some cases (lead, for example) is beneficiated to the point that it is saleable as a metal concentrate. The first marketable mineral product created as a result of mining and before any non-mining processes (e.g., manufacturing processes such as refining or smeltering) are applied. and any treatment processes necessary or incidental to the mining process, specific treatment processes and also generally the costs of transporting the ores or minerals from the point of extraction to the plant or mill in which the treatment processes are applied. More specifically, The term "mining" includes not merely the extraction of the o Res or Minerals from the ground but also the treatment process considered as mining described in paragraph (4) [IRC §613(c)(4)(D)];" In addition, "and so much of the transportation of ores. or minerals (whether or not by common carrier) from the. point of extracted to the plants or mills in which such treatment processes. are applied" from the ground to the plant or mills in which such treatment processes are applied thereto as is not in excess of 50 miles unless the Secretary [of the Treasury] finds that the physical and other requirements are such that the ore or mineral must be transported a greater distance to such plants or mills. Subparagraph (4) of IRC §613(c) defines, for the different categories of minerals, the treatment processes that when applied by the mine owner or operator are considered as mining. The costs of such processes are included in the value or price for purposes of mining. percentage depletion): "In the case of iron ore, bauxite, ball and sagger clay, rock asphalt, and ores or minerals which are customarily sold in the form of a crude mineral product" "Sorting, concentrating, sintering, and substantially equivalent processes to bring to shipping grade and form, and loading for shipment [613(c)(4)(C)];" "Lead, zinc, copper, gold, silver, uranium, or fluorspar ores, potash" in cases where there is no representative price from sales of the same ore concentrate (the mining output) in other markets, then gross income from mining is estimated by multiplying gross sales by the ratio of mining to total costs. As a hypothetical example, assume that the market price of the final cast copper on the commodities exchanges is $3.60/lb, which is $7,937/metric tonne of pure copper. Also assume that one metric ton of copper ore concentrate contains 30% pure copper and no other valuable minerals. The remaining 70% is sulfur, iron, and other impurities that have no value. of transportation and handling of such concentrates, metals (including bullion) or products from the Claims to any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser. c) related insurance on such concentrate, metals, bullion or products. Thus, continuing with the above hypothetical copper example, the net smalter return would be the price at which cast copper could be sold after the costs of smelting and refining the copper ore are subtracted. Using the same figures as before, the market price of the final cast copper is $3.60/lb. tonne (2,205 lbs) of pure copper would be valued at $7,938. One ton of copper ore concentrate contains only 30% pure copper, so that the value of one tonne of that ore concentrate is 30% of that, or $2,381. To calculate smeltering and refining costs assume that these are 10% of the price of the cast copper. Then costs would be $238/tonne of copper concentrate (equal to $0.36 x 0.30 x 2,205) "Net-smelter return" is a common term used in the mining industry to refer to the net average revenue per unit of the smelted mineral product sold by the miner. If annual sales were 100,000 metric tonnes of copper concentrate, total net smalter return revenues would be $214 million. At 8%, the royalty on this wouldbe $17 million. This is because final metal prices are high relative to smelting/refining costs. In general, the higher are metals prices relative to costs (in which case mineral producers earn extra or more) Net smelter return is the amount received by the mine or mill owner from the sale of the mineral product to the treatment plant that converts the output of the mill to marketable metal. In non-metal mines the selling price is usually 'fob mine site' because of the transportation costs involved in delivering the mineralProduct to the buyer. From the gross proceeds received there may be a profit. In Canadian law, net smelters return is defined in the same way as in UK law. "Net Smelter Returns" shall mean the actual proceeds received by the Purchaser from a smelter or other place of sale or treatment in respect of all ore removed from the Claims. The Purchaser will deduct from such proceeds the following charges levied by third parties to the extent that they are not deducted by the purchaser in computing payment: a) assay costs and umpire assay costs charged by any mint, smalter, refinery or other purchaser; b) smelting and refining charges, penalties, and the cost of transporting ore. The permitted deductions will include all charges by the smelter, such as smelting and refining charge as well as penalties for impurities in the ore. In some cases deductions may also be made for taxes except income taxes and, depending on the nature of the commodity, for marketing costs. The similarity of these definitions of net smalter return (gross price less non-mining costs) times output to the gross income base under the percentage depletion rules is readily apparent. The following two examples, from contracts or royalty deeds between a landowner (the vendor) and the mining company (the purchaser), illustrate the legal language used in defining a net smelters return. deductions for costs incurred by the owner after the property leaves the mine property and before sale. Costs of transportation, insurance, or security, penalties, sampling and assaying, refining and smelting, and marketing. No deductions are made for the operating costs of the mine-mill complex. A net smelter return will be ... the net value of minerals from the property, where Net Value is Gross Value less certain permitted expenses. Gross value will usually be defined with reference to the spot price of an average weekly or monthly spot price on specified markets.