Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) standards are commonly used standards for TPP quality. 27 states reported taking steps to modify the process for identifying low-performing TPPs. California reported modifying its process for approving TPPs to assess alignment with new K-12 standards. No states reported identifying a TPP as low- performing during the 2013-2014 academic year because of limited alignment with K- 12 standards. States also used modified licensing tests designed to assess individual teaching candidates’ preparation. Officials from all 14 TPPs highlighted the importance of providing candidates with ample opportunities to apply the new K-12 standards in real classrooms. Many states are beginning to adopt assessments to measure K- 12 students’ performance on the new standards. Officials from five TPPs said it will be important for candidates to make connections between different subject areas. Several TPPs we spoke with said that they planned to make further modifications to their teaching programs as states continue to implement the new Standards. For example, one TPP recently surveyed faculty and administrators to evaluate its efforts and identify any ongoing needs. to evaluate TPP performance) and to reflect different types of college- and career-ready K-12 standards. As part of these case studies, we reviewed state documents and interviewed officials from the state oversight agency. In total, we interviewed 14 TPPs. We ensured that this non-generalizable sample of TPPs varied in a number of ways including whether they were located within or separate from colleges and universities. We also ensured that the TPPs represented a range of sizes and urban, suburban and rural areas. TPPs with written resources, information sessions, or both. One state convened a half-day workshop that included information about the new standards. Officials then posted a recording of the session and additional resources about the standards online. Three states reported inviting TPPs to K-12 conferences that discussed the new Standards. Officials in one of those states said that this approach allowed them to foster a positive environment for TPPs. The standards are set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Education's website. communication and coordination among K-12 districts and TPPs. Most states reported that they modified their oversight activities to verify that TPPs were aligning with new K- 12 standards. 34 states reported deliberately modifying their TPP approval process to assess such alignment. Twelve other states did not report modifying their approval process for this specific reason, but did report assessing some or all TPPs against standards for TPP quality that may nonetheless provide information about alignment. For example, the Interstate Highway System provides transportation links between states and the federal government. such tests are used by 43 states. The testing companies both reported modifying those tests to align with new K-12 standards. Among the 8 states that do not use such tests, 4 reported in our survey that they modified their licensure requirements in other ways in response to thenew K- 12 standards. For example, all four of these states contract with testing companies to design customized tests and may request revisions. Pearson officials described working with one such state to modify its testing requirements to comply with the new standards.  states are now using or developing academic standards that are explicitly tied to college and career preparation. In 2010, the Council of Chief State School Officers and the National Governors Association spearheaded the effort to help states develop common college- and career-ready standards for grades K-12 in math and English. As of the beginning of the 2014-15 academic year, 44 states and the District of Columbia have adopted the Common Core State Standards. The Common Core Standards will be rolled out to all states by the end of the year. coursework or coursework requirements to ensure that teaching candidates had sufficient subject-matter knowledge to teach to the new K-12 standards. The three TPPs that did not make such changes were graduate-level programs or otherwise required teaching candidates to obtain a bachelor’s degree before attending the TPP. Officials from a few TPPs stated that most or all subject- Matter knowledge should be obtained prior to starting theTPP. The TPPs did make changes sometimes coordinated with other departments, such as math and English. For example, one TPP began offering courses that were co-taught by subject-area and TPP faculty. some academic departments were more receptive to modifying their curriculum than others, due to department priorities or other factors. For example, officials from one TPP observed that the new K-12 standards for English require the participation of teachers from multiple academic disciplines. TPP faculty members who were not in the English department were sometimes reluctant to modify their courses accordingly. Modifying coursework related to teaching techniques: Officials from all but one of the 14 TPPs we contacted described modifying courseworkrelated to teaching Techniques. For. example, one TPP said that candidates should learn teaching techniques that focus on the individual student. All 14 TPPs we interviewed made changes that ranged from large-scale reforms to more modest modifications. The changes generally fell within increasing subject-matter knowledge, modifying coursework related to teaching techniques, and using classroom training to provide real world experience. Examples of such changes, and related challenges, are listed below. Officials from 11 of 14TPPs described changing coursework.custom tests to align with new K-12 standards by adding more questions that measure teaching candidates’ ability to teach non-fiction texts. Officials from 9 of the 14 TPPs described assessing candidates’ preparedness for the new K-12 standards. Officials from half of the TPPs acknowledged the difficulty of training new teachers in real classroom settings. In particular, officials from 6 TPPs said that school districts are training veteran teachers in the new standards at varying rates. Several TPPs also acknowledged that veteran teachers are being retrained at a higher rate than they were in the past. That could be a problem for the future of the profession. to us that, while they may use some data elements, others are not useful. States are frequently required to complete some reporting requirements that they report are not contributing to their oversight activities. Most of the TPPs and K-12 districts and several other stakeholders questioned the usefulness of some Title II data to themselves and other stakeholders. Officials from 6 of the 14 TPPs with whom we spoke reported spending at least a month completing the annual Title II reports. The results suggest that, even among states that find the Title IIData generally useful, states are frequently requiring them to complete the annual reports. it takes a relatively large number of staff hours to prepare the data. States most frequently reported spending between 21-100 staff hours completing the annual Title II state- level reports. After devoting this time to the task, 5 states said the Title II data were “very useful,” 19 said they were ‘moderately useful, and 25 states said it was “neither useful nor not useful” or “not useful.” States most often reported using the data to inform the approval of legislation. Title II of the Higher Education Act requires states and institutions of higher education that conduct TPPs to annually report specific information. Education does not have direct oversight authority over TPPs. States and most colleges or universities that offer TPPs submit the required data using reporting templates developed by Education (see table 2). In this report we use the term “college or university” to mean “institution of higherEducation” as defined by the act. For the statutory reporting requirements, see 20 U.S.C. §§ 1022d-1022f. Under the Higher Education Act, Education has responsibility for ensuring the quality of the data submitted in Title II reports. State officials are expected to certify the accuracy of the Title II data they submit to Education and Education reviews the state reports for obvious instances of non- compliance. Agency officials were not aware that two states did not describe a process to identify low-performing programs in their most recent Title II report. The Education Department says it has no plans to change the way Title II is administered in the future. The Office of Postsecondary Education administers Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. However, the agency does not have mechanisms in place to promote regular, sustained information-sharing among these offices. Education officials said the agency and its Title II contractor occasionally create custom Title II data runs for Education program offices. But there is no systematic effort to share Title IIData within the agency, officials said. Officials in one office that administers competitive grants related to TPP quality described discussing grant results internally, but did not systematically discuss TPP quality. A large online TPP defines most of its teaching candidates as enrolled in the state where the TPP is headquartered. The Title II report lists that state as one of the nation’s top teacher-producing states, while state officials told us that in fact the state faces teacher shortages. A TPP completer is someone who has met all the educational or training requirements in a state-approved course. Other requirements such as a certain sequence of courses can make it difficult for students to complete the program. of study for initial teacher certification or licensure. However, this definition allows for states or TPPs to choose whether they require their students to take and pass all state licensing tests before they can complete all of those educational or training requirements. As a result, different definitions of completer can lead to inconsistent data and make it difficult to make comparisons across TPPs or obtain a national picture. These varying ways of calculating and reporting key Title II data have persisted despite Education’s efforts to clarify guidance and improve reporting tools. Education permits states to report some Title II data in different ways to account for their differing approaches to overseeing TPPs and the differing structures of the TPPs. This affects the consistency and clarity of the data that Education ultimately disseminates. Education does not include clarifications about potentially inconsistent data elements, such as alternative route TPPs or definitions of enrollees and completers. Education officials told us they did not include such explanatory material in these other formats because they considered the explanations in the previous annual report to be sufficient. colleges and universities offering TPPs provide the required information. The agency also compiles and disseminates the information to the public in annual reports, webpages and data spreadsheets. The proposed rule was available for Title II reporting requirements through February 2, 2015. On December 2, 2014, Education published a notice of proposed rulemaking, which among other things, proposed to modify the proposed rule. As part of this announcement, the Department of Education is releasing a list of proposed changes to the rules. Education officials said they have to continue to collect the current data, due to statutory requirements. Education described some benefits to the existing data, including that it provides a robust picture of the demographics of teaching candidates. We recommend that the Secretary of Education take the following four actions: 1. Develop a risk-based, cost-effective strategy to verify that states are implementing a process for assessing whether any teacher preparation programs are low-performing. 2. Study the usefulness of Title II data elements for policymakers and practitioners and, if warranted, develop a proposal for Congress to eliminate or revise any statutorily-required elements that are not providing meaningful information. The current Title II data requirements may be of limited use in helping to improve the quality of TPPs. Education has not taken steps to evaluate whether any of them should be eliminated. Few states reported using the data to inform state funding decisions or to provide information to school districts that are hiring teachers fromTPPs. Nearly every state reported some cases where certain requirements may not be helpful. Less than half the states told us that they use the goals and assurances section of the Title II reports, which includes information about institutions’ goals for addressing teacher shortage areas. 8 of the 14 TPPs told us that very little of the Title II data was useful to them for assessing the performance of their own programs. Officials from several TPPs also expressed confusion about the overarching goal of Title II reporting requirements. Education identified some potential data inconsistencies, such as differences in state definitions be identified, potentially resulting in new teachers being ill- prepared to teach K-12 students. Without increasing information-sharing within the Department and with states, Education may miss opportunities to disseminate information. Title II reporting requirements and make recommendations to Congress to remove or revise requirements, as warranted. identify potential limitations in the Title II data and disclose such limitations in its reports, websites, and data tables. enhance information-sharing about TPP quality within Education and relevant state agencies. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of the Department of Education, and other interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. The majority of states (43) reported to us that they had a process for identifying low-performing TPPs. The most common criteria they used to identify low- performing TPPs were failure to meet the state’s TPP or teaching standards and denial or conditional approval during the state approval or renewal process. According to data that states submitted as part of their Title II report, 6 states identified one or more TPPs as low-performance and 13 states identified a TPP as at risk of becoming low performing in 2013 or 2014. TPPs of their status. Most also publicized this status (4) and increased their monitoring of the TPPs. Two of the six states that identified low-performing programs also identified programs at risk of becoming low- performing. 37 states reported in our survey that they provided may be unaware of information about good practices for TPP quality that could assist them in their oversight. Education is responsible for collecting and disseminating Higher Education Act Title II data and administering grant programs that provide an opportunity to contribute to TPPs’ continuous improvement. Seven states reported in our survey that they did not have a process for identifying low-performing TPPs in academic year 2014-2015. States have flexibility in the criteria they use to identify low- performing TPPs, but are required to describe those criteria to Education as part of their annual Title II reports. According to Standards for reports, Education does not verify that states are in fact implementing the procedures they describe in their reports. Without a monitoring Title II report that was reported in October, 2014, Education may miss instances of noncompliance. procedures are sufficient to ensure quality without having a process to identify low-performing TPPs. For example, officials in 2 of the 7 states that reported they do not have a process for identifying low- performing programs in our survey told us that it was not necessary. While it is possible that all TPPs are meeting states’ performance criteria and do not merit a low-performance designation, states are still required to have such a process in place, the report says. For more information on the report, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/top-10-health-care-policies-and-reforms-in-the-united-states. that they assessed alternative route TPPs against state developed standards less frequently than traditional TPPs. Seven states reported using observations of alternative routeTPP courses or experiences less frequently (see table 3). The differences in how states approve alternative route. TPPs may be a consequence of several factors, including how states define alternative. routeTPPs and differences in state requirements for alternative route and traditional.TPPs define when a teaching candidate is formally enrolled and these definitions may range from when a. teaching candidate first takes a course to after they have completed. Some states reported not having a process for identifying low-performing TPPs, as required under the Higher Education Act. States are required to conduct an assessment to identify low- performing TPPs in the state and provide Education with an annual list of such programs and any programs. Some alternative TPPs may be approved through other mechanisms, according to one state representative. The requirements for traditional TPPs are set by state regulations while the requirements for alternative route and traditional TPP's are different, a representative from one state explained. Nearly all states reported that they review TPP program design and data about candidates before approving them to prepare new teachers. More than half also use one or more types of information to assess graduates’ effectiveness as teachers. These results are based on our survey of all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In some instances, the wording of the original survey question has been modified for brevity and to remove technical terminology. See the related article for more details on the results of this survey. The results of the survey were based on a survey of the states and D.C. traditional TPP graduates. Fifteen states reported assessing traditional TPPs based on other outcomes data such as the test scores (i.e., K-12 student assessment results) of public school students taught by recent TPP graduates (see fig. 2). One of our case study states uses such data to help TPPs identify potential problem areas in the training they provide to teaching candidates. As of the 2014-2015 academic year, at least 10 additional states reported that they planned to begin using such data. TPPs prepare teaching candidates to employ effective teaching techniques and gain real-world experience in the classroom. TPPs take many forms and may be operated by a variety of organizations (see table 1) State oversight responsibilities related to TPPs may be held by one or more state agencies, including the state department of education, the state board of Education, or a state agency. For example, the structure of TPPs can vary widely, from “traditional” TPPs such as four-year undergraduate programs with student teaching requirements, to “alternative route’ TPPs. a variety of methods to examine all three objectives. We reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations; federal internal controls standards; and leading practices for program management. We also conducted a web-based survey of the state entities responsible for overseeing TPPs in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In addition, we conducted interviews with a wide range of stakeholders including Education officials and contractors; companies responsible for administering state licensing tests; researchers; and the national accreditation organization for teacher preparation programs. See below for more information about this survey. state independent standards board. States have discretion in how they conduct oversight of TPP quality. States can define the types of TPPs that may operate in the state, such as undergraduate or post-baccalaureate TPPs, or alternative route TPPs. They can also set licensing requirements that teaching candidates must satisfy that often include completing an approved TPP and passing licensing tests that assess subject-matter knowledge or other other criteria. State can also assess whether any TPPs are low-performing, as required under the Higher Education Act. of subject matter knowledge. States may use teams made up of peers from other TPPs, state staff, national accreditation organization staff, or a combination. 43 states reported that they consider information collected by an external TPP accreditation. organization for at least some of their programs. 41 states said they typically reviewed program design for traditional TPPs by reviewing syllabi or other course material, and interviewing TPP faculty or staff. For more information, visit the National Education Association’s Teacher Preparation Council website. in an e-publication supplemental to this report, “Teacher Preparation Programs: Survey of State Entities that Oversee Teacher Preparation programs” (GAO-15-599SP, July, 2015). The quality of survey data can be affected by nonsampling error. We included steps in developing the survey, and collecting, editing, and analyzing survey data, to minimize such nonsampled error. By allowing state officials to enter their responses directly into an electronic instrument, this method automatically created a record for each state official in a data file. and the District of Columbia, achieving a 100 percent response rate. The survey used self-administered, electronic questionnaires that were posted on the Internet. We sent the survey to the official responsible for submitting each state’s Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and requested that this person consult with other officials in order to provide an official state response. We reviewed state responses and followed up by e-mail or telephone with select states for additional clarification and obtained corrected information for our final survey analysis. using graduate effectiveness information or expand their current use of such information as part of their approval process. For example, officials in Tennessee told us that they currently review some effectiveness data. They plan to begin reviewing recent TPP graduates’ teacher evaluation results in the future. Officials in Arizona told us they plan to start reviewing data on graduate effectiveness. They told us the impetus behind adding this new data is to better align the state’s TPP with the national average for graduate effectiveness and teacher evaluation. quality standards with recommended requirements presented by CAEP. States and TPPs reported challenges collecting information on graduates’ effectiveness. Officials from 3 of our 5 case study states and 7 of the 14 TPPs we spoke to said that collecting this type of data is difficult. For example, state oversight offices or TPPs would need to obtain key information about TPP graduates from local districts. Several of these officials noted districts may be difficult to identify or not be be easy to find. The report recommends that TPPs that already have CAEP approval may receive an expedited state approval process. “Pre-service assessments” could include evaluations of candidates’ performance as student teachers. More than half of states reported that they also review certain information about graduate effectiveness when assessing TPPs for approval or renewal. States that incorporate this information reported doing so in several ways. Most commonly, 30 states reported using surveys that assessed principals’ and other district personnel’s satisfaction with recent recent events in the schools. See questions 9a, 9f, 9h, and 9i in the related e- supplement. as well as organizations representing teachers, teacher preparation programs, officials who head state departments of education, and governors. We also conducted case studies in 5 states. In each of these states we interviewed officials from state oversight entities, officials from two or three TPPs, and officials in at least one K-12 school district. Finally, we analyzed data collected to fulfill Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and Education’s related reports and technical assistance guidance. We conducted our work from March 2014. to July 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To identify how states oversee TPPs, modified their practices in response to new K-12 standards, and used Higher Education Act Title II data and Department of Education information about TPPs. We surveyed state oversight entities from all 50 states, including the District of Columbia, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina and Virginia. and Education’s reports, data spreadsheets and web pages that compile data from Title II state reports. We interviewed Education officials and contractors responsible for collecting, analyzing and reporting such data. We also compared Education's reports and spreadsheets against federal standards for internal controls and leading practices for data-driven program management.reliability of fields in Education”s Title II data spreadsheet regarding the number of TPPs that states reported identifying as low-performing or at risk of being low- performing. testing the accuracy of these reporting fields for a non-generalizable sample of states. We determined that Education’s compilation of state data about TPPs that have been identified as low-performing was sufficiently reliable to include in our report. In addition to the contact named above, Scott Spicer (Assistant Director); Barbara Steel-Lowney and Daren Sweeney (analysts-in-charge); Lucas Alvarez, and Hedieh Fusfield made key contributions. Also contributing to this report were: Deborah Bland, Kate Blumenreich, Joanna Chan, Sarah Cornetto, Holly Dye, Kirsten Lauber, Ashley McCall. Education has made few efforts to share expertise about TPP quality among its offices. By not providing the explanatory material, the data may be potentially misleading and make it difficult for users to compare across states or programs. Education officials also noted that sharing information with states can be challenging for some competitive grant programs. Without such an approach, Education may be missing opportunities to support state efforts to enhance TPP quality. For example, states may not have access to clear and useful information aboutTPP quality. The agency may consider adding such material in the future. Teacher quality workgroup has been inactive since the office in which it was housed reorganized in the fall of 2014. Education officials noted that such workgroups, particularly when operating out of high-level offices in the agency, have been very helpful for systematically sharing information across offices. This represents a missed opportunity to use relevant information, officials said. The agency has not subsequently resumed these information-sharing efforts, they said. It is unclear when the agency will resume the teacher quality workgroups. Education administers several competitive grant programs that provide funding for TPP reforms. Of these competitive grants, the largest that is focused specifically on improving TPP quality is the Teacher Quality Partnership Grant program. In September 2014, Education selected 24 partnerships, including TPPs and partnering school districts, to receive a combined $35 million in Teacher Quality partnership grant funds. The Transition to Teaching grant program also provides grants to recruit and retain teachers in high-need schools and encourage the development and expansion of alternative route TPPs. in each state, as well as the number of individuals who complete a program. However, Education also noted in the preamble to its December 2014 proposed rule that “data that are collected and reported have not led to an identification of significant improvements in teacher preparation program performance” Education officials told us they have not conducted a study to inform Congress or the agency about whether any current reporting requirements are not useful. Therefore, Education has an incomplete picture of the usefulness of various data fields. distribute the results. This could include more detailed information about data elements where definitions vary substantially from state to state. Develop and implement mechanisms to systematically share information about teacher preparation program quality with relevant Department of Education program offices and states. We provided a draft of the report to the Department of education for review and comment. Education’s comments are reproduced in Appendix II. Education agreed with our four recommendations, but noted that its proposed regulations include new requirements for how teacher preparation programs are to be distributed. states reported in our survey that they oversee TPPs through an independent standards board. Four states expressed concern about their access to Education resources for TPP improvements. Gaps in the agency’s efforts to disseminate information result from information- sharing being left to individual offices’ initiative rather than an agency-wide mechanism, Education officials noted in a follow-up inquires. The Education Department says more could be done to improve the TPP system in the U.S. and that it is looking into the matter. The objectives of this study were to answer the following questions: (1) How do states oversee teacher preparation programs (TPP)? (2) What are states and select TPPs doing to prepare new teachers for new K-12 standards? (3) To what extent does the U.S. Department of Education’s (Education) data reporting and other information-sharing support and encourage high quality TPPs? We used the information from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) to conduct our study. to Education officials, several technical assistance and research entities and the office that administers competitive grants such as the Teacher Quality Partnership Grant Program. Only about one third of states reported receiving information from Education about TPP oversight or enhancing TPP quality. About half of all states said they would like additional support from Education on this topic. This suggests that Education is also missing opportunities to support states that could use relevant research and assistance from Education to enhance TPP quality, according to the report. 15 states surveyed said they want more information from the Department of Education about teacher preparation. We conducted case studies of five states: Arizona, California, Maine, Tennessee and Virginia. We selected K-12 districts that worked with these TPPs, by providing student teaching experiences, hiring graduates, or both. We reviewed select state Title II reports; Education’s reporting templates for the state reports and institutional and program reports. We also reviewed the December 2014 proposed rule; technical assistance documents developed by Education and its contractor; and Department of Education grants and information-sharing related to TPPs. 22 states reported using fewer sources of information for alternative route TPPs compared to traditional TPPs. States more commonly reported using information about the effectiveness of graduates teaching in public schools within their state versus information about those teaching in private schools or in other states. Officials in one of our case study states noted that it was especially challenging to obtain data on teachers who work in another state or in private school. For example, eight states reported eight states were not willing to provide such information about teachers in their state.