regulatory agency (e.g., an approved state permit program). That is, owner/operators of regulated disposal units were required to comply with applicable criteria by the applicable deadlines. States were not precluded from adopting regulations more stringent than the federal criteria. It would appear that each state could determine key elements related to program implementation and facility compliance, at least to the degree that such state determinations did not undercut a viable state program, the authors say. They say the goal was to achieve a consistent level of protection from threats specific to improper management of MSW. State solid waste management agencies commonly require owners and operators of certain waste disposal facilities to obtain a permit. A state permit "program" is the body of authorities, activities, and procedures that the permitting authority uses to implement and enforce regulations applicable to a solid waste disposal facility. Since the bills were designed to result in a state-based regulatory program, discussion of CCR Permit Programs focuses on the programs that may be created by states, as opposed to a program to regulate CCRs that could potentially be implemented by EPA. EPA subsequently promulgated " requirements for State Permit Program Determination of Adequacy," in 40 C.F.R. Part 239. The requirements list the detailed information that states were required to provide to EPA, as well as the authorities, activities, and procedures a state would have to demonstrate that they had in place. An adequate program was one that EPA determined could ensure regulated facility compliance with the MSW landfill criteria. The State Implementation Rule (SIR) includes the following four subparts: General, State Program Application, Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs, and Enforcement. would need to demonstrate to EPA before the program could be deemed adequate by EPA; and requires state programs to provide for citizen action in the state civil enforcement process. Adequacy Determination Procedures —includes criteria EPA would use to make its adequacy determination or to partially approve state programs, procedures states must follow if they needed to modify their programs, and criteria and procedures EPA may use to withdraw its determination of adequacy. (Individual criteria included in the SIR and provisions in Section 4011 are listed in Table B-1 .) Under the Constitution, Congress has no power to compel states to exercise their sovereign authority. Congress may not require states to adopt federal regulations or implement certain requirements using a permit program. But Congress has authorized EPA to promulgate and enforce certain regulations, while providing for conditions under which a state may be authorized or approved to adopt and enforce those regulations. Given the options of allowing EPA to enforce a federal standard at facilities in the state or adopting and enforcing the regulations themselves, states generally choose the latter. Under current law, the term "backstop authority" is not formally defined in statute or regulation. Whether EPA is said to have backstop authority or not has no legal consequence. The term has been widely used to refer to explicit authority provided to EPA to enforce standards at individual facilities in a state authorized by EPA to implement and enforce federal standards. For example, under RCRA, the Clean Air Act, and the Clean Water Act, the bills would provide EPA with authority to backstop state programs. Subtitle C (42 U.S.C. §6928(a), EPA is authorized to enforce standards of performance at individual facilities in a state. Section 111(c) of the Clean Air Act provides EPA with comparable enforcement authority. In this sense of the term, the bills would not provide EPA with authority to backstop state programs to regulate CCR facilities. Despite its recent decline in demand, coal remains the dominant fuel for electricity generation in the United States, and is expected to continue to be well into the future. The bills' requirement that EPA identify certain state program elements that may be "deficient" involves the use of a term not found in the RCRA statute. As a result, it is difficult to anticipate how EPA would respond to such a mandate. In the bills, EPA could identify as a deficiency program elements described in the Permit Program Specifications or provide no formal role for EPA in this regulatory development process.. Once a state is implementing a permit program, EPA would have a role in states that fail to remedy program deficiencies. be required to provide notice to a state regarding "deficiencies" in its program, with regard to certain program elements. At any time after a state is implementing a CCR Permit Program, EPA would be required to identify and notify a state of any deficiencies. If a state fails to remedy program deficiencies identified by EPA within the time frame negotiated between the state and EPA, the agency would berequired to implement a permit program for a state. The time frame for that could vary depending on the compliance deadlines established by the state. would be obligated to provide information necessary for EPA to make its deficiency determination within 90 days of EPA making the request. If EPA identifies a program deficiency, the agency would be directed to collaborate with the state to establish a reasonable deadline to address it. What constitutes a "reasonable deadline" is not explicitly defined, except that it could not be "earlier than 180 days" after the date on which the state receives the notice. The requirement that EPA identify a deficiency at any time a state is not implementing a program — as opposed to when a states is. other basic program elements typically specified in regulations. For example, not later than one year after the state certifies it has a program in place, that state shall require the owner or operator of each regulated structure to comply with applicable groundwater monitoring requirements. As noted above, however, the applicability of those groundwater monitoring requirement would depend on the state's definition of a "gauge system" The program would not provide explicit deadlines for many program requirements, though EPA or the courts might read reasonable deadlines into the section. Bills would establish framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCRs. Proposed Section 4011(e) prescribes conditions under which EPA would be required to implement a CCR program for a state. EPA would not be explicitly required to assess other program elements. Supporters of this approach have suggested that such programs could be at least as effective as federal requirements that may be established by EPA under either regulatory option proposed in June 2010. The bills did not explicitly require EPA to set uniform national standards of protection or promulgate regulations applicable to CCR structures. Some stakeholders debate the appropriateness of EPA's definitions. The bills leave that issue unresolved, opening the door to a diversity of state solutions. Until states promulgate regulations that include a more detailed definition of a CCR "structure," program applicability will not be determined with specificity. The regulated universe of "owners and operators" will notbe known until a state defines a structure. Section 4011 also omits that EPA's definition of "owner and operator" is not inclusive enough. How much would EPA's guidance influence states? When would owners and operators of CCR structures be subject to any new regulations? How would EPA interpret its obligation to identify program deficiencies? Would EPA identify a program as having a deficiency if EPA determined it was not adequate to ensure facility program requirements that would otherwise be left to states to interpret? Some in Congress who have expressed concern that EPA has "overreached" its existing legislative mandates have supported legislation that would limit EPA's role in regulating CCR disposal. Would EPA identify as a deficiency a state's definition of a "CCR landfill" that EPA determined was insufficient to ensure that uses of CCRs that constitute disposal on land are regulated? When and how often would EPA identify program deficiencies? Would EPA review a program for adequacy immediately after a state certified that it had a program in place, or would it wait until years after. Would EPA establish requirements (similar to 40 C.F.R. Part 239) or issue guidance to allow compliance with requirements? Proposed Section 4011 would not create a permit program, per se. Instead, it would provide the framework that states may be expected to use. There is no explicit directive in the bills that the requirements applied via the permit program be those necessary to protect human health (i.e., meet a federal standard of protection). Requirements adopted by the state would likely and enforce regulations. The proposed bills discussed below are those likely to have implemented using a permitProgram. The regulations were required to be those needed to "protect human health and the environment" certification include selected elements from Section 239.3, Components of Program Application and Section. 4011(c) Permit Program Specifications. Included under the "Minimum Requirements" in this section are five provisions (pertaining to Permits, State Notification, Agency Requirements, Agency Authority, and State Authority) that are drawn, in part, from selected individual criteria included among the Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs in Subpart C of Part 239. Both sections include provisions drawn from selected elements in 40 C.F.R. §239.13, Criteria and procedures for implementation by Administrator. The proposed amendments to RCRA would not create a "permit program," per se. Instead, selected provisions in the bills would form a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCR management. Legislation addressing CCRs may be considered in the 113 th Congress. Analysis of selected elements of the legislation considered during the 112 th Congress is provided in this report as background for future legislation that may take a similar approach. The program Minimum Requirements also include five provisions that appear to be drawn, in part, from selected " requirements" included in 40 C.F.R. Part 239, Subpart C. This report looks primarily at how state programs to regulate CCRs may be developed and implemented. It does not attempt to identify detailed requirements that may be applied by a state regulatory program. Since the most recent bill passed by the House adopted provisions in the Senate bill, unless otherwise noted, any reference to "the bills," "the proposed amendment to RCRA," or "Section 4011" refers to S. 3512/Title IV of H.R. 3409 , proposed in the 112 th Congress. As proposed, state CCR Permit Programs would likely be created with no involvement from EPA. In contrast to other RCRA permit programs, EPA would have a substantially different role in program implementation and enforcement. Existing state programs to regulate the most impact on the development and implementation of individual state C CR Permit programs. EPA would be required to implement state program certification requirements, comparable to "State Program Application" requirements in 40 C.F.R. Part 239, Subpart B. EPA could issue guidance before the states implement their programs. EPA has already done much of the work of writing such regulations or guidance. CCR bills in the 112 th Congress did not explicitly state that state-implemented CCR Permit Programs would be intended to emulate federal-state programs. The need to interpret statutory provisions, coupled with the authorities already given to EPA in RCRA, might inadvertently create something like the agency's traditional regulatory role, rather than limiting it, says John Defterios. would draw from authorities in existing sections of RCRA. It is difficult to determine in advance how EPA may interpret directives regarding its role or how the proposed authorities may affect state adoption and implementation of a permit program. EPA would be given a more limited role in development of the regulatory program for CCR facilities, compared to the existing program to regulate MSW landfills. Compared to that program, the most significant differences in EPA's role are with regard to promulgating regulations applicable to the entity required to obtain a permit. The purpose of the proposed amendment to RCRA was the creation of state permit programs to implement regulations applicable to CCR disposal. Regulations that would ultimately apply to owners and operators of CCR structures would depend on each state's interpretation of the criteria listed among the proposed Permit Program Specifications. Such a program would be comparable to existing state programs to enforce standards necessary to ensure facility compliance with RCRA's open dumping prohibition, the report says. It is assumed that all states in which CCRs are managed (i.e., primarily states with coal-fired power plants) would opt to implement their program. Proposed amendment to RCRA would create programs to regulate MSW landfills. The approach used in the 112 th Congress bills would not have provided an explicit mandate that EPA or the states promulgate regulations. Under Section 4011 in the proposed bills, states would create CCR Permit Programs using statutory criteria drawn from regulatory criteria previously created pursuant to RC RA. The available legislative history accompanying the bills indicates that CCR permit Programs are intended to be similar to existing state programs to Regulate MSW Landfills, but there are several differences. Under this structure, statutory provisions listed in the proposed Permit Program Specifications would serve as both the framework states may use to create regulations. Proposed Section 4011(d) would require EPA to identify and notify a state of "deficiencies" in specific elements of its program. The analytical process and technical basis for determining how and why certain requirements were selected or excluded are not clear. Questions regarding the potential standard of protection intended to be achieved by state programs to regulate CCRs are also raised. approach, proposed in the 112 th Congress, was to create state programs to regulate a particular type of waste (CCRs) This report provides information regarding those existing programs as they have been implemented. The degree to which state regulations implemented by a CCR Permit Program to regulate MSW landfills will be enforceable depends on various factors. The similarities between the proposed program to regulate CCRs and the existing program to regulating MSW Landfills can be identified. The differences can be found primarily in the requirement that a C CR Permit program apply the selected MSW landfill criteria to owners and operators. existing facilities would be required to meet would be particularly relevant in determining the degree to which a state program may protect human health from risks specific to CCR disposal. The bills did not explicitly require a CCR Permit Program to apply criteria that would be intended to achieve a specific standard of protection. If promulgated in accordance with existing state solid waste management laws, regulations may meet standards of protection determined by each state. However, by drawing from selected standards proposed by EPA, but not others, it is unclear whether individual state C CR Permit Programs would address the same range of risks identified by EPA.  proposed bills include no explicit directive to states or to EPA to promulgate standards. Instead, minimum program requirements specify that the CCR Permit Program "shall apply" selected MSW landfill criteria to owners and operators of structures. In federal pollution control laws, ambiguities are subject to EPA (and potentially court) interpretation. Any ambiguisms or requirements not specified in the proposed CCR bills would be subject to state (and possibly court)interpretation. It cannot be predicted whether state programs to regulate CCRs, developed and implemented pursuant to provisions in Section 4011, would result in the management of C CRs comparable to the existing programs. The MSW landfill criteria are intended to apply to facilities that dispose of largely "dry" waste. They do not address issues specific to liquid waste accumulation in surface impoundment ponds. New MSW landfills were required to ensure and operators of such facilities during the interim period between promulgation of the final hazardous waste regulations and the implementation of permit programs used to ensure facility compliance with those regulations. EPA asserted that selected requirements applicable to TSDFs were particularly relevant in developing the proposed standards. compliance with the standards before they began operation. Owner/operators of existing facilities that did not comply with applicable criteria by deadlines specified by EPA would be in violation of RCRA's prohibition on open dumping. EPA tailored and supplemented the MSW landfill criteria to address threats to human health specific to CCR management. In its June 2010 proposal to regulate CCRs, standards included in EPA's Subtitle D option were designed to meet the standard of protection established by Congress for sanitary landfills. criteria—primarily the technical criteria such as operational and design criteria and groundwater monitoring requirements. However, program specifications do not include criteria comparable to "general" standards in the MSW landfill criteria. Since those standards are necessary to implement a program, states would likely include them in their own CCR Permit Program. State inclusion of those criteria would likely vary from state to state. Decisions regarding the applicability of state regulations and compliance deadlines that detailed compliance deadlines and specific regulatory criteria applicable to existing facilities. combustion residuals. [Emphasis added.] "[P]aragraph (2)" states the "Revised Criteria" proposed in Section 4011(c)(2" Under that paragraph, specific subparts of the MSW landfill criteria and selected individual criteria are cited. For example, the paragraph entitled Revised Criteria begins "The revised criteria described in this paragraph are ... ," followed by provisions such as "the revised criteria for design, groundwater monitoring, corrective action, closure, and post-closure" apply to facilities that may receive hazardous household wastes. EPA subsequently defined these facilities in regulation as municipal solid waste, or MSW, landfills. EPA approval of a state permit program to implement the MSW landfill criteria was dependent on whether EPA determined that the state's program was "adequate" EPA is not authorized to regulate any other type of nonhazardous solid waste (such as CCRs). Instead, EPA may only expand upon the landfill criteria relevant to the state-enforced prohibition of open dumping. EPA's role regarding the open dumping prohibition was to promulgate regulations that contained criteria to distinguish between facilities that would be classified as "sanitary landfills" or "open dumps" At a minimum, a facility would be deemed a sanitary landfill if solid waste disposal at such a facility posed no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment. Disposal facilities that did not meet the criteria for sanitary landFills would be considered open dumps, EPA said in a statement. EPA revised existing regulatory criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. States either adopted the federal criteria exactly or used them as a model to create their own requirements. EPA determined whether state programs were adequate to ensure facility compliance with federal criteria. States "implement" those regulations by issuing permits to owners and operators of regulated landFills.. Currently, EPA has no authority to directly enforce the MSW landfill criteria at any MSW. facility in a state without an EPA-approved program. EPA could have directly enforced the MSW landfill criteria at any point after April 1993 in any state that did not yet have an EPA-approved program in place. EPA never stepped in to directly enforce the federal criteria, however. Some have argued that by requiring EPA to implement a CCR Permit Program for a state under specific still developing its program—suggests that such a review may be anticipated at some point in the future, when EPA could determine if a program was being implemented as described in the state's program certification. directly enforce the criteria may not currently be invoked by the agency since that authority is limited to states found by EPA to have an inadequate program to implement the MSW program. Under Subtitle C, EPA has primary authority to implement and enforce the federal requirements applicable to hazardous waste treatment, storage, and disposal facilities (TSDFs) In lieu of the federal program, states can be authorized to implement regulations applicable to those facilities, including permitting those facilities. Most states have requested and received such authorization.  HSWA added a paragraph applicable to "Control of Hazardous Disposal" in Section 4005. That paragraph includes provisions that directed states to adopt a permit program to implement the MSW landfill criteria. EPA's determination of state program adequacy was also relevant to the agency's potential to directly enforce the MSw landfill criteria, the agency says. The 1984 amendments to Section 4004 required each state, within 18 federal performance standards, to protect human health and the environment. The SIR allowed states to adopted regulations that may not have been identical to the MSS criteria. MSW landfill criteria were finalized to the point at which a state adopted a program approved by EPA as adequate to enforce the federal criteria. For this purpose, EPA was explicitly authorized to use its inspection and federal enforcement authorities under Subtitle C, Sections 3006 and 3007. In any state that EPA determined did not adopt a program adequate to assure facility compliance, EPA could use authorities available in Sections 3007 and 3008 in Sub Title C to directly enforce the open dumping prohibition at MSW landfills in that state. Proposed Section 4011(k) would likely affect the applicability of state regulations implemented by a CCR Permit Program. The key definition is that of a "structure" A structure would be defined as "a landfill, surface impoundment, or other land-based unit" Proposed definitions comparable to those in 40 C.F.R. Part 239 are those for "coal combustion residuals permit program" and "permit" The proposed definitions do withdrawal of determination of adequacy. to varying interpretations. One such provision is the definition of "structures" that may receive CCRs. It would appear that the applicability of any regulations a state would promulgate and implement using its permit program would depend on that state's definition of a structure. In defining the term as a "landfill, surface impoundment, or other land-based unit" without further definition, the bills would afford states broad latitude in construing these terms. By contrast, existing RCRA defines a structure as "a building, structure, or structure-like structure" States would determine when owner/operators would be required to comply with the requirements implemented via the permit program. Participating states would certify that they have a program in place within three years of enactment of proposed Section 4011. States would presumably promulgate regulations applicable to CCR structures. Deadlines for compliance and details regarding program applicability would not be known until states description of its program, required to be provided to EPA under the State Actions provisions, states would berequired to describe their program. The proposed amendment would not explicitly require the agency implementing the program to promulgate regulations. However, program preconditions arguably imply that states would promulgate such regulations. The proposed bills would define a "coal combustion residuals permit program" as "all of the authorities, activities, and procedures that comprise the system of prior approval and conditions implemented by or for a state to regulate the CCR program" The proposal would not include details regarding what may constitute a "CCR landfill" or a " CCR surface impoundment" not apply to structures that are surface impoundments; "for all structures that receive coal combustion residuals after the date of enactment of this section"; and "for. all structures" The Minimum Requirements include five provisions drawn from EPA's June 2010 proposed Subtitle D standards for CCR landfills and surfaceimpoundments. Those proposed provisions would apply to those structures as well as other CCR sites. The minimum requirements are based on EPA's 40 C.F.R. Part 258, Subpart G. The bills considered in the 112 th Congress were proposed in the wake of a June 2010 proposal by EPA to regulate CCRs. This report provides background and selected information regarding that EPA proposal. The report also describes selected elements of RCRA Subtitles C and D, relevant to both EPA's proposal and legislative proposals to create state programs to regulate the coal-fired power plants. It does not provide a comprehensive discussion of EPA's authority to regulate. CCR legislation is likely to be considered by the 113 th Congress. The proposed amendment would also have provided no explicit authority for EPA to directly enforce regulatory criteria applicable to CCR disposal units. Such authority provided to EPA in other parts of RCRA has generally served as an incentive to states to adopt and implement federal regulatory criteria. The absence of such authority makes it difficult to anticipate the degree to which EPA may encourage states to implement a program to regulate CCRs that would comply with the Permit Program. It is not necessarily a question of a state's ability. It may be a difference in interpretation between states and EPA regarding standards. proposed two options to regulate CCRs pursuant to its current authorities under RCRA Subtitles C and D. EPA has identified a number of the potential impacts of implementing either EPA regulatory option. According to industry estimates, almost 80% of C CRs generated in 2011 was managed in a way that involved land application of the material. Such management practices included CCR disposal in landfills, surface impoundments, or mines (as minefill); and use as structural and embankment fill and as a soil amendment. Each bill would have added to Subtitle D of RCRA a new Section 4011, Management and Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals. In states that did not create a program that met program specifications included in the proposed amendment, or in other specified circumstances, the EPA would have been required to implement a program. The bills would encourage states to create permit programs according to statutory standards in the amendment. The aim of the amendment is to "facilitate recovery and beneficial use, and provide for the proper management and disposal" of CCRs. a minimum standard of protection from permit programs used to implement and enforce those regulations. Creation of a state program to regulate a particular type of waste, according to statutory provisions in federal law, without detailed federal regulations or guidance, would be a novel approach in RCRA. That a RCRA program has never been authorized or established by Congress using such an approach does not mean that this new approach would not meet a particular objective. The proposed bills did not include a specific statement of the objective of a CCR Permit Program—with the exception of the broad statement to achieve a certain level of protection. required to be implemented under RCRA in the past, it has been with the specific intent of assuring that waste disposal facilities will operate in compliance with baseline federal regulatory criteria that meet an explicit standard of protection. In its June 2010 proposal, EPA's primary objective was to address gaps in state programs to regulate CCRs by establishing national standards that would achieve a minimum level of protection from risks specific to CCR. EPA and state authorities to promulgate, implement, and/or enforce requirements broadly applicable to the management of nonhazardous solid waste. The Solid Waste Disposal Act Amendments of 1980 (P.L. 96-482) included provisions commonly referred to as the "Bevill Amendment" Under those provisions Congress specifically excluded CCRs from regulation under RCRA Subtitle C. Pursuant to that directive, EPA was required to conduct a comprehensive study and submit to Congress a report on the adverse effects on human health and the environment related to the disposal and utilization of wastes and other byproduct materials generated primarily from coal or other fossil fuels. RCRA reauthorization. In February 1980, Representative Tom Bevill introduced an amendment to the pending legislation that would require EPA to defer the imposition of hazardous waste regulatory requirements for fossil fuel combustion waste. Representative Bevill stated that EPA's intent to regulate such waste as hazardous would discourage the use of coal and constitute an unnecessary burden on the utility industry. In anticipation of the enactment of this legislation, according to EPA, the agency excluded the regulation of fossilfuel combustion waste from its final hazardous waste list. On October 14, 2011, the House passed the Coal Residuals Reuse and Management Act. On August 2, 2012, the Coal Ash Recycling and Oversight Act of 2012 (S. 3512) was introduced in the Senate. The House subsequently incorporated the provisions of the Senate bill in Title IV of H.R. 3409, the Stop the War on Coal Act, passed in the House on September 12, 2012. The bills would have amended the Solid Waste Disposal Act. EPA would provide its analysis of risk assessment data, studies, reports, and various other data used to determine regulatory criteria. In its proposal to regulate CCRs, various stakeholders have disagreed with EPA's assessment of what criteria should be applied. The administrative process, however, provides some transparency regarding how EPA arrived at its determination. It also provides a way for the public to see how EPA made its determination and how it will implement the rules. The process is called the Administrative Procedure Act, or APA. EPA was required to review studies and other actions of other federal and state agencies regarding the material. EPA also invited participation by other concerned parties, including industry, with a view toward avoiding duplication of effort. Both legislative and administrative actions regarding the potential regulation of CCRs, particularly EPA action taken in response to the Bevill directive and more recent action taken after the Kingston release, are summarized in Table C-1. In March 2000, EPA submitted its "Regulatory Determination on Wastes from Fossil Fuel Combustion" to the White House Office of Management and Budget, for to improper disposal practices, and concern over potential gaps in state regulatory programs. EPA determined that national standards were needed to protect human health from risks specific to CCR management. EPA options to regulate CCRs are limited under its current authorities in Subtitles C and D. EPA's June 2010 proposals reflect EPA's effort to determine those risks and protective measure to address them.. As discussed, EPA proposed two alternative regulations based on its existing statutory authorities in RCRA under Subt subtitles C andD. EPA's determination that CCRs warranted regulation as hazardous waste was based, in part, on data from damage cases. EPA cited new data that identified significant risks for the waste to leach arsenic. Risk to human health associated with agricultural uses of coal ash a substitute for lime. In May 2000, after review by EPA, the EPA approved the use of C CRs for agricultural uses. The decision was a departure from previous opinions regarding the management of CCR's. It was a decision that was made in part based on data that showed the potential threat to health and the environment. OMB, EPA issued a revised regulatory determination that stated its intent to leave the Bevill exclusion in place. However, EPA stated that it was convinced that national regulations under Subtitle D were warranted for CCR disposal in landfills and surface impoundments. The composition of the waste had the potential to present danger to human health and the environment in certain circumstances, EPA said. EPA said there was sufficient evidence the wastes were being managed in a way that was safe for human health. The proposed Subtitle D design standards would require that new landfills and all surface impoundments that have not completed closure prior to the effective date of the rule. Units would be required to be retrofitted with a liner or closed within five years of the final rule. EPA also proposed to require the same liner and leachate collection and removal systems as those being proposed under its Subtitle C option. The technical justification for the requirements is equally applicable to the wastes and surfaceimpoundment, irrespective of the statutory authority under which the requirement is proposed. Opposition to the Subtitle D option stemmed from various concerns, many of which were centered on EPA's lack of authority to directly enforce the standards. Given the argument by many states that the material is being managed sufficiently under current state regulatory programs, environmental and citizen groups have expressed doubts over the degree to which states would adopt new standards. This report provides information regarding EPA's proposals to regulate hazardous wastes. It is intended to provide information about EPA's proposed regulations to regulatehazardous wastes. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. HSWA amended Subtitle D to add Section 4010, in which Congress directed EPA to study the extent to which the guidelines and criteria applicable to solid waste management and disposal facilities were adequate to protect human health and the environment. Within three years, EPA was required to report the results of its study to Congress, as well as any recommendations. That approach resulted in more detailed regulations than those applicable to sanitary landfills, and included a stronger enforcement mechanism to ensure consistent state conformance with the national standards. the following statement: The Committee believes that it is not necessary for EPA to promulgate new regulations. EPA acknowledged in [its June 2010 Subtitle D] Proposed Rule that the "part 258 criteria represent a reasonable balance between ensuring the protection of human health and the environment" The Committee expects that permit programs using the minimum Federal baseline established by this legislation will meet the standard of protecting human health. The House report further notes the "revised criteria" that would be included in the proposed rule. Under Subtitle C of RCRA, EPA has primary authority to regulate hazardous wastes. Under Subtitle D, however, states have primary authority. EPA's role has largely been to promulgate criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. The Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 (HSWA; P.L. 98-616) amended RCRA Sub Title D to address an issue almost identical to the one currently applicable to CCRs. In developing time frames that it considers adequate for compliance, EPA might be adapted to guide the process of identifying deficiencies. proposed standards are structured similarly to regulatory requirements applicable to MSW landfills, supplemented to reflect requirements specific to the management of CCRs. Adoption and enforcement of the Subtitle C "cradle to grave" regulations would involve stricter waste management standards implemented at a higher cost to both industry and state waste management. According to EPA, if implemented as proposed, each regulatory option would result in a similar level of protection. However, each option wouldresult in regulatory programs with a substantially different scope and potential for enforcement. Household waste is exempt from Subtitle C requirements. But that doesn't mean it doesn't pose potential risks to human health and the environment. Congress recognized that disposal facilities that accept such waste may need to comply with standards that were more detailed than the broad criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. Rather than subject household waste to the full gamut of "cradle to grave" Sub Title C regulations, Congress took an approach that could be implemented under the RCRA's "Clean Air Act" EPA has two options to regulate CCRs pursuant to RCRA Subtitle C and D authorities. Under the Sub Title C option, EPA would reverse a previous regulatory determination to exempt C CRs from the hazardous waste requirements. Opponents of the SubTitle C option were largely due to concerns that it would be costly to implement to both states and industry; be too restrictive; stigmatize the material by labeling it "hazardous," adversely affecting its potential for reuse. EPA's second regulatory option would be to promulgate national standards applicable to landfills and surface impoundments. Subtitle D would establish standards applicable only to owners and operators of CCR landfills and surface impoundments. EPA could promulgate the Subtitle D standards, but would have limited authority to enforce them. States have the primary authority to implement and enforce standards applicable to the management of nonhazardous solid waste. If finalized, EPA could encourage states to adopt and enforce the Sub Title D standards. But it would have no authority to enforcement the standards directly. It would create a regulatory program only for the CCR "grave," not every stage of management. factors include data regarding the nature and concentration of toxic constituents present in the waste. EPA determined that the material is generated in large volumes annually (e.g., approximately 130 million tons in 2011) The material contains more than 40 toxic constituents, according to EPA. The potential for toxic constituents to degrade and migrate from the point of deposition under plausible management conditions was also considered. The material was found to be of a high quality and to be safe to handle and dispose of. It was also of a low quality and could be hazardous to human health. that may receive a particular type of waste. Regulatory criteria that meet that directive have been identified in the more than 30 years that EPA has gone through the public rulemaking process. With regard to waste management, necessary protections involve the identification of various factors, including, but not limited to common methods of managing the waste. Analysis of toxic constituents, such as heavy metals, is a step in the process. Potential pathways of human exposure are another step. The presence of toxic constituent alone is not enough to protect against human exposure. risks to human health from waste management activities pertain to the potential for hazardous contaminants to be released from the site of deposition and to migrate off-site. In 1991, the agency promulgated the following requirements applicable to MSW landfills: General standards; regulations established by EPA explicitly define terms necessary to determine the applicability of those regulations. Final regulations represent the "minimum national standard" applicable to waste disposal facilities that, when implemented, would be expected to would achieve the standard of protection set in statute. waste management regulations in 1978. In these proposed regulations, EPA identified six categories of wastes it deemed "special wastes" that would be deferred from hazardous waste management requirements. These special wastes were identified because they typically were generated in large volumes and, at the time, were believed to pose less risk to human health and the environment than the wastes being identified for regulation as hazardous waste. In the months before the hazardous waste regulations were finalized in 1980, Congress was debating the issue of special wastes. the agency made based on the study findings. Further, EPA was required to revise the sanitary landfill criteria to apply to facilities that may receive hazardous household wastes. At a minimum such revisions for facilities potentially receiving such wastes should require ground water monitoring as necessary to detect contamination, establish criteria for the acceptable location of new or existing facilities, and provide for corrective action as appropriate. Congress explicitly required EPA to revision the existing sanitary. landfill criteria. to be those necessary to protect human health and the environment and may take into account the practicable capability of such facilities. Risk to human health was highest from contaminant leaching and migration to surface and groundwater. EPA found that risk was largely eliminated through the use of a composite liner. Potential protective measures include a requirement that composite liners be used at the site of deposition. In gathering this information, EPA looked at waste management practices identified as those that may minimize human exposure to toxins below a standard specified according to federal law; such practices have included a requirement to use composite liner at the disposal site. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. A stressor is any physical, chemical, or biological entity that can induce an adverse response. Stressors may adversely affect specific natural resources or entire ecosystems, including plants and animals. EPA uses risk assessments to characterize the nature and magnitude of health risks to humans, birds, fish, wildlife. The federal government is responsible for cleaning up and disposing of hazardous waste. The EPA has a responsibility to protect the environment from chemical contaminants and other stressors that may be present in the environment. The agency also has a duty to ensure that waste is disposed of in a manner that meets federal standards. In 2011, electricity generating units in the United States burned more than 900 million tons of coal. CCRs are the inorganic material remaining after pulverized coal is burned at electric utilities and independent power producers. According to industry estimates, in 2011, as much as 130 million tons were generated. Disposal of C CRs on site at individual power plants may involve decades-long accumulation of waste.. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of tons of dry ash or wet ash slurry (in a surface impoundment) deposited at power plants. Landfills also include piles, sand and gravel pits, quarries, and/or large-scale fill operations. Sites that are excavated so that more coal ash can be used as fill are also considered CCR landfills. CCR surface impoundment —facility or part of a facility that is a natural topographic depression, man-made excavation, or diked area formed primarily of earthen materials. A CCR is designed to hold an accumulation of CCRs containing coal ash. the combustion of coal or other fossil fuels, including an analysis of the source and volumes of such material generated per year. present disposal and utilization practices; potential danger, if any, to human health and the environment from the disposal and reuse of such materials. alternatives to current disposal methods; the costs of such alternatives; the impact of those alternatives on the use of coal and other natural resources; and the current and potential utilization of suchmaterials. Further, as it has been proved that surface runoff or leachate can pose a danger to health or the environment. On December 22, 2008, national attention was turned to risks associated with managing such large volumes of CCRs. A breach in a surface impoundment pond at the Tennessee Valley Authority's (TVA's) Kingston, TN, plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry, covering more than 300 acres. TVA estimates that cleanup will continue into at least 2014 and will cost $1.2 billion. The incident at Kingston drew attention to the potential for a sudden, catastrophic release related to the structural failure of a surfaceimpoundment.  units could not be located in an unstable area (e.g., a location susceptible to natural or human-induced events or forces capable of impairing the integrity of the unit) New disposal units would be required to be constructed with a composite liner. Within five years, existing surface impoundments would be needed to have solids removed and be retrofitted with a composites liner. All units would have to comply with the groundwater monitoring requirements within one year of the effective date of a final rule. units must have groundwater monitoring systems installed before CCRs could be disposed of in the units. All units would be required to control fugitive dust emissions. Owners and operators of all existing surface impoundments would be. required to maintain certain information about their properties. The state would also require the owner/ operator to notify the state that the design has been placed in the operating record and on the owner's or operator's publicly accessible Internet site. The regulations would take effect on January 1, 2015. 40 C.F.R. §257.60, "Placement above the natural water table," included among the Location Restrictions criteria. 4011(c)(1)(D) Wind D ispersal —similar to EPA's proposed 40 C.f.r.§257.80, "Air Criteria," intended to address issues associated with fugitive emissions of coal ash dust. State Notification and Groundwater Monitoring: Groundwater monitoring —within one year of submitting its program certification to EPA, a state would require the owner or operator to submit a report to EPA. Proposed criteria at Section 257.71 would require facility owners and operators to implement standards necessary to prevent contaminant spread. The proposed provision that would be applied via the permit program would prescribe actions a state would be required to take after it was determined that contaminants had migrated from the deposition site. In the narrative, EPA's proposed criteria atSection 257. 71 would require Facility owners and Operators to. implement standards needed to prevent contamination spread. In this narrative, the proposed criteria is related to certain risks associated with contaminant migration from unlined surfaces. EPA found that the majority of states appeared to regulate CCR landfills adequately. However, there appeared to be gaps in state regulatory oversight of surface impoundments. More than 60% of states required neither liners nor groundwater monitoring for CCRs. EPA further noted that it lacks details regarding the manner and degree to which states are regulating the disposal and use of C CRs. To address potential gaps (i.e., to establish regulations applicable to CCR disposal, use and use in the U.S. significant number of landfills and surface impoundments without proper controls in place, particularly in the area of groundwater monitoring. While there had been substantive improvements in state regulatory programs, EPA identified significant gaps either in states' regulatory authorities or in their exercise of existing authorities. Further, citing its concern regarding the potential mismanagement and inconsistent state regulation of CCRs, EPA stated that it would revise its determination if it found that a need for regulation under Subtitle C was warranted. EPA's June 2010 proposal reflects the agency's revised determination. free liquids, and which is not an injection well. Examples of CCR surface impoundments are holding, storage, settling, and aeration pits, ponds, and lagoons. New disposal units would be required to be placed above the natural water table, and could not be located in wetlands, within 200 feet of a fault zone, or in a seismic impact zone. The following standards are among those intended to address concerns associated specifically with CCR disposal. The standards include criteria EPA deemed necessary to control contaminant leaching and migration. The potential for structural failure could be minimized by various means, including ensuring that the units meet certain design standards and are inspected regularly. Surface impoundments also pose a risk of structural failure. CCR disposal facilities are currently subject to limited federal regulation. Instead, they are regulated by individual states. In a continuing effort to determine whether CCRs should be subject to federal regulation, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is conducting a review of the CCR industry. The agency is working with states to determine the best way to regulate the industry. EPA found that many state solid waste management programs adequately regulate CCR landfills. EPA determined that national standards applicable to the management of CCRs destined for disposal are needed. EPA also identified certain protective measures that may be implemented that would minimize or largely eliminate risks from CCR disposal. As a result of potential risks tied to CCR management, documented cases of damages attributed to the risks EPA identified as associated with CCR use and use. The Kingston release also brought attention to the fact that the Management of C CRs is essentially unregulated at the federal level. constituents, including antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, and selenium; and that those constituents can degrade and migrate from the point of deposition under certain conditions. EPA identified common methods of disposal and use, potentially regulated under RCRA, that resulted in documented cases of damages that could cause human health concerns. Those management methods include disposal in landfills, accumulation in surface impoundment ponds, and use in land applications equivalent to landfill disposal. EPA identified various pathways in which humans may be exposed to toxic constituents in CCRs at levels high enough to cause health concerns. The pathways under which exposure would most likely occur include the following: contaminant leaching and migration off-site. Direct, uncontrolled discharge or release of liquid waste to surface water, as in the structural failure of a surface impoundment (e.g., the Kingston), or direct, uncontrolled release of waste from a landfill, sand pit, quarry, construction site. EPA's June 2010 proposal was intended to create a national standard to regulate CCRs destined for disposal. In its Subtitle D option, EPA would add to 40 C.F.R. Part 257, "Standards for the Receipt of Coal Combustion Residuals in Landfills and Surface Impoundments" Details in EPA's proposed definitions of potentially regulated units reflect risk assessment data and documented cases of threats to human health from CCR disposal in surface impoundments and landfills. requirements provided evidence that similar requirements, applied to CCR surface impoundments, will prevent a catastrophic release of CCRs. EPA's Subtitle D regulatory option reflects the framework of MSW landfill criteria, but includes selected criteria drawn from MSHA standards and standards applicable to hazardous waste TSDFs. The most significant differences pertain to the potential regulation of surfaceImpoundments. For example, requirements that would provide protections specific to the disposal of liquids are not included in Part 258 because bulk disposal of liquid is prohibited in MSW landfills. the units (e.g., a description of the physical and engineering properties of the foundation materials on which the CCR surface impoundment is constructed), and a certification by an independent registered professional engineer that the design is in accordance with current, prudent engineering practices for the maximum volume of CCR slurry and CCR wastewater that can be impounded therein. Differences between the MSW landfill criteria and EPA's proposed standards for CCR landfills and surfaceimpoundments can be found at the EPA's website. EPA intended those risks to be addressed, at least in part, in its "Design criteria for existing CCR surface impoundments and lateral expansions" (proposed 40 C.F.R. §257.71, included among the Design Criteria) Compared to the bills' structural integrity provisions, EPA's proposed criteria included more detailed requirements comparable to the MSHA standards (discussed above in " Proposed EPA Standards to Address Risks Specific to CCR Management " and detailed in Table A-3 in Appendix A ). the accumulation of coal ash slurry (risks from a catastrophic release of liquid waste) To address such risks, selected proposed standards for CCR surface impoundments were modeled on the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) regulations in 30 C.F.R. Part 77. EPA's decision to draw from the MSHA standards was based on its belief that records compiled by MSHA for its rulemaking and the agency's 40 years of experience in implementing those standards were accurate.