response and offensive actions. Many security observers suggest that an equally daunting group of strategy and policy challenges must be addressed if the United States is to continue to rely on technology as a major component of societal activities. Since 2008, a number of strategy. and policy proposals have been offered that may assist in addressing the appropriate balance. of relying on emerging technology and network-centric governance while safeguarding critical infrastructure. and control systems, as well as the nation's cyber infrastructure. The U.S. needs to find a way to balance the need for emerging technology with the need to protect critical infrastructure and control. systems. Cybersecurity is not just about protecting computers, but also has implications for U.S. national security and economic well-being. The Obama Administration declared that U.s. critical information infrastructures are a strategic national asset in a May 29, 2009, speech by the President. Both the legislative and executive branches of government have developed cybersecurity legislation and related initiatives. However, just as important as cybersecurity is privacy and civil liberty considerations, so is the need to protect the public. national strategy for securing communications and information infrastructure. Legislation proposed in S. 733 calls upon the President to present a national strategy within one year of the bill's enactment. This bill would also create a national advisory panel to oversee implementation of the strategic plan and to periodically advise the president on the need for revising the strategy. Some have criticized the provision, which would give the President emergency control over public and private networks in the event of a crisis, and have argued that the bill is vague. Some point to the 2003 National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace as a framework for organizing and prioritizing federal cybersecurity efforts, including the private sector. Others note that this document fails to take into account the rapid rate of change in technologies. Multiple federal information systems enterprise networks make a concerted strategic approach to network security even more difficult, in that each has its own authentication procedures and security standards. Another cybersecurity difficulty for the government is balancing the protection of civil liberties and individual privacy protections with the desire for comprehensive security. A persistent set of issues has stymied significant progress in detecting and deterring existing threats and implementing effective safeguard measures. Issues that appear to continually challenge U.S. cybersecurity efforts include uncertainty of the geographic location of the perpetrators of cyber attacks. The introduction of new vulnerabilities to the nation's infrastructure from increasingly sophisticated threats. A poorly coordinated federal-private sector approach to addressing emerging risks; and legal ambiguities with respect to U.s. cybersecurity. The evolving integration of mobile technology devices into critical information infrastructure. cyber-related issues from a comprehensive national approach. Such concerns often assert that a continuation of addressing cyber incidents as a myopic individual agency responsibility will eventually lead to increased systemic vulnerabilities and put the nation at greater risk. It is argued by some that a more strategic approach to detecting, identifying, mitigating, and responding to future cyber incidences may strengthen both the individual agency and the whole-of-government approach to securing the technologies that underpin every aspect of modern society. The following table is designed to assist in identifying emerging cybersecurity themes contained within previously enumerated respective executive branch activities. and deploy intrusion prevention tools. Review and potentially redirect research and funding. Connect current government cyber operations centers. Develop a government-wide cyber intelligence plan. Increase the security of classified networks. Expand cyber education. Define the role of cybersecurity in private sector domains. Develop multi-pronged approaches to supply chain risk management (potential tampering within the production line and the risk associated with computer products and parts made outside the U.S). Define enduring deterrent technologies and programs. The report was published by the National Security Agency. as one of the President's key management priorities and establish performance metrics. Designate a privacy and civil liberties official in the NSC cybersecurity directorate. Convene appropriate interagency mechanisms to conduct legal analysis of priority cybersecurity issues. Initiate a national cybersecurity public awareness and education campaign. Develop U.S. government positions for an international cybersecurity policy framework. Prepare a cybersecurity incident response plan. Develop a framework for research and development strategies that focus on "game-changing" technologies that enhance security. Cybersecurity is broadly defined as the protection of critical information infrastructure and its processes and content. This report does not discuss reorganizing the executive branch to better address cybersecurity-related issues. The report presents the emerging issues in cybersecurity as identified by the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI), the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) Report to the 44 th President, and the Obama Administration's 60-day policy review report. A lack of consensus on what sort of government resolution may be necessary as a network security measure. need for a current comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy. The most recent strategy, the 2003 National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, outlined a unified, whole-of-government approach to dealing with cybersecurity. Some say that the 2003 policy has not kept pace with the rapidly evolving technologies and threats in cyberspace. Others say it is not a comprehensive strategy but is instead a set of recommendations, much like the CSIS Commission report. The Administration's 60-day review's near-term action plan calls for preparing and updating a new strategy. including both Administration-led initiatives, federal agency programs, statutes, and proposed legislation. Table 1 notes corresponding legislation proposed in both the 111 th Congress and the 110 th Congress to relevant existing statutory frameworks. Current appropriations bills are shown to illustrate congressional spending priorities. overview lists and summaries of the cybersecurity-related legislation are found in the Appendix. The lists are not exhaustive, but rather are designed to give a representative overview of cybersecurity related activities in the federal government and to assist in identifying priority areas where legislation might be proposed. The report groups common themes into broad subject areas. Issues are compared to the current statutory framework, new legislative efforts in the 111 th Congress, and executive branch initiatives to identify commonalities and possible gaps. Some of the apparent gaps discovered may actually be addressed by existing classified programs, which cannot be discussed in this unclassified report. Critics maintain that without an overall government strategy and underlying policies to outline cybersecurity priorities, goals, and how to achieve them, executive organization and program funding may be a muddled process. freedom of speech protections on the Internet while devising cybersecurity procedures. Outreach, collaboration, and policy formation —working across government and with the private sector to share information on threats and other data. Establishing a permanent Congressional Commission or Task Force that would assess and report to Congress successes and ongoing challenges in U.S. cybersecurity programs and activities. The assessments could address issues relating to current and emerging threats, current best security practices, and mitigation and remediation recommendations, as well as provide a venue for the recipients of this report to submit threat information and requests for assistance to the Department. there is no single congressional committee that can claim primary jurisdiction over cyberspace. Neither is there a single executive agency or department with sole cybersecurity responsibility or commensurate authorities. Cybersecurity is a cross-cutting field that affects many government and private sector agencies. No single official oversees cybersecurity policy across the federal government, and no single agency has the responsibility or authority to match the scope and scale of the challenge, the President said. "When it comes to cybersecurity, federal agencies have overlapping missions and don't coordinate and communicate nearly as well as they should," he said. Cuba and Cuba's Relations With Other Countries" includes "the status and extent of Cuba's cyberwarfare program" as one of the seven subjects to be addressed by the report on Cuba required from the Director of National Intelligence. No more than 200 full-time student positions may be filled at any one time by private sector employees enrolled under this section. Eligible private sector. employees will be those engaged in providing significant defense related support to the Department of Defense or other federal agencies. or those whose work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. The U.S. military views cyberspace as a warfighting domain as well as a force enabler. For the Department of Defense, cybersecurity takes on an offensive or defensive national security role. For other government stakeholders, cybersecurity means information security, or securing the information that resides on cyber infrastructure such as telecommunications networks. And coordinate. DHS's task is complicated, as cyberspaces technology and processes are largely owned and operated by the private sector, and as the authority of the federal government to exert control over cybersecurity activities may be limited. The Department of Defense has a number of programs designed to address vulnerabilities and threats to its own networks. Secretary Gates recently announced the creation of a new sub-unified command under the U.S. Strategic Command. This new command is to coordinate a unified approach to defending and securing military cyber networks. The December 2006 National Military Strategy for Cyberspace Operations (NMS-CO) guides the DOD's efforts to protect and secure its networks and systems. The National Cyber Security Center is a clearinghouse whose mission is tocoordinate information from all agencies. and emerging cyber risks to the nation. Drafting legislation, strategy, and policies that take into account rapidly changing telecommunications and Internet-based technologies. Ensuring risk reduction education and training is a core component for all federal government employee performance assessments. Requiring the National Intelligence Council to produce classified and unclassified annual reports addressing current and emerging cyber-related based threats. Require the Department of Homeland Security annually to produce cybersecurity risk assessments for all nonfederal government entities with non-U.S. citizens. The bill provides authority for the Secretary of Defense to permit private sector employees to enroll in and receive instruction at the Defense Cyber Investigations Training Academy. No more than 200 full-time student positions may be filled at any one time. Eligible employees will be those engaged in providing significant defense related support to the Department of Defense or other federal agencies or those whose work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. In addition to the above section (932)—section 1222 "Report on" The Defense Industrial Base (DIB) initiative provides a vehicle through which DOD and industry partners can better share information on cyber threats and defense practices. DOD also has established a Cybercrime Center (DC3) that assists in criminal, counterintelligence, counterterrorism, and fraud investigations by the Defense Criminal Investigative Organizations (DCIOs) and DOD counterintelligence activities. In addition to setting forensics standards, it provides training and testing laboratories for protection of defense information systems. Common themes often noted by many cybersecurity experts underscore a lack of transparency and dearth of defined departmental roles and responsibilities. The section would require the Secretary of Commerce to develop and integrate a national licensing, certification, and periodic recertification program for cybersecurity professionals. It would also require the Director of the National Science Foundation to give priority to computer, information science, and engineering research to ensure support is provided to meet cybersecurity challenges. See under: Section 18—Cybersecurity Responsibilities and Authority. The section would requiring the President to develop a comprehensive national cybersecurity plan. The President would also be required to establish measurable security cybersecurity standards for federal government, government contractor, or grantee critical infrastructure information systems and networks. The Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has primary responsibility for reducing cyber vulnerabilities in the electrical grid. Programs in several departments address various aspects of cybersecurity within their respective areas of responsibility. Some organizations have appeared to have greater authority and capability than others. A few of the departments and their accompanying responsibilities are noted below. In the Energy Independence and Security section of this article, we highlight some of the programs in the Energy Department's Cybersecurity Program. For more information, visit www.energysecurity.gov. Act of 2007 (EISA; P.L. 110-139 ), Congress directed NIST to lead the Department of Energy and other agencies in ensuring an interoperable, secure, and open energy infrastructure. Cybersecurity and associated standards are being addressed as part of this Smart Grid Interoperability Framework that is under development. NIST is also tasked to promote the development of a Smart Grid interoperability framework for the U.S. electrical grid. The framework will include protocols and model standards for information management for smart grid devices and systems. of key security standards and guidelines to support the implementation of and compliance with the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA; P.L. 107-347 ). HHS is responsible for implementing privacy and security standards for electronic personal health information. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) leads the cybersecurity coordination for non-military departments and agencies in the federal government. The National Cyber Security Directorate works with private industry on a voluntary basis to promote safe cybersecurity practices. DHS is also home to the National Security Agency. The Bush Administration initiated the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) The initiative aims to make the United States more secure against cyber threats. The CNCI is seen as a plan of action for programs and initiatives to be addressed at the operational and tactical level. Given the classified nature of the presidential directives and the secrecy accompanying department and agency implementation activities, some details of the initiative have been made public through departmental press releases, speeches by executive branch leaders and analysis offered by individuals who follow cybersecurity- and terrorism-related issues. activities related to this issues, few details are known about CNCI-related federal government implementation efforts. According to one media account, Steven Chabinsky, Deputy Director of the Joint Interagency Cyber Task Force for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, said there are 12 objectives. These include the following: Move toward managing a single federal enterprise network (an integrated communications system architecture for the federal government with common security standards across the network). 2. Deploy intrinsic detection systems. 3. Develop. Section would require TSA to implement system of risk-based allocation of resources. Report would include "a summary that ranks the risks within and across transportation modes" H.R. 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of 2009 Status of bill : Introduced in House; referred to House Subcommittee on Information Policy, Census, and National Archives. See under: Title I—Authorization of Appropriations; Section 102. Risk-Based System for Allocation of Resources; Assessment and Prioritization of Risks. "Vulnerability of a cyber attack" would be considered a risk. The bill would create the office of the Chief Technology Officer within the Executive Office of the President. The CTO would assess the impact of information technology and networked information technology systems and applications on cybersecurity and personal privacy. Other responsibilities would be ensuring "the security of the federal government's information technology infrastructures, information technology strategy, and use of Information technology" The bill is expected to be voted on in the next few weeks and could be signed into law by the President in early 2015. Some Members of Congress have proposed legislation that would create new offices or positions. It is unclear how proposals such as S. 778 to establish the Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor fits with the administration's recently proposed Cyber Coordinator. The position would serve the President as the principal advisor for all cybersecurity related matters. In addressing civil liberties protections. As this legislation is marked up, alternative proposals may be considered. Another area of interest is executive branch organization. As the federal government continues to organize to defend its strategic cyber assets. The new coordinator will have "regular access to the president" and will be considered a key member of the national security staff. The position's exact mandate and scope of responsibilities is unclear, but some duties will include improving federal agencies' computer security and coordinating national cybersecurity awareness campaigns. Some security observers are concerned that the lack of apparent cyber related activities may be a problem for the U.S. government. The new position will be based in Washington, D.C. and will work with the White House National Security Council. President Obama announced the creation of a new cabinet-level position to coordinate cybersecurity strategy and policy across the federal government. This new "Cyber Coordinator" would report to the National Security Advisor and the Director of the National Economic Council. On December 22, 2009, the White House announced that the President's new Cybersecurity Coordinator would be Howard Schmidt. Schmidt is an information security expert with many years of experience in government, law enforcement, and industry. According to an e-mail announcement sent to a White House e-mails list by John Brennan, S. 177 would amend the Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act to improve federal response efforts after a terrorist strike or other major disaster affecting homeland security. In the section for the definition of a major disaster it would include cyber attack on computer systems as one of the possibilities under "terrorist attack" S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in Senate,referred to Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship. See under: Section 6—Inclusion of Energy, Security, Transportation, And Energy. Water Related Research In The List of Topics Deserving Special Consideration As SBIR Research Topics. The bill would extend allocation of funds for research programs related to the Small Business Innovation Research program. Section 6 includes cybersecurity as one of the topics of interest, in particular the research by the National Academy of Sciences relating to cybersecurity. S. 1391 Department of Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. See under : Title IX—Department of Defense Organization and Management; Subtitle D—Other Matters; Section 932—Instruction of Private Sector Employees in Cyber Security Courses of the Defense. best support efforts to enhance security of the bulk power electric grid. Cybersecurity threats are mentioned together with biological, nuclear, radiological, and chemical threats. H.R. 3293 provides $607,482,000 for the public health and social services emergency fund. S. 1436 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 Status of bill: Placed on Calendar in Senate. energy and water development and related Agencies appropriations act, 2010 (placed on calendar in Senate) The bill seeks to amend Part II of the Federal Power Act in order to address cybersecurity threats to the reliability of the bulk power system. In addition, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission would be authorized to respond in cases of imminent cyber security threats. The section also emphasizes ensuring that the Commission protects cybersecurity-related information. See under: Section 3—Protection of Bulk Power System From Cybersecurity Threats. H.R. 2195 to provide additional authorities to adequately protect the critical electric infrastructure against cyber attack. The bill attempts to improve the cybersecurity of the critical electric infrastructure. The Secretary of Homeland Security would be required to initiate several interim measures to protect the system from cyber attack. Section 4 would require the Secretary of Commerce to implement a system to provide dynamic and real-time cybersecurity status and vulnerability information for all federal government information systems and networks managed by the Department of Commerce. S. 773 Cybersecurity Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in Senate, Referred to Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act (referred to Senate committee after being received from House)—mentions a cyber attack as a security concern. S. 1436 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 (placed on Calendar in Senate)—for the "purpose of forming and governing a national energy sector cyber organization" The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and is now being considered by the Senate. The bill would create a cyber organization to focus cybersecurity research and development and to identify and disseminate best practices. Delivery and Energy Reliability. The section would allocate funding for the Department of Energy as it relates to electricity delivery and energy reliability. As part of the funding the Secretary must establish an "independent national energy sector cyber security organization" to institute research, development and deployment priorities. H.R. 2200 Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act Status of bill: Referred to Senate Committee. The bill is expected to be voted on by the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee in the coming weeks. The Senate has yet to vote on the bill. The bill would allocate $1,700,000 for the Center for Counterterrorism and Cyber Crime, located in Norwich University, Northfield, Vermont. One of the objectives of the mentioned "federal policy" is to provide cybersecurity for the regional electrical grid. H.R. 2454 American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 Status of bill : Placed on Calendar in Senate. See under: Title III—Protection, Preparedness, Response, and Recovery; Federal Emergency Management Agency; State and local programs; item 12 (B) S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009 (referred to Senate committee)—cybersecurity mentioned as a research priority for small businesses. Includes a cyber attack in the listing of major disaster. H.R. 1174 FEMA Independence Act: Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity is mentioned for an independent FEMA. S. 2454 American Clean Energy and Security Act: Cybersecurity mentioned in energy bill. HR. 2200 and privacy of the federal information technology infrastructure and networks: "coordinating closely with other federal departments and agencies" H.R. 2868 Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Act of 2009 (referred to House committee)—several sections mention cybersecurity in connection with overall security for chemical facilities. S. 1494 Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (passed/agreed to in Senate)—has an extensive and detailed section (340) on cybersecurity oversight. H.R 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of2009 (reached House subcommittee)—to create the Office of the Chief technology Officer within the Executive Office ofThe President. H.R. 7007 would have established the "American Cybersecurity Commission" The commission would have focused on "strategy for American business, national infrastructure, and United States Government non-military and non-national security related computer systems" H.R 5959 would have created a "comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative advisory panel" The bill was referred to the Senate Committee after being Received from the House. The bill called for the President to create an advisory panel to report on information security for the federal government. as of September 28, 2009. For the most up-to-date information, please consult the Legislative Information System (LIS) at http://www.congress.gov/ . Overview list of Bills in the 111 th Congress that Address a Cybersecurity-Related Issue Directly tied to cybersecurity S. 1438 Fostering a Global Response to Cyber Attacks Act (referred to Senate committee). H.R. 266 Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2009 (reached to House subcommittee)—expansion of professional cybersecurity education programs. S. 778 To establish, within the Executive Office of the President, the office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor. S. 921 would establish the National Office for Cyberspace within the Executive Office of the President. The Office would play a crucial role in deterring cyber attacks and defending the cyber critical infrastructure. H.R. 2165 Bulk Power System Protection Act of 2009 Status of bill : Introduced in House—referred to House Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. See under: Subchapter II—Information Security; Subsection 3552—National Office forCyberspace.Act of 2009 The proposed S. 733 in its initial version contained provisions for presidential cybersecurity authorities. Rewrites of this legislation reportedly may revise this provision. Such activities could be replaced or supplemented with the inclusion of cyber-security authorities. This may suggest to some that existing programs have emphasized securing networks before tackling the attendant issues such as freedom of speech, privacy, and civil liberty protections as they pertain to the Internet. Another common area of focus appears to be addressing issues related to workforce development, outreach, and collaboration-based initiatives. be addressed by the report required from the Director of National Intelligence on Cuba. S. 1494 Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Passed/agreed to in Senate. See under: Title III—General Intelligence Community Matters; Subtitle D—Congressional Oversight, Plans, and Reports; Section 340 – Cybersecurity Oversight. Section 340 would improve congressional oversight of federal cybersecurity programs. It would require that the President inform Congress about every cybersecurity program currently in operation and every new program created thereafter. The program notification must include some type of certification on the legality of the program. expresses the interest of Congress is improving the nation's cybersecurity overall. Section 4 would require the Secretary of State to submit to the Senate and House a report describing "any actions taken by the United States to work with the governments of foreign countries to improve cybersecurity" Under "Procurement—Defense Wide": Major Equipment DISA #027—Cyber Security Initiative $18,188. Under "Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Air Force": Cybersecurity for control networks research $4,000. P.L. 110-329 ( H.R. 2638 ) Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance, and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2009. Includes $143,539,000 in FBI salaries and expenses to "address emerging threats in counterterrorism and cybersecurity" P.L110-329 would have directed $3,500,000 for State and local cybersecurity training. Would have also directed $4,000,000 to the Idaho National Laboratory's Power and Cyber Systems Protection, Analysis, and Testing Program. the Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through the Assistant Secretary of Cybersecurity, to establish a program awarding competitive grants to institutions of higher education for cybersecurity programs. H.R. 4791 Federal Agency Data Protection Act would have required agencies to comply with information security policies and procedures. (CRS summary) Final status: Reported by the Committee on Homeland Security. In section 4, under the "authority of Director of Office of Management and Budget to establish information security Policies and procedures," it would haverequired agencies comply with. P.L. 110-5 ( H.J.Res. 20) Provides $43,075,000 for "cybersecurity" activities for the Department of Energy. Creates an Under Secretary responsible for overseeing critical infrastructure protection, cybersecurity, and other related programs. Also, creates R&D program that can "research technologies that mitigate damages in the event of a cyber attack" Mandates that the "smart grid" must incorporate "full cybersecurity" for "smart" grid. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008. Indicates that the annual report on the military power of the People's Republic of China must include "developments in China's asymmetric capabilities" Section 1814 requires the Secretary of Defense to prepare a plan for response to natural disasters and terrorist events. Section 3123 includes cybersecurity threats as part of the "plan for addressing security risks posed to nuclear weapons complex" P.L. 110-161 ( H.R. 2764 ) Consol Security Appropriations Act, 2010 (awaiting conference)—"$1,700,000 shall be for the Center for Counterterrorism and Cyber Crime." H.R. 2647 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (waiting conference)—civilian cybersecurity training authorization, creation of Joint Program Office for Cyber Operations Capabilities. Peripheral cybersecurity related or mentions P.L. 111-5 ( H.r. 1 ) American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 2009 —under Title XXX Health Information Technology and Quality, section 13001 directs privacy standards for electronic health information. Title VI directs the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Department. P.L. 107-347 on December 17, 2002. Title III of the E-Government Act of 2002. Contains standards for securing information and information systems within federal agencies. 18 U.S.C. § 2510 Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986. Title I of the ECPA protects wire, oral, and electronic communications while in transit. It sets down requirements for search warrants that are more stringent than those issued under the Patriot Act of 1973. It requires compliance reports be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in other settings. Title II of the ECPA, the Stored Communications Act (SCA) protects communication held in electronic storage, most notably messages stored on computers. 18 U.S.C. § 1030 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984 Status of bill: P.L. 98-473 , 98 Stat. 2190 on October 12, 1984. Defines criminality of security breaches and unauthorized access to data on federal computer systems and certain financial institutions. 42 USC § 201 The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPA A) Privacy and civil liberties concerns are not highlighted in recent congressional proposals. There are Internet privacy and non-disclosure policies written into statutory frameworks that may not specifically address cybersecurity. Civil liberties is an area of concern for both Congress and privacy advocates, but does not appear to be an immediate priority reflected in proposals. The National Security Advisor and the Director of the National Economic Council are among those who have raised privacy and civil liberty concerns in the past. The White House has not responded to requests for comment. of individually identifiable health information in computerized insurance records. 15 U.S.C. § 6801 Financial Services Modernizati on Act of 1999 (Gramm-Leach-Blil ey) Status of bill: P.L. 106-102 , 113 Stat. 1338, enacted November 12, 1999. See under: Disclosure of Nonpublic Personal Information (Financial Privacy Rule).  Requires financial institutions to provide consumers with a privacy notice at the time the consumer relationship is established and annually thereafter. of networks and information. It is difficult to secure information infrastructures and their content without tradeoffs between security and the freedoms associated with the Internet. Many concerned about civil liberties fear that the executive branch will use its national security powers and national defense mandate as justification for encroaching on privacy without adequate oversight. Others regard security measures, such as network traffic monitoring, as a violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Complicating the issue is a lack of consensus on how to proceed. with third-party companies. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-most-cnn-top-stories-of-the-year-2013/story.html?storylink=cpy. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. Click here for more information on CNN.com's top 10 stories of the year 2013. Click through the gallery to see more stories from 2013.