Current non-tariff barriers on vehicles are equivalent to a 26% tariff on vehicle imports. U.S. vehicle and parts exports to the EU could raise by over 200% and EU by 71%. Safety, fuel efficiency, and emissions standards differ between the two regions due to historical differences in producer and consumer preferences as well as the role of government in industry practices. The United States and the EU have different standards even for an item as large as a car. It projects that elimination of tariffs and just 10% of non-Tariff barriers could raise U.K. vehicle exports by over 50%. region where they are produced because of local consumer preferences and vehicle standards. In 2012, imports constituted about 20% of U.S. sales, and about 17% of sales in the EU. In some cases, a vehicle that is entirely legal in one country may not be sold in another due to differing fuel efficiency, safety, and emissions standards. For example, Ford Motor Company's ECOnetic high-efficiency diesel engine, made in Great Britain, gets up to 71 miles per gallon (mpg) of fuel. This engine is not sold. same in 2012: 14.8 million vehicles sold in the United States and 14.3 million in the EU. Seventeen of the EU member states manufacture vehicles. Germany is by far the largest auto producer within the EU (see Figure 2 ). The five top countries—Germany, Spain, France, United Kingdom and Czech Republic—manufacture more than 76% of all vehicles produced in the European Union. In the U.S., vehicles are manufactured in 15 states. Unlike some consumer goods, such as computers and apparel, most vehicles are sold in. in North America because it does not comply with U.S. and Canadian emissions standards. Ford has determined that expanding its Mexican engine plant to make a redesigned version of the ECOnetic for North America would cost $350 million. Increasingly, auto manufacturers and their parts suppliers have sought to organize their production on a global basis. The German automaker BMW, as an example, produces sport utility vehicles for markets worldwide from a plant in South Carolina. Greater commonality in regulation would make it easier for automakers and parts makers to organize production. standards. Many countries, including the United States, have adopted new standards that will be costly for manufacturers to meet. Automakers have responded by creating partnerships to develop more powerful batteries, multispeed transmissions, techniques to improve engine efficiency. Along these lines, BMW and Toyota have agreed to jointly develop fuel cell technology. About half of all the passenger cars sold in Europe have diesel engines, which are more efficient than gasoline engines and emit a lower level of some greenhouse gases. Many automakers believe that offering diesels (as well as higher-performing higher-performance vehicles) is a good idea. coordinate production across major markets. Automakers are developing global vehicle platforms that will reduce the number of models sold around the world. For example, the new Jeep Cherokee and Dodge Dart are based on Fiat's Compact Wide platform. The Ford Focus was developed in Europe but is built with similar components in the United States, China, Germany, Russia, and Thailand and sold in 130 countries. Joining forces to meet tightening world emission standards is one of the key ways to reduce carbon emissions in the future. The formal TTIP negotiations began in July 2013. Motor vehicle safety and emissions standards are areas where the U.S. side side impact protection, child restraint systems, and some emissions standards as priorities for selective mutual recognition. A fourth option would be to forge an agreement on emerging regulations, such as those dealing with electric and fuel cell vehicles, rather than focusing on existing regulations. Under this approach, the United States and the EU would commit to jointly develop standards covering new issues or technologies. The pending free trade agreement between the EU and Canada may influence the direction of TTIP. could play an important role if a TTIP agreement contains significant provisions related to auto safety, emissions, and fuel economy regulations. Congress established the U.S. government agencies whose regulations are the focus of the negotiations on automobile standards. If the TTIP effort to obtain mutual recognition or harmonization affects agencies' authority or changes the ways in which automotive regulations are developed and implemented, Congress may well be asked to modify the underlying statutes that govern motor vehicle safety, emission, and Fuel Economy regulations. Canada will recognise a list of EU car standards and will examine the recognition of further standards. This will make it much easier to export cars to Canada. The agreement is also said to allow Canadian vehicles to be certified in Canada for the EU market. Convergence of vehicle standards has potential drawbacks. One aspect pertains to the lack of speed with which governmental agencies can address new technologies and vehicle innovations. The rule-making process is already lengthy, and the need for international coordination could make it even longer. that could reduce accidents may be delayed in reaching the market. The EU acknowledges that if vehicle standards become international, there could be less room for legislative scrutiny. U.S. consumer advocacy groups have raised similar concerns about TTIP. The United States and the EU must not limit the United States or the EU from adopting and enforcing standards that provide higher levels of consumer, worker, and environmental protection, the groups say in a July 2013 letter to the leaders of the U.K. and U. S. Congress. requirements." C omprehensive mutual recognition . This approach would permit automakers to sell vehicles in either market if they meet either a U.S. standard or a standard accepted in the EU. This approach is how the EU certification process works. S elective mutual recognition. This would identify certain major standards for which TTIP could provide mutual recognition, rather than providing mutual recognition of all standards. A car certified as compliant with US safety, emission, and fuel efficiency standards would be accepted as compliant in EU, and vice versa. Trade in vehicles and parts between the United States and the EU reached $57 billion in 2012. TTIP represents another effort to extend regional templates to encompass a greater share of trade and investment. The EU 27 produced more than the U.S. in 2012, compared to 10.3 million vehicles in each region. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, a separate negotiation, could have a similar effect, writes David Frum, a trade expert at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of a book on the topic. Past auto agreements have been effective in leading to a more globalized auto industry. The 1965 motor vehicle agreement between the United States and Canada and the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) removed barriers to trade and cross-border trade in autos. Some of these differences may reflect past efforts to protect domestic vehicle industries against foreign competition. Others may result from different legal traditions or divergent views as to the best way to achieve goals such as cleaner air and reduced oil consumption.simple as a seat belt. In November 2011, President Obama and leaders of the European Union (EU) named a High Level Working Group on Jobs and Growth to recommend steps to broaden transatlantic economic ties. In its final report, issued in February 2013, the working group called for a new bilateral agreement to govern transatlantic trade and investment. Such an agreement, the group urged, should provide for "the promotion of more compatible approaches to current and future regulation and standard-setting" One month later, Obama notified Congress that the United States would enter into negotiations. Environmental matters were not included in the EU's founding Treaty of Rome. Prior to the mid-1980s, UNECE produced regulations relating to safety, environmental protection, and energy efficiency. The member states signed the Single European Act (SEA) in 1985 with a goal of unifying the European. It was a common practice for EU member countries to adopt standards and regulations similar to those issued byUNECE. Each country retained authority to adjust the UNECe standards as it saw fit. Under the SEA, auto emissions regulations were harmonized across Europe in 1987. Initially, the harmonized standards were less strict than US standards. Similar to the 1970 U.S. Clean Air Act proviso for California, the SEA allows member states to enact measures more stringent than those enacted by the EU. Directive 70/220/EEC covered CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions from gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicles. In June 1991, the Council of Ministers of the European Council adopted the Consolidated Emissions Directive (commonly referred to as "Euro 1") WP.29 is a subsidiary body of the Inland Transport Committee of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) WP.29 administers a 1958 agreement on vehicle construction and two related agreements which were adopted by some European countries to promote EU-wide integration of vehicle design, construction and safety. UNECE standards deal with vehicle safety, environmental protection, fuel efficiency, and anti-theft performance. Signatories to the 1958 U.N. agreement commit to mutual recognition of each other. UNECE regulations do not cover the whole vehicle, only its parts. WP.29's voting members are limited to government representatives, but automakers, trade associations, and other nongovernmental organizations also participate in its meetings. The United States did not sign the 1958 UNECE agreement because it would require mutual recognition of standards generated outside the United States. After U.S. self-certification began in 1967, the UNecE approach was seen as incompatible with the U.s. process. Since 1970, the EU has used the Whole Vehicle Type Approval system. Some European automakers "preferred to limit the extension of standards to those that would create obstacles to the invasion of foreign vehicles into their national markets" Over time, the balance shifted to favor more similarity between U.S. and EU standards. The EU system applies to a complete vehicle, often taking into account the UNECE standards promulgated for specific auto parts. Nearly every EU country has either a government agency or designated privately-owned test houses that conduct testing. UNECE and its successor, the EU, have sought to promote a single European market in motor vehicles. Tariffs on cars traded between member states were eliminated in 1968. In 1970, the European Community enacted a framework that laid the basis for vehicle approval harmonization across all member states. Initially, European working groups on vehicle safety issues based their work on U.S. standards and practice because the United States had established a federal safety program earlier. It has been suggested that one reason for the slow development of European standards is the lack of a national safety program. Once an EU member state approves a new vehicle, it can be marketed throughout the EU. The EU agreed in 2007 that the UNECE regulations would be incorporated into the EU type-approval procedure. Legislative work at the EU level is led by European Commission's Directorate of Enterprise and Industry. Vehicle safety promotion is also pursued by the European Commission through initiatives such as DG Transport's EU road safety action program and DG Information and Society's E-safety and Intelligent Car initiatives. programs to address air pollution in the United States. About 10% of NHTSA and EPA standards are based on work SAE has already done. ISO has developed nearly 20,000 standards across a range of industries. For example, a 2010 ISO standard addressed automotive crankshaft bearings. International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) is a private organization founded in 1906 that develops and implements standards.or emissions. Standards are typically developed through negotiation in technical committees comprising representatives of many countries. The International Organization for Standardization ( ISO) was founded in 1947 and develops voluntary international standards. IEC standards related to motor vehicles concern charging system architecture, lithium batteries, and other aspects of electric vehicles. Various other private-sector advocacy groups are engaged in identifying and publicizing new vehicle standards. In the United States, these include the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, American National Standards Institute (ANSI), National Safety Council, the Center for Auto Safety, and Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety. in the EU, nonprofit groups such as the European Transport Safety are involved in the development of new standards. obtaining functional equivalency determinations from regulatory agencies might be difficult. An alternative approach was developed in the 1998 UN agreement on global technical regulations, which created a global registry of processes and common technical standards. This initiative, resulting in the creation of the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations, has resulted in agreement on only 13 technical regulations to date. Simultaneously, there has been a transatlantic dialogue on autos since the mid-1990s through the U.S.-EU High-Level Regulatory Cooperation Forum. The 1996 TransAtlantic Automotive Industry Conference on International Regulatory Harmonization produced a report on the auto sector. NHTSA sent a report to Congress in April 1997 discussing potential harmonization of U.S. and European side impact standards. A similar bilateral regulatory initiative has been under way since 2011 with Canada. An EU initiative, the Competitive Automotive Regulatory System for the 21s Century, or CARS 21, has also explored harmonization issues. A 2012 CARs 21 report recommended exploration of ways to bring about "stronger internationalisation of standards" The U.S. signed a 1998 UNECE agreement which establishes global technical regulations (GTRs) GTRs are issued in a UN Global Registry and contracting parties use their own regulatory process to implement them. Unlike the 1958 agreement, there is no requirement for type approval and mutual recognition of approvals. The World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations promulgates regulations affecting vehicle safety, environmental protection, energy efficiency, and anti-theft performance. It is a U.N. body with a global approach. In Europe, a system of governmental control over autos was more prevalent, first in each country and later through the EU. EU directives passed by the European Parliament have the force of regulations. In the early decades of the automobile, U.S. vehicles were lightly regulated by a combination of state and private sector standards. In 1952, the United Nations (U.N.) established the Working Party on the Construction of Automobiles (WPCAC) The European vehicle regulatory regime now includes both EU directives and standards promulgated through a United Nations organization. In 2006, CARS 21 called for gradually replacing some EU laws with UN regulations. More than 40 EU directives have been replaced with corresponding UN regulations since that time. Harmonization need not mean having identical rules in both regions. From the viewpoint of auto manufacturers, it means minimizing unnecessary differences in regulations so that a "single vehicle standard" can be built to satisfy all. The U.S. and the EU could address convergence of automotive regulations under TTIP. These include the following: H armonization of rules. European, U.S. and Japanese auto industry groups sought common regulatory ground in 1996. They proposed to harmonize regulation of five vehicle components, including windshield wipers, defoggers, and seat belt assemblies. The regulatory bodies did not agree to any changes, however, because the data-driven review process made it difficult to prove functional equivalency of even a standard component such as a seat belt. This experience suggested that the EU standard-setting process should be changed to make it more transparent. Europe were set in 1998-99 through voluntary agreements between the European Commission and the automotive industry. These agreements targeted fleet-average CO 2 emissions of 140 g/km by 2008-09. After 2004 the manufacturers failed to meet their targets through voluntary actions. In response, the Commission developed a mandatory CO 2 emission reduction program, and CO2 emission targets for new passenger cars were adopted in April 2009. The regulation established a fleet- average CO 2 target of 130 g/ km by 2015 and defined a long-term target of 95 g. not issue fuel economy standards similar to the U.S. CAFE standards. As shown in Table A-4 , EU fleet-average CO 2 emission targets as required by EU Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 are 130 g/km to be reached by 2015. A long-term target of 95 g/ km to be reach by 2020 is also required by the EU. For more information on the EU's CO 2 emissions targets, visit the European Commission's website. for more information about the EU CO2 emissions targets. The EU does not set fuel economy standards for vehicles directly. Instead, it sets standards for GHG emissions in terms of the mass of CO 2 , measured in grams, emitted from a vehicle's tailpipe per kilometer driven. These standards can be used to estimate fuel economy for vehicles sold in Europe. The first carbon dioxide emission targets for new passenger cars in fuel efficiency of each manufacturer's new-vehicle fleet through the CAFE standards, and separately imposes standards forGHG emissions from new mobile sources. The standards include incentives for vehicles with CO 2 emissions below 50 g/km and for those running on a mixture of 85% ethanol (E85) Certain flexibilities are available for manufacturers, including credits for technology innovations, pooling between manufacturers, and exemptions for low-volume manufacturers. Emission limits are set according to the mass of vehicle using a fleet-average limit value curve. As with the other EU regulated vehicle emissions, CO2 emissions are measured over the NEDC test cycle. CAFE and GHG emission certification is typically based on fuel economy and emission data provided by vehicle manufacturers. This procedure is sometimes referred to as the EPA 2-cycle test. CAFE values are generally higher than typical fuel efficiency in real-world operation or as published by the government or posted on new vehicles. This discrepancy reflects the fact that the EPA does not set fuel economy standards for new vehicles in the first place.program flexibilities include Air Conditioning Improvement Credits, Advanced Technology Credits, Off-Cycle Innovative Technology Credits and Early Credits. This measurement procedure allows heavier cars to have higher emissions than lighter cars while preserving the overall fleet average. Each manufacturer will have its own fleet-wide standard which reflects the vehicles it chooses to produce. The regulation also includes a system of averaging, banking, and trading (ABT) of credits, based on a manufacturer's fleet average CO 2 performance. Credit trading is allowed among all vehicles a manufacturer produces, both cars and light trucks, as well as between companies. For a summary of the 2012 CAFE and GHG vehicle standards, see Table A-3 of the Appendix. setting more complex, as NHTSA and EPA issue separate standards but act in concert. standards call for combined passenger car and light truck GHG emissions of no more than 163 grams per mile by 2025. This translates into a 54.5 mile-per-gallon equivalent. The GHG standards are based on CO 2 emissions-footprint curves, where each vehicle has a different CO 2 compliance target depending on its "footprint" value, related to the size of the vehicle. From 1975 to 1988, the average fuel economy of new automobiles increased 81%, from 15.8 to 28.6 mpg. In the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 (EPCA), Congress established Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for new passenger vehicles starting with model year (MY) 1978. EPCA prohibited states from issuing their own fuel efficiency standards. NHTSA administering the congressionally established standards. The U.S. first issued vehicle fuel economy standards in response to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries oil embargo of 1973. Before 2007, NHTSA had very little authority to modify passenger car standards without congressional direction. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) raised the fuel economy standards of passenger vehicles, light trucks, and sport utility vehicles. In 2009, the Obama Administration, some state regulators, and the auto industry crafted a federal program to modify CAFE standards. The most significant recent change in fuel economy Standards took place outside of the previous channel of congressional action. The Obama Administration and some state regulatory agencies crafted a program to change CAFE Standards. The U.S. standard regulates all the GHG emissions from the vehicle in terms of CO 2 -equivalents; the EU regulates only carbon dioxide emissions. The EU sets fleet-average GHG standards in relationship to the mass of a vehicle, whereas the United States sets standards based on the vehicle "footprint" The EU and United States use varying definitions of vehicle categories and weight classes, with proposed targets based on projected sales of vehicles in different size and/or weight classes within each each country. EU GHG standards return a greater sales-based and fleet-wide emission reduction than those in the United States. Figure 4 represents an estimate of historical and projected fuel economy targets, adjusted for the factors outlined above. In the U.S. and the EU, NGOs play a role in the setting of vehicle standards, including these entities: Society of Automotive Engineers ( SAE ) remains involved in developing recommended standards for industry and has issued or updated about 2,000 motor vehicle standards in the past five years. gasoline, electric, and hybrid vehicles) will be necessary to meet higher U.S. fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions standards. Having similar standards for diesel engines in the two regions could reduce design and manufacturing costs. In the United States, private standards and state regulation prevailed until the 1960s and 1970s, when federal legislation was passed. Since then, Congress has delegated vehicle regulation to federal agencies, occasionally providing specific direction through legislation. The processes by which the US and EU establish vehicle safety, fuel efficiency, and emission standards have evolved in different ways. originally used by UNECE and by the difficulty of obtaining agreement among so many individual countries. With the recent shift to decision procedures requiring less-than-unanimous agreement within the European Commission, it has been possible for the Commission to adopt more stringent emission standards. A comparison of current emissions standards for selected pollutants is shown in Figure 3. For a more detailed survey of the standards in each region, see the Appendix. In the United States, establishing fuel economy standards is a function of direct statutory authority. This agreement grew out of the fuel efficiency standards passed by Congress in 2007. The agreement enabled automakers to manufacture vehicles that are in compliance with both federal and state requirements under the Clean Air Act. The combined CAFE/GHG standards have made standard. The CAFE-GHG agreement has been signed into law by the White House on October 1, 2013. It is expected to be implemented by the end of the year. It will apply to light duty vehicle fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas emission standards. "Tier 2" standards have been in place since 2004. Anyone wishing to sell an engine or vehicle within the U.S. must demonstrate compliance with the CAA and all applicable EPA regulations. This approval process differs from the self-certification used by NHTSA and is closer to the EU type approval system for safety and emissions regulations. Once EPA sets emission standards for a particular engine and/or vehicle category, than vehicles with smaller engines are required to meet the standards for that category. Current EPA emissions standards for vehicles regulate CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions. Subsequently, EPA promulgated "Tier 2" standards on February 10, 2000. The Tier 2 regulations introduced more stringent numerical emission limits and a number of additional changes that tightened the standards for larger vehicles. Since light-duty emission standards are expressed in grams of pollutants per mile, vehicles with large engines (such light trucks or SUVs) were required to use more advanced emission control technologies. New regulations are first published as proposed rules, and following a period of public discussion may be withdrawn or amended. The Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) of 1990 ( P.L. 101-549 ) established standards to limit tailpipe emissions from new motor vehicles. These Tier 1 standards applied to all new light-duty vehicles. Separate sets of standards were defined for each vehicle category, with more relaxed limits for heavier vehicles. The CAAA also required EPA to study the need for new tailpipe standards for heavy vehicles, such as SUVs, minivans, and pick-up trucks. manufacturers must produce engines that meet those standards by a specified date. Conformity is determined under test procedures specified by EPA. The most common testing procedure used by EPA is the Federal Test Procedure, as mandated by the Energy Tax Act of 1978. Tests are based on the Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule to reflect typical driving patterns. Currently, EPA uses a three-tiered compliance strategy for light-duty vehicles: (1) pre-production evaluation to certify vehicles prior to sale; (2) a production evaluation on the assembly line for early evaluation of production vehicles. In the EU, emission standards only apply when the vehicle is produced (conformity of production) Once the vehicle leaves the factory and enters service, the manufacturer has no liability for its continued compliance with emission limits. Surveillance testing, mandatory emissions system warranties, recall campaigns, and other features of U.S. emissions regulation are not incorporated in the European regulatory structure. A key difference between the EU and the United States is the test procedure, in particular the drive cycle that a car has to go through on a roller bench. ushered in the current regulatory regime for vehicle emission standards in Europe. Current standards (referred to as "Euro 5") cover CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions, and differentiate between gasoline and diesel vehicles. Euro 6 standards are scheduled to be implemented in September 2014 (strengthening NO x standards for diesel vehicles) The evolution of EU exhaust emission standards for light-duty, gasoline- and diesel-fueled vehicles is traced in Table A-2 of the Appendix. 2000 with the Euro 3 standard, the test procedure was modified to eliminate the engine warm-up period before the beginning of emission sampling. Further, the Euro 5/6 implementing legislation introduced a new PM mass emission measurement method. Vehicle emissions standards established by the EU and the United States are not directly comparable because of the differences in the testing procedures and approval processes. Both the European and the U.S. systems of compliance are based on the Approval Process. The Euro 5-6 system of compliance is based on. The EU uses the New European Drive Cycle (NEDC) and the United States uses the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) Differences between the two include distance, duration, and vehicle speed, as well as factors such as whether the vehicle must begin at a cold start or whether there is a warm-up period. Some observers have noted that the European emission standards have historically lagged behind the U.S. standards. This lag may be attributed to the complex, consensus-based approach to standard setting. A critical aspect of the air quality problem in urban areas has been ground-level ozone production. Emissions of hydrocarbons and NO x from motor vehicles are responsible for contributing to the formation of ozone. Motor vehicles represent the largest domestic source of air toxics, or pollutants known or suspected to cause cancer or other serious health or environmental effects. Vehicles have been determined to contribute approximately one quarter of domestic GHG emissions, which trap heat in the earth's atmosphere, contributing to global climate change. The federal Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act of 1965 adopted both the California crankcase and tailpipe emissions standards for 1968 model-year vehicles. Congress strengthened federal authority in 1967 by explicitly preempting states from adopting or enforcing new motor vehicle emission standards in the Air Quality Act of 1967. This preemption provision (with California as the sole exemption) remains in effect today as Section 209(a) of the Clean Air Act (CAA) At present, the federal government manages vehicle emissions controls, although the state of California remains a major force in shaping national legislation. California is the only state vested by the CAA with the authority to develop its own emission regulations if EPA grants the state a waiver. California emission standards are administered by the California Air Resources Board, a regulatory body within the California Environmental Protection Agency. The CAA allows other states a choice between implementing federal emission standards or adopting the California requirements. The evolution of U.S. emission standards for light-duty, gasoline-fueled vehicles is traced to the 1970s and '80s. In 1959, California became the first state to address pollution from cars. In 1960, Congress directed the Surgeon General to study the "various substances discharged from the exhausts of motor vehicles" This regulatory pattern continued throughout the 1960s, as California authorities established control requirements and the U.S. government followed suit. For example, California required the control of crankcase emissions in 1961and set the first HC and CO emissions in 1964. In 1965, California set a limit on the amount of CO emissions a car can emit. substantial improvement in the safety characteristics of vehicles. Since it was established, NHTSA has issued dozens of safety standards, and it maintains an extensive database on vehicle crashes. The law puts the onus for enforcement of federal standards on automakers themselves. It provides that "a manufacturer or distributor of a motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment shall certify to the distributor or dealer at delivery that the vehicle or equipment complies with applicable motor vehicle safety standards prescribed" The agency neither approves motor vehicles or parts as complying with its standards nor collects information from manufacturers. NHTSA buys vehicles from dealers and tests them at its own facilities. If NHTSA determines there is noncompliance, it can encourage the manufacturer to recall the model to correct the problem or can order a recall. The law also makes manufacturers responsible for testing of vehicles and liable for recalls and penalties if they are later found not to meet NHTsa's standards.under this chapter.... Certification of a vehicle must be shown by a label or tag permanently fixed to the vehicle. in this chapter. In Senator Warren Magnuson, chairman of the Commerce Committee, argued that Congress was implementing a limited type of regulation. The committee also recognizes that the broad powers conferred upon the Secretary, while essential to achieve improved traffic safety, could be abused in such a manner as to have serious adverse effects on the automotive manufacturing industry. The Committee expects that the Secretary will act responsibly and inSuch a way as to achieve a better traffic safety. The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) was established in 1970. Vehicle Code; 13 had implemented portions and only six had taken no action. With the start of the Interstate Highway system in the 1950s, greater automobile travel, and rising highway deaths, the interest in vehicle safety grew. Between 1962 and 1964, Congress passed three safety bills into law, including a seat belt regulation. These laws set the stage for more ambitious legislation a few years later. For example, the legislation establishing safety requirements for federal fleet vehicles led to the promulgation of 17 standards by 1966. Most significant change in U.S. vehicle safety regulation came with the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966. Senator Abraham Ribicoff, one of the advocates of the new legislation, said "this problem is so vast that the Federal Government must have a role" As passed unanimously by both houses of Congress and signed by President Johnson, the legislation was a major impetus. Curtailing auto-related highway deaths was a other major impetus for the legislation. The legislation was signed into law by President Lyndon Johnson in 1966. The Highway Safety Act of 1966 mandated that each state put in place a highway safety program in accordance with federal standards. The National Traffic Safety Agency was established to carry out the provisions. In 1967, the agency was renamed the National Highway Traffic Safety Safety Agency. The agency was later changed to the Secretary of Transportation when that agency was established in 1967. The act was signed into law on January 1, 1967. It was one of the first federal highway safety laws in the history of the U.S. integrity these new, little-understood machines. Regulating either driver conduct or vehicle design at the national level did not conform to existing political ideas about the appropriate federal division of responsibilities. The only useful and politically acceptable action Congress might take was to help the states and localities construct more and better roads. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), a professional association founded in 1905, became the primary source of vehicle safety and emission rules for many decades. It is no longer in existence. State governments often used SAE recommendations to enact requirements for vehicle equipment, such as dual brakes, headlamps, and windshield wipers. Other SAE standards were adopted directly by manufacturers. The first step toward a nationwide system of vehicle regulation came in 1926, when a voluntary Uniform Vehicle Code was drafted to replace the many different state rules. By 1946, 30 of the then 48 states (plus the District of Columbia) had adopted the Uniform Vehicle code. The code specified the types of lighting, reflectors, brakes, mirrors, and tires that cars should have.