QMU was that several steps in a nuclear weapon must all work for the weapon to function. Each step, or "gate" in QMU terminology, can be quantified. For example, a certain amount of energy must be transmitted to the secondary for it to detonate. Another QMU concept is margin. If the minimum amount of. energy needed to. detonate the secondary is X, and the amount needed to detonated the secondary. is Y, then the margin is X. of energy predicted to be transmitted to the secondary is 3X, then there is a margin of 2X, i.e., margin is the amount by which the predicted quantity exceeds the minimum required quantity. Did the calculation incorporate all relevant variables? Were there biases in experiments on which the calculations were based? Were the most relevant nuclear tests used as a data source? The uncertainty can be quantified through calculations (such as computer models); further, the amount of uncertainty is bounded because each gate has an upper and a lower. QMU provides three key concepts relevant to decisionmaking on pit manufacturing. Margin is the amount by which (1) space available for pit manufacturing exceeds (2) space required to manufacture 80 ppy. The degree of confidence at each gate is expressed as margin divided by uncertainty; the higher the number, the greater the confidence.limit. If margin exceeds uncertainty for a particular gate, then there can be confidence that the weapon will "pass through" that gate satisfactorily, and if margin exceeds. uncertainty for all gates, there is confidence that it will work.  uncertainty in QMU cannot be predicted or bounded, let alone quantified. Another means of maintaining margin, not shown in Figure 1 , is for Congress or NNSA to bar from PF-4 new missions that would consume MAR and space. It would not be acceptable to let uncertainties that materialize into actual events reduce margin below zero, as Figure 1 shows. The effects of these uncertainties on pit manufacturing can be calculated once they materialize, but the likelihood that they will come into being is uncertain. weapons complex has ample space and MAR for AC for 80 ppy. Uncertainty : Margins can change over time. The longer the timeframe, the more uncertainties can be expected to increase. Figure 1 shows hypothetical examples of uncertainties. Those in red could reduce margin, and those in green could increase it. The higher the uncertainty, the greater the risk of margin being reduced or increased in a given time period. The more uncertainties there are, the less margin margin can be calculated in advance. provide a positive margin. Non-feasible options would not merit further consideration. The next step would be to estimate the cost of the feasible options and decide which are affordable. These data are needed to eliminate unaffordable options. High cost has caused the demise of several nuclear weapons complex projects. Not shown in the figure is that MAR and space margins may change over time, as Figure 1. The final choice would be made by comparing those options against other possible criteria in order to make a final choice. would be difficult at best. The answer is also related to cost and equipment. Using two shifts per day, it might be possible to reach 80 ppy with equipment that would support 50 ppy on a single shift. A more costly option would be to increase the amount of equipment (and thus floor space used) to enable production of 80 with asingle shift. Would the capacity be held in standby mode most of the time, available for use as needed; operated for months or years at 80 p py for certain pit campaigns and held in low-rate production mode for. of space by allowing fewer pieces of equipment to produce a given amount of product, thereby reducing space requirements. Rocky Flats Plant, for example, generally operated using three shifts per day. On the other hand, a higher tempo for an extended period could increase operating cost, require more maintenance, reduce time available for maintenance, and increase the likelihood of equipment failure. Such options would almost surely be faster and less costly than major construction, but without data on space required for 80 ppy, it is not possible to know if they would. would provide an added measure of confidence in the study. What capacity is being sought? Is it 80 ppy, or 50 with a surge capacity to 80, or something else? What operating tempo is planned? Would manufacturing use 1 shift per day/5 days a week, 2 shifts per day, or operate 24/7? The answer is related to capacity. If the capacity sought is80 ppy using 3 shifts each day, a higher surge capacity would be needed. If it is 80 pPy using 3 hours a day, it would need to be at least 125 ppy. and to demonstrate for at least 90 days during 2027 the ability to manufacture WR pits at a rate of 80 per year. Some favor a capacity of greater than 80 ppy, while others argue that a lower number would suffice. The debate over that capacity would take on added salience to the extent that it moves within the realm of the military's range. The report focuses on how to achieve the high end of DOD's range because that is the high-end of its range. It is beyond the scope of this report. out of the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research building (described below), which became operational in 1952. While DOD has a requirement for up to 80 ppy, some key questions about how to manufacture at that rate remain not only unanswered but also unasked. Without answers to these questions, Congress cannot know whether existing buildings, without modifications, could manufacture 80 pPy; or if modest upgrades would suffice. If major construction would be needed to augment capacity, this report provides a framework for such construction. that could force a halt to pit manufacturing. One way to maintain enough margin to support a specified pit manufacturing capacity is to develop multiple means to counterbalance uncertainties that would reduce margin. Some means could be implemented promptly; others could be developed, held in reserve, and implemented only as needed. Having these means available for future deployment would add confidence that sufficient margin could be maintained. Determining how much MAR and space would be needed to manufacture 80 ppy would require an industrial process analysis. It appears that it would take over a decade to reach 80 ppy, and the path to that capacity is obscure. If the path becomes clearer, it would become more important to determine if 80 is the right number, or if it should be higher or lower. This report starts with a static approach to pit manufacturing, examining the history of pit manufacturing in the U.S. and around the world. It ends with a more dynamic approach, examining how pit manufacturing has changed over the years. that some lessons learned would lead to increased costs. What is the first module estimated to cost? The second? How sensitive is the cost of pit manufacturing to capacity, and what tradeoffs might a sensitivity analysis reveal? As a hypothetical example, if it cost an additional several billion dollars to move from 70 to 80 ppy, would it be worth spending the added money? Would it be less costly to move Pu-238 to INL, SRS, or a newly-built module? not, how much AC should be done there and how much at another site. Without data on such matters as building condition and cost for any required upgrades and equipment, it is not possible to determine the relative merits of the options. Figure 8 shows a notional decision sequence for downselecting pit manufacturing options. After defining options meriting consideration, the first question is, Which options are feasible? It would be simple to compare data on the required MAR and space, once they become available, against the amount ofMAR and space released by each option. staffing the new facility, and so on—of the move. A fourth option to release space would be to build one or more modules for lower-MAR activities now housed in PF-4. While these activities have a lower MAR level, they would still require Hazard Category 3-level facilities. Moving out these two activities would release about 6,800 square feet of lab space, 11% of the total. Some waste processing activities inPF-4 are also lower- MAR, but they would not be moved. drum storage, freeing space to house such laboratory-floor operations as nondestructive analysis, and some waste management operations. Move some equipment out of PF-4. For example, a gas gun, which propels a metal slug into a plutonium target to study how plutonium behaves under impact. The gas gun uses 1,200 sf of laboratory space inPF-4 and some basement space. Moving it to RLUOB (if that building's MAR were to be increased substantially) or to another site would release space. PF-4 to manufacture up to 30 ppy instead of 10; increased efficiencies of this type would reduce space requirements for 80 ppy, increasing margin. Develop equipment and processes for faster work flow so fewer pieces of equipment to manufacture a specified number of pits, reducing floor space. Repurpose unused space or space used for lower-priority programs, as discussed. Make more efficient use of PF-4's basement, which houses the nuclear materials vault and most utilities, and provides space for shipping and receiving and for staging waste drums. The space limit is absolute: 60,000 sf of laboratory space. The MAR limit is somewhat flexible, as various measures can increase it. If manufacturing 80 ppy requires more space than is available in PF-4, NNSA would need to find alternatives, whether building modules, moving some tasks to other sites, or reducing capacity to whatever level is needed. LANL is undertaking such projects, e.g., decontaminating some rooms that are no longer in use and "repurposing" them to make them available for pit manufacture. Figure 2 shows the 2012 allocation of space in PF-4 by program. The gray area, 4,700 square feet (sf), is available for immediate repurposing. It consists of laboratory rooms not currently in use. White areas represent non-laboratory areas. This analysis also applies to " MAR Options for PF- 4 ," below, and is not repeated there.promptly or held in reserve. For each, a decision would be needed on whether to proceed and, if so, when. rather than trying to build a "big box" plutonium building that would attempt to accommodate all foreseeable future needs. Others respond that modules could be costly and, if existing buildings can be used, may not be needed. Another option (not shown) would be to build one module for Pu-238 work or pit casting. This option would release some 5,000 sf in PF-4 in addition to the 4,700 sf available for repurposing. A third option would move Pu- 238 work from LANL to Savannah River Site (SRS) and Idaho National Laboratory (INL), have worked with Pu-238 and have stated that they have, or could modify, buildings to do this work. This option would result in 26,300 sf for pit work in PF-4. In determining the feasibility of this option, NNSA would need to evaluate space and MAR at other sites, as well as the costs—the move itself, repurposing PF- 4 space, refurbishing, reequipping, and. The cost of this project would be in the tens of millions of dollars. Pit fabrication occupies 12,000 sf. One option involves building one or more " modules," reinforced-concrete structures that would be buried near PF-4. modules would be designed for high-MAR tasks, such as casting plutonium into hemishells or working with Pu-238. LANL maintains that a key advantage of modules is that they would permit expansion of capacity on an as-needed basis. (Space for some other tasks, like Plutonium Recycle and Purification, would also support pit manufacturing.) much space would plutonium disposition require? While major construction could make more space available, increasing efficient use of existing space could increase the space margin. LANL is currently redesigning the existing pit fabrication space in PF-4. The process line was intended as a pilot plant to develop, quickly, techniques for resuming production. It was not intended as the nation's pit production site; other proposed facilities, such as the Modern Pit Facility, were to fill that role. It could be done in several ways, including: Designing work flow to minimize space utilization. work on plutonium and can manufacture pits. Unused space therefore represents opportunity for plutonium work forgone. Would moving the entire Pu-238 line, 9,600 sf, to another site have the same result? Or would the released space be needed to accommodate added equipment needed to manufacture 80 ppy? At present, RLUOB is permitted to have 26 grams of WGPu MAR for AC, which is not nearly enough to perform the AC for 80 p py. If this limit remains in amount of MAR to the same scale as Table 1 and assumes that programs other than pit manufacturing use the MAR they used on February 27, 2013, for the foreseeable future. It shows that if the newly-available 800 kg PE of MAR and the unallocated MAR are both allocated to pit manufacturing and combined with the pit fabrication MAR, then 57.0% of the MAR in PF-4 would be available for pit work. (While the amount of MAR used by other tasks remains the same, the percentage of MAR they use is lower than in Table 1 because each task accounts for different amounts of MAR) 2 would have 6.5% as much. MAR available in PF-4 for pit manufacturing would increase to 62.5%. Option 2 would move the Pu-238 MAR contained in 5,000 sf ofPF-4 to one module. This option requires half as many modules as the first option. Under Option 2, pit fabrication would be allocated 72.4% of the 2,600 kg PE of MAR inPF-3. Under this option, the MAR available for repurposing would also be allocated to pit fabrication. Pu-238 is only a small fraction of PF-4's radioactive material by weight. It is so radioactive that it is allocated 40% of the MAR allowance, though it did not use that much on February 27, 2013. If adding 800 kg of MAR is not sufficient to support 80 ppy, at least three other options would release more MAR. For example, 91% of Pu-238 MAR was at one point concentrated in 5,000 sf of the 9,600 sf that Pu- 238 Programs occupy inPF-4. " Increasing MAR Margin Without Major Construction ." They proceed on an open-ended basis guided by results of continuing analyses. Once some additional upgrades are completed, PF-4's MAR allowance may revert to 2,600 kg or perhaps some other number. This analysis assumes a MAR allowance of 2, 600 kg PE and, as noted in the sidebar, uses space data from 2012. LANL points out thatPF-4, as the only U.S. building that is currently able to make pits, is essential to the entire nuclear weapons enterprise. and releases twice the MAR as Option 1. Option 3 (not shown) would move all Pu-238 work to INL or SRS. This would free up all the MAR, vs. 91% for Option 2. As with space, it may be possible to increase MAR margin without major construction. One approach is to strengthen PF-4 seismically to reduce the risk of building collapse through such steps as wrapping supporting columns in carbon fiber bonded with epoxy to strengthen them, anchoring them. As of 2012, 4,700 sf was available for immediate repurposing in PF-4. How much space is available now? Is that space, plus the 12,000 sf for pit fabrication, plus space for other pit-related tasks, enough to manufacture 80 ppy? Would one module release enough MAR and space inPF-4 for pit manufacture? If yes, would that be the case if pit casting were moved to the module, or if Pu-238 were move to the modules? be needed to manufacture 80 ppy; lay out production lines in PF-4 to accommodate that equipment while retaining space needed for other tasks; and calculate what MAR would result from this production line configuration. An extrapolation provides an upper bound: If a given amount of space and equipment can make 30 ppy, then three times those amounts could make 90 ppy. However, such a study is likely to find that less space and less space is needed. Adding complexity to the calculation, constraints imposed by room layout, facility layout, and process flows must be considered. other periods; operated at a steady rate, less than 80 ppy, to level out the workload; or operated at full capacity at all times. What programs could be moved out of PF-4 if necessary to create enough space or MAR, where would they go, what would the move cost, and who would pay? What is a reasonable tradeoff between cost and capacity? As a notional example, if LANL could manufacture 70 ppy using existing buildings and an operating cost of $500 million per year, but it would cost $1 billion per year. layout to manufacture 30 ppy would fully consume the space, and most of the MAR allowance, currently available in PF-4. Manufacturing 80 ppy will require more space and MAR than are currently available for that task. Further, updated seismic modeling results raised concerns that an earthquake might collapse or otherwise compromise the building, forcing a reduction in MAR from 2,600 kg PE to 1,800 kg PE. Various projects to increase seismic robustness have been underway for years; see the section for details. for 80 ppy, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC at LLNL or at SRS? LANL is conducting projects to bolster the seismic robustness of PF-4. If 2,600 kg PE is not enough MAR, could additional projects raise the MAR allowance enough to accommodate manufacture of 80 p py? LANl maintains that each successive module should cost less than the one before it. On the other hand, it is possible to increase the MAR from 1,800 to 2, 600 kg PE (or more or less) Current 12,000 sf in PF-4 available for pit fabrication is enough to fabricate 30 ppy once certain upgrades have been completed. Space needed for 80 ppy would not increase linearly with capacity. Even calculating the amount of space for equipment is not linear. If one piece can support 40 ppy, then 80 p py would require two such pieces, but if one piece suffices to support 30 p py, then80 ppy will require three pieces.expects these modules would be comparable in cost to Hazard Category-2 modules. space and MAR in PF-4? If not, what can be done to provide it? Decision 2: Once enough margin for space and margin for MAR are provided for pit manufacturing, what steps can be taken to maintain these margins over decades in the face of uncertainties? Decision 3: For AC, space and MAR available across the nuclear weapons complex exceed space andMAR required by a considerable amount, so margin is not an issue. Instead, the issue is how much AC should be done at LANL and how much, if any, AC should been done at other sites. and MAR required to manufacture 80 ppy. Available space and MAR figures would probably need to be updated. LANL (and perhaps other sites) has computer models and other resources needed to perform these calculations. AC also has space andMAR requirements but, as discussed in " Options for Analytical Chemistry ," margins are not at issue because the nuclear plant is so large.. Congress would be in a better position to determine which options would free enough space and. MAR in PF-4 to manufacture. space and MAR suitable for AC. This capacity resides at several buildings in the complex, including Building 332 at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and Building 773-A at SRS. Each of these facilities would apparently have enough floor space and MAR allowance to conduct the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy. PF-4 might perform some additional AC for higher-MAR work, such as sample preparation (which takes several-gram samples from larger pieces of plutonium) and certain analyses. Space and MAR requirements for manufacturing 80 ppy have never been calculated rigorously, though they could be. Comparing space and MAR required vs. available would show whether there is enough space andMAR at the moment. Over time, various factors will affect availability and requirements. While few of these factors can be predicted, this report discusses ways to offset any adverse effects from them. In addition, decisions will be needed the available space could accommodate. This section considers options that might make the needed space and Mar available. A study would need to take into account that there are many ways to make more space or MAR available. A piece of equipment that could support manufacture of 300 ppy would suffice for any number less than 300, whether 10, 30, or 80. This detailed analysis would be needed to determine whether enough MAR allowance and space could be made available. The study would also need to consider ways to reduce space orMAR requirements, thereby increasing margin, as discussed under " Space Options for PF-4 " and " MAR Options forPF-4 ."  LANL has provided data from which this report calculated how much MAR and space various options would make available. The data, however, cannot indicate which options, if any, would provide enough margin because data on space and MAR requirements are also needed to calculate margin. Congress would need data on MAR margin, space margin, and cost for various pit manufacturing options in order to best determine which options are feasible and affordable. The following questions highlight how these data could support decisionmaking. Once certain seismic upgrades are completed, is there expected to be enough MAR margin for PF-4 to accommodate the added MAR needed to manufacture 80 ppy? LNL has examined space and MAR needed to fabricate 80 ppy in a preliminary fashion. LANL has not performed a detailed analysis of the full pit manufacturing process, including plutonium supply, waste management, AC, external support activities, and fabrication. To enable calculation of margin, Congress would need to obtain two numbers. Congress may choose to direct NNSA to provide these twoNumbers. Once these numbers become available, Congress could face three decisions: For pit manufacturing, is there currently enough margin for space andMAR in PF-4? If not, what would Congress do? the space and MAR margins for 80 ppy once current projects in PF-4 that will increase permitted MAR and make more space available are completed. This static approach provides a baseline and metrics to indicate whether margin is ample, minimal, or insufficient. Next, the report takes a dynamic approach, noting that uncertainties could affect margin and how they might be offset. Finally, it considers analytical chemistry requirements. This approach leads to three decisions Congress may choose to consider: Decision 1: For pit manufacturing, is there currently enough margin for pit manufacturing? Congress remains deeply involved in efforts to increase pit production capacity. Section 3114 of H.R. 4435 would require NNSA to produce 30 WR pits per year during 2023, at least 50 during 2026. In its report on S. 2410 , the FY2015 defense authorization bill, the Senate Armed Services Committee directed N NSA to include construction of modules, which would support an exit from a 1950s-era era of plutonium production. In 2014, an NNSA document changed the date for achieving a 30-ppy capacity to "by 2026," and a 2014 Department of Energy document stated, "Current plans call for pit production capability of 50-80 pits peryear by FY 2030" NNSA anticipates manufacturing a few pits a year in the near future to prepare to manufacture WR pits. The schedule for ramping up pit production is uncertain. A Department of Defense (DOD) official stated in 2013 that there is no daylight between the Department of Energy and the Defense on the need for a near-term pit manufacturing capacity of 10 to 20 and then 30 by 2021, and then in the longer term for a capacity of 50 to 80 per year.previous WR build of W88 pits was completed in FY2011. The U.S. has no plans to build a pit facility. PF-4, which opened for operations in 1978, is the last plutonium processing building to come online. As of June 2014, NNSA had the capacity to produce up to 450 ppy of plutonium. NNSA has no immediate plans to increase production of plutonium to that level, however. The agency has no current plans to produce more than 125 ppy at any one time, though it has the capability to produce as much as 500 ppy. The House Appropriations Committee recommended a substantial increase in funding. Use of retired pits in life extension programs would reduce the number of new pits that would have to be manufactured. The committee also recommended $35.7 million for moving certain activities at LANL by 2019. It would be a separate line item in the FY2016 budget "to add additional visibility into the process," the committee said in a report. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit that promotes free and open dialogue. U.S. policy is not to build new-design nuclear weapons for new missions. Some argue that the capacity to manufacture new pits may be needed to extend the service life of certain existing weapons. Increasing manufacturing capacity would require more equipment, more space, and more MAR. Finding enough space and MAR for AC should be simpler than for pit manufacture. More options are readily available to meet requirements for AC than for Pit manufacture.. The Department of Energy's Rocky Flats Plant produced between 1,000 and 2,000 pits per year at the height of the Cold War. Rocky Flats manufactured as many as 2,000 pits per year (ppy) In 1989, armed agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Environmental Protection Agency raided Rocky Flats to investigate suspected environmental crimes. DOE first suspended pit production later that year, subsequently halted it permanently, and eventually dismantled the plant and remediated the site. Congress and the Administration searched for many years for a way to make pits. NNSA proposed a two-track strategy. In one track, Plutonium Facility 4 (PF-4), the main plutonium building at Los Alamos National. Laboratory (LANL) (NM), would house a pilot plant to develop pit production processes and manufacture a small number of pits. It took until 2007 for LANL to make its first "war reserve" pits, i.e., those certified for use in the stockpile. In that year, LANL made 11 such pits, the highest number since 1989. The second track involved a facility with the capacity to make pits on an industrial scale, on the order of 100 or more ppy. manufacture about 10 non-war reserve pits per year in PF-4. War reserve (WR) pits are those judged acceptable for use in the nuclear stockpile. Other pits are manufactured for such purposes as development or process qualification. With most work atPF-4 halted in June 2013, the actual manufacturing rate in June 2014 was zero for pits of any type; work is resuming at the end of June 2014. Since there was no requirement to manufacture WR pits, some processes needed to certify pits as WR had been suspended after the halt. In 1992, the United States began a moratorium on nuclear testing that continues to the present. An issue became how to demonstrate confidence in the safety and reliability of these weapons. One approach, developed by LANL and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), was Quantification of Margins and Uncertainties, or QMU. This section describes that approach, then modifies it to make it applicable to pits. The idea underlying QMU is that nuclear weapons can be maintained without testing. Pit fabrication casts "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium, machines them to remove excess material, and welds two together to form a pit. Pit manufacturing also involves such supporting tasks as purifying plutonium for use in pits, certification to ensure that finished pits meet required standards, material control and accountability; waste management; and analytical chemistry. For background, see CRS Report R43406, U.S. Nuclear Weapon "Pit" Production Options for Congress. On the other hand, AC to analyze process problems requires fast turnaround to minimize the time the process is shut down. Increasing the amount of plutonium would require adding electrorefining furnaces, increasing space requirements. Since the United States no longer produces plutonium, all U.S. plutonium is "old," such as from retired pits. As plutonium decays, it produces other elements, such as uranium and americium. These must be removed by chemical processes to purify plutonium for use in new pits. Pit fabrication requires extensive AC for every pit. AC supports other pit manufacturing tasks, and non-pit tasks as well. The building at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) that currently performs AC to support pit manufacture and many other plutonium tasks is in poor shape and not seismically robust. DOE wants to halt work there by 2019, so one or more other facilities will be needed. Laboratory floor space , or "space," is needed for pit fabrication. Laboratory buildings have space for corridors, offices, etc., but not floor space. AC involves little MAR because it uses tiny samples, such as a few milligrams of plutonium dissolved in a small amount of acid. AC involves much more space per unit MAR than does pit fabrication because each laboratory instrument is housed in a glovebox or hood that might occupy a lot of space. Anchoring gloveboxes more strongly to the floor to reduce the likelihood that an earthquake would knock them over, exposing plutonium to the air, in which case a fire could generate plutonium oxide particles and release them into the atmosphere. Analytical Chemistry (AC) analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture. AC measures the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities a sample contains. AC typically uses samples on the order of milligrams. Before a pit type can be accepted into the stockpile, it must be certified as acceptable for war reserve use. This involves validating weapons codes, among other things. Validation, in turn, draws on experimental data. PF-4 prepares test items for experiments at the Nevada National Security Site that do not produce a nuclear yield. PF-4 supports some of these experiments, such as by preparing samples for analytical chemistry and materials characterization. MC measures bulk properties of plutonium such as tensile strength, magnetic susceptibility, grain structure, and surface characteristics. MC typically uses samples on the order of a fraction of a gram to measure these bulk properties. For more information, visit www.pf-4.data. Pit Fabrication involves casting "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium. ARIES converts excess pits to plutonium oxide (a powder) and places it in special containers for long-term storage. MR&R examines containers of plutonium in PF-4 that are to be sent to WIPP for permanent disposition. If the containers have deteriorated, MR& R repackages the plutonium in new containers.tens of grams of plutonium per kilogram of material. finished pit with x-ray imaging, physical measurements, etc., to ensure it meets specifications. Pits are monitored at Pantex Plant (TX) and PF-4.PF-4 monitoring techniques include taking physical measurements and checking for release of gases that may indicate deterioration of the pit. While Pantex can perform some of these tasks, pits can be disassembled only. The NNSA and its predecessor organizations have monitored the condition of nuclear weapons using a variety of techniques since the beginning of the nuclear weapons program. "Material At Risk" (MAR) is "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress" It is material that could be released by a disaster, such as an earthquake that collapses a building followed by a fire. Each building that works with plutonium has a building-specific MAR allowance. MAR is expressed in units of plutonium equivalent. Plutonium is the fissile material in pits. Four forms are relevant here: Plutonium-239 (Pu-239) Pu-239 is the fissile isotope in pits. pits contain other plutonium isotopes in addition to Pu-239. That mixture is called weapons-grade plutonium (WGPu) Since some of the other isotopes are more radioactive than Pu- 239, WGPu is about 1.5 times as radioactive as Pu-238. It is relevant to pit manufacturing options because 40% of the MAR allowance in PF-4 is allocated to Pu.238. Moving some or all Pu- 238 work out ofPF-4, the main pit manufacturing tool. Pu-238 is the heat source for radioisotope power systems (RPS) for space probes. It is manufactured by bombarding rods of neptunium-237 with neutrons in a nuclear reactor. It undergoes radioactive decay much more rapidly than does Pu-239, producing uranium and other impurities. PF-4 receives Pu-238, removes the impurities through chemical processes, and makes plutonium oxide, which it presses into capsules. It mates some capsules with other equipment to make RPSs for military applications. capsules to Idaho National Laboratory, which does the same to make RPSs for space probes. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PR&P): This area recovers plutonium from scrap plutonium (such as from lathe turnings, pits scrapped for not meeting standards, or retired pits) Plutonium is then precipitated out of solution as plutonium oxalate, and is then roasted to produce plutonium oxide. This area also recovers and purifies plutonium using high-temperature chemical processes. PF-4 uses 10,400 sf for plutonium recycle and purification. How much plutonium could that area purify per year? How many ppy would that capacity support? How much more space would be needed to provide plutonium for 80 ppy? Alternatively, could these processes be moved to another site, such as Savannah River Site? Pit fabrication generates some plutonium scraps. Providing for recycle of this plutonium requires space, and producing 80 p py would require more space than 30. How Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PRP) uses aqueous (plutonium dissolved in acid) processes and molten processes to recover pure plutonium from scrap or from retired pits by chemically removing impurities. This option would move about 198 kg of MAR out of PF-4. Module 1 would have 1.5% as much MAR asPF-4 and Module 2 would house molten plutonium from Pit Fabrication and from PRP. (This would eliminate PRP within PF- 4.) support 80 ppy; this would be "RLUOB Equipment Installation 2," or REI-2. The other involves decontaminating some rooms, removing some old gloveboxes, and installing new materials characterization (MC) equipment; this is "Plutonium Equipment Installation," or PEI. PEI would support MC, and relates to plutonium physics. A separate activity, not part of the CMRR project, is removing excess special nuclear materials from the storage vault in PF-4, work that has been underway for some years. plutonium building at LANL, would make MAR and space available for other purposes. In PF-4, MAR is measured in units of plutonium equivalent (PE), which is about 1.38 times as radioactive as Pu-239. This measure is linked to potential dose if plutonium is released, such as by an earthquake and fire. It is the only building in the U.S. with the combination of attributes required to make pits: high security, pit fabrication equipment, and the ability to handle high-MAR processes. needed may be evolving due to changing programmatic requirements for plutonium. The scope of the additional work being requested is consistent with the original mission need to provide analytic chemistry and material characterization space in a different facility than the legacy CMR building. PF-4 reconfiguration activities are also appropriate to be conducted as part of the original CMR Replacement project so long as they are limited to re-equipping lab space. Construction of new modular facilities and installation of equipment withinPF-4 to establish enhanced pit production capabilities are also needed. wall more strongly to the ceiling, installing braces that tie columns to beams, building shear walls, and installing a drag strut on the roof of PF-4 (see Figure 5 ). Other steps could reduce the risk that plutonium would escape even ifPF-4 collapsed. plutonium escaping in an accident causes dose, and dose is the key factor in determining the amount of MAR permitted. Removing tons of combustible material from production areas could also reduce plutonium escape risk in the event of a building collapse. An annual review of margin and potential factors that could affect it. Candidates include LANL, another lab or plant in the nuclear weapons complex, NNSA, DOD, or an independent group like the National Academy of Sciences or the JASON defense advisory group. Since LANL is intimately familiar with PF-4, it could be argued that it should do the report. On the other hand, LANL could be perceived as having a conflict of interest. An annual review might be useful to have an annual review. independent group would not have this potential conflict of interest. LANL and LLNL are both nuclear weapon design laboratories, so LLNL's expertise would be of use in evaluating a LANL study. Since the two labs have often competed for projects and have a reputation as "friendly adversaries," involving LLNL involving LANL could be a good idea. The study could be prepared by LANL or peer-reviewed by LLNL. It could also be done jointly by the two laboratories or by a third party. testing, held that peer review is essential in developing or maintaining weapons. A second site could accommodate a surge in AC needs or provide a backup in case AC operations at LANL were suspended or disrupted. It might cost more to perform AC at two sites rather than one, but it would be better for the U.S. to have two sites instead of just one. The U.N. Secretary-General has called for the creation of a second site for plutonium AC testing, which would be based at a different location. A second site would necessitate shipping many plutonium samples per year from LANL to another site. It might be beneficial to have all plutonium AC technicians at one site so they would have the same training and operate according to the same formal and informal procedures. Concentrating as much plutonium work as possible at LANL would strengthen its position as the nation's plutonium center. While SRS and LLNL could both do this work, their facilities presumably have the facilities to do it.one, though it is impossible to know without the data. For example, LANL is validating an AC system that may require a sample size of 1.5 mg of WGPu instead of 225 mg. Not at issue is that LANL would need the capability to perform all AC tasks even if it did not have the capacity to perform AC for 80 ppy. The case for having a second site perform some of the AC needed for 80ppy while maintaining the full suite is not clear. The issue is whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if not, how much AC should been done there and how much at another site.  LANL would gain little if any technical competence by conducting AC for 80 ppy vs., say, 40. It may be difficult to provide enough MAR and floor space at LANL for the AC. LANL and a second site could cross-check the accuracy of each other's AC measurements and processes from time to time. LNL and LLNL have for decades, since before the end of nuclear. LLLNL and RLUOB have a long history of working together. L LLNL and LLUOB work together regularly.  module might free up enough MAR but not enough space for 80 ppy, or that moving Pu-238 programs to another site would suffice. (Other factors may enter into feasibility as well, such as the condition of a building.) But without data for space and MAR needed to manufacture 80 p py, one cannot know which options are infeasible, which provide excess capacity and thus entail excess cost, and which are "just right" Regarding AC, the discussion shows that there are multiple options to provide AC capacity, and highlights the issue of whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if so, where. this latter number be much reduced if the samples were all analyzed at LANL? What turnaround time would be required for samples moved onsite or shipped offsite? The time required to receive AC results would be needed in order to estimate the number of gloveboxes and temporary storage locations. The analysis would need to take into account that most AC is done on a confirmatory basis, i.e., manufacturing proceeds on the assumption that AC results will confirm that samples are within specifications. Such AC is not time-sensitive. is so small. NNSA calculated that RLUOB, with 400 grams WGPu, could likely be operated as HC-3 without significant facility modifications. Because of modern building features, the dose from the increased material in a worst-case accident would still be below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. Operating RLU OB as an HC-2 facility would not require congressional approval. Instead, congressional oversight would come through the normal reviews associated with the normal review process for such facilities. If the MAR limit for RLUOB is increased to 400 grams of WGPu for AC, how much more MAR and space, if any, would be needed for AC at LLNL or SRS? If the 26-gram limit is retained for R LUOB, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC atLLNL or at SRS. What would it cost to enable RLU OB to hold 400 grams W GPu? How much more space would it take to perform remaining AC? Radiological Facilities do not require stringent safety or security measures because the dose to onsite or offsite personnel in the event of a worst-case accident would be very low. NNSA considered several options for raising the MAR limit in RLUOB. One option was to retrofit the building by adding various safety upgrades to make it HC-3 at the highest level (1760 grams WGPu). That option would have been costly and time-consuming and was not necessary for conducting AC work required. offsite personnel that a worst-case accident could be expected to cause. There are myriad other regulations, all of which come together in a document called a Documented Safety Analysis, or DSA. While each building in the Hazard Category system requires a DSA, a Radiological Facility, such as RLUOB, does not because the amount of radioactive material in the building is not considered a hazard. The DSA is tailored to each building and specifies the amount the building can hold and still remain below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. This report presents three key decisions and an approach to help structure them. It focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources (laboratory floor space and Material At Risk (MAR), discussed next) available for pit manufacturing. It shows that it is not known whether available amounts suffice. While NNSA has extrapolated space, it has not determined how much will be needed to meet the needs of the pit industry. It also raises the possibility that Congress may choose to direct NNSA to generate the data needed to answer these questions. Most pit-related AC is performed in the CMR building. NNSA plans to halt programmatic operations there "in approximately 2019" Producing 80 ppy would require additional AC, as AC must be performed for each pit. N NSA plans to achieve a 30-ppy capacity by FY2026, so work currently done in CMR would have to be performed elsewhere.dozen square feet of space. Many analyses must be done for each individual pit. The number of instruments and their housing increase in tandem with manufacturing capacity. The Radiological Laboratory-Utility-Office Building (RLUOB, pronounced "rulob") was completed in FY2010. It is configured for AC. NNSA plans that RLUOB would house AC equipment needed to support pit manufacture, and possibly enough to support manufacture of 80 ppy. The building is "genuinely decrepit" and "structurally unsound," in the words of two studies, and is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than more recent buildings. a higher plutonium limit, if properly equipped, could likely conduct all the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy. NNSA further found that RLUOB would have sufficient space for the needed equipment. The planning for this approach will be conducted by personnel from NNSA headquarters (including the Office of Defense Programs) and Los Alamos National Laboratory over the summer and fall of 2014 to understand the costs and benefits of this approach. A Radiological Facility like RLU OB would be a good place to start. different capacities and would require different upgrades to support whatever level of AC was required. Data on the MAR and space requirements, and the cost of the LANL, LLNL, and SRS options, would be needed to provide a basis for decision. The option of having LLNL or SRS conduct a substantial fraction of the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy must be evaluated in light of a revised path forward for AC that NNSA developed in June 2014. Based on an initial analysis by Los Alamos National Laboratory, NNSA determined that the combination of PF-4 and RLUOB withPF-4 would be the best solution. Having 9 kg of plutonium in CMR, as at present, poses a much greater risk than having 400 grams in RLUOB. If NNSA is able to implement its path forward, LANL could perform all the AC needed to support manufacture of up to 80 ppy. In that case, the key question for AC would be how much, if any, AC one or more sites other than LANL should perform. The foregoing discussion shows how much additional AC is needed to meet NNSA's needs. the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Replacement (CMRR) line item construction project. CMRR-Nuclear Facility (NF) was "deferr[ed] … for at least five years" in the FY2013 budget request on cost grounds. NNSA plans to include funds for two subprojects in the C MRR line itemConstruction project beginning with the FY2016 request. One is adding new AC equipment to RLUOB so it can perform AC to the nuclear plant's reactor. RTBF Construction, using the CMRR line item to fund these projects is consistent with the committee's recommendation: 04-D-125, Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) Replacement Project, LANL. The Committee recommends $35,700,000, instead of providing funds for these activities under Program Readiness as in the budget request. While the capacity and amount of process equipment is the same, the funding levels are different. This approach is consistent. with the Committee's previous direction to the NNSA to carry out all CMR replacement activities in accordance with DOE Order 413.3B, rather than within operations funding. NNSA to perform all the tasks planned for CMRR-NF, the cost of which was projected in the FY2012 budget request to be between $3,710 million and $5,860 million. NNSA requested FY2015 funds for the AC and MC subprojects as part of the Program Readiness component of Readiness in Technical Base and Facilities. While there are no cost estimates for NNSA's path forward, it would cost substantially less than CMRr-NF because it would avoid building a large plutonium facility. not sufficiently related to the original mission need of the existing project, and the Committee does not support the inclusion of these activities as subprojects within the existing CMR replacement project. REI-2 and PEI would also permit NNSA to exit the CMR building, a long-time goal of NNSA. CMR was built to the seismic standards of the late 1940s, so it is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than is RLUOB. Studies have found it to be "decrepit" and "structurally unsound" Congress has been deeply involved for decades in setting policy, providing funding, and supporting or rejecting programs for the nuclear weapons enterprise. For example, it established the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), a semi-autonomous component of the Department of Energy. It also rejected a major facility to manufacture a key nuclear weapon component. It initiated and later rejected the Reliable Replacement Warhead; and directed NNSA, the Government Accountability Office, and others to conduct studies on nuclear weapon issues. One RTBF is NNSA's program for operating the nuclear weapons complex and maintaining its infrastructure. Within PF-4, RTBF space is used for functions that support multiple programs, such as shipping and receiving, waste management, and material control and accountability. NNSA operates the weapons complex from a base in Virginia, Virginia, which is home to the U.S. Navy's F/A-18 Hornet aircraft carrier. The F/E-18 is based in Virginia and is part of the Navy's P-4 fleet.