We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional committees, the agencies included in our review, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix. The Department of the Army Corps of Engineers said they had no comments on the draft report.localities.com. John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (continued) operations during fiscal year 1994. National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Archives and Records Administration National Endowment for the Arts. Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission Thrift Deposit Protection. Department of Health and Human Services Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of Army Corps of Engineers, Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board, Federal Mine Safety and health review commission, among others. Please contact me at (202) 512-8387 if you have any questions concerning this report. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The list will be sent to you via email or a text message. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Hoover Dam, site rentals of cabins, trailers, and camping and group-use sites, and land-use fees. Public Information products, the review and approval of pipeline rights-of-way, Cenozoic Publication. User fees from applicants for licenses to engage in interstate commerce, parties in rail authority proceedings and compliant and compliant-type declaratory order proceedings (49 C.F.R. 1002.3) Registration fees from handlers of authorized drugs (doctors, pharmacies, and others) Sale of utilities (electricity, steam, water, and sewage treatment) to Federal Prison Industries, Inc. (Trade name-UNICOR); sale of meal tickets; rental income from staff housing located at various federal prisons. Sale of farm by-products; fees from the care and custody of state prisoners from various states Gift shop sales, tickets, and tours National Archives and Records Management Reproduction services, the sale of reference material, over-the-counter sales, publication sales, audiovisual sales and rentals, and Presidential library admissions. interest earned on investments, telecommunications income from billings, earned assessments, provision for assessment credit, exit/ entrance fees, recoverable expenses from the Uniformed Bank Performance Report (UBPR) collections, miscellaneous income from seminars, rents, and others. Collection of civil penalties, the sale of federal campaign disclosure reports and records, and revenues from FOIA User fee collections, fines and penalty payments, and Davis Law receipts. Filing fee from persons acquiring voting securities or assets who are required to file pre-merger notifications (15 U.S.C. 18a) with FOIA and requests made to the Research Division Duplicating costs under FOIA and the sale of Board publications reports License and inspection fees, annual fees, and other regulatory costs Rebates for volume discounts on governmentwide total quality training costs Fees for over 80 types of applications, statements, and reports filed pursuant to each of the statutes the Commission administers. User fees charged to cover the costs of materials, brochures, and space rental for seminars, workshops, business award events, and others. Ad valorem fees for cargo on vessels going into U.S. ports. observation decks and viewing machines at Eisenhower Lock; fees for vessel service, damage repairs, and violations; rental of office space; pleasure craft and noncommercial tolls for use of the seaway. Civil penalties, sale of test tires and vehicles, royalties, FOIA requests, Corporate Average Fuel Economy fine (CAFE) penalties, and user fees. User fees for processing applications to sell ships; operating the computer-aided Operations Research Facility at the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy. by state agencies. Total (fees + special accounts) Rate of return (percent) Transportation (including ferry, cruise, tourmobile) Food service operations, lodging, campgrounds, vending machines, retail sales, river running, big game hunting, marinas, ski resorts, transportation, cruise boats, boat docks, coin-operated copiers, and others. Retail sales, marina, beaches, golf courses. Lodging, food service operations,. pools, horseback riding, and firewood sales. bars, marinas, boat docks, horseback riding, and golf courses Retail sales, recreation equipment rentals, food service operations, marina, golf courses, tennis courts, theaters, and office and special purpose space Tennessee did not track concessioners’ revenues. It charged a flat concessions fee. Application fees and the sale of patent information. Fees for rule reviews, designations, Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), leverage audits, registration, reparations, photocopying, and publications. Most of the $20.5 billion was to be either deposited in Treasury’s special account or retained by the agency for its use. Agency officials estimated that activities generating $175 million, or about 1 percent, were not conducive to concessions operations. The activities included the sale of hydroelectric power, audiovisual products, coins, medals, and commemorative items; tours of the Hoover Dam; operation of gift shops and reproduction services; and admission to presidential libraries. In appendix VII, the activities varied and included the selling of Hydroelectric Power, Audiovisually Products, Coins, Medals, and Commemorative Items. of the $20.5 billion in income, could be converted into concessions operations. These activities included the sale of hydroelectric power, tours of Hoover Dam, and collection of user or entrance fees. On March 21, 1996, we provided copies of a draft of this report to the heads of the departments of the six land management agencies for comment. We did not ask for comments from all 75 agencies in our survey because to do so would have been impractical. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of total concessions. More than 10,000 megawatts of power (electricity) from 54 hydro power plants. Power generated at 22 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers projects located in a 10-state southeastern region. Revenue and fees obtained from contractor parking, fitness dues, and other fees. Gas sales to customers who redistribute to retail customers. Power from 21 multipurpose water resource projects of the Army Corps. and 9 of the Bureau of Reclamation, plus power from nonfederal generating plants. were to determine (1) the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, (2) the rate of return received by the federalGovernment from concessions, and (3) how the federalgovernment’s rate ofreturn compared to other governments’ rates of return. To accomplish objectives one, two, and four, we used three questionnaires to request data from 75 federal executive departments and agencies listed in the 1993/94 U.S. Government Manual. The first questionnaire requested summary information on all concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. The second questionnaire asked for detailed agreement-specific information on each concessions agreements either initiated or extended during fiscal Year 1994. amount of revenues and fees, information on whether competition was used to select the concessioner, whether fees was one of the factors considered during competition, and how competed agreements were advertised. The third questionnaire asked for information on agencies’ income-generating activities that were not concessions. We pretested the questionnaires at six federal agencies or agency components: the Department of Agriculture’s Forest Service, the Army Corps of Engineers, the General Services Administration, the Smithsonian, and the Smithsonian. 27 of the 75 federal departments and agencies surveyed reported having concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. Fifteen of the 27 agencies either initiated or extended at least 1 concession agreement. The Central Intelligence Agency provided an oral briefing on its concessions program and did not provide any details on its concession agreements. In response to our questionnaires, we received information on 5,000 concessions agreements. Our information about the agreements comes from only the agencies’ questionnaire responses for the agreements. However, to check whether the questionnaires were filled out completely and accurately, we (1) checked selected responses against copies of the concessions agreement. information on all concessions operations and detailed agreement-specific information (including copies of the concessions agreements) on each agreement that was either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994. We interviewed federal concessions management staff at both headquarters and field levels and nonprofit organizations interested in concessions issues. We obtained and reviewed the laws, regulations, and policies for each federal entity’s concessions operations. Further, if concessions services in agencies were provided under agreements with GSA, we requested agencies not to include these operations in their responses. Twenty-seven of the 75 departments and agencies we surveyed reported that they had concessions operations during fiscal year 1994. Data on all concessioners’ revenues were not available. Some agencies reported that gross revenue data was not available because concessioners paid a flat concessions fee and the agency had no requirement to track gross revenues. As a result, Table II.1 contains overall information reported by the 27 departments and agency. Forty-two departments andagency responded because some had more than one component managing concessions. competitive agreements. Government received over $82 million from concessions operations during fiscal year 1994. Nine of the 42 agencies or agency components also estimated that concessioners provided an additional $4.7 million in nonfee compensation by maintaining government property. Agency responded that concessions fees were sometimes waived because of the following reasons: (1) reduced prices on vended items, (2) difficulty in obtaining contractors, and (3) a more attractive procurement was needed because of a lack of offerors, appendix III. The 42 agencies or agency components reported that they had 11,263 concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. concessions operations ranged from small fishing guide services generating annual revenues of less than $1,000 to multimillion-dollar recreation corporations. The National Park Service and the Forest Service concessions operations accounted for about 90 percent of the six land management agencies’ reported concessioners’ gross revenues and fees paid to the government. Some agency officials said they had no requirement to track concessioners' revenues when concessioners paid a flat concessions fee. government’s land is usually needed to complete a service, such as adding a ski lift. However, other activities such as river running, jeep tours through scenic areas, and hunting trips, were very profitable to concessioners. On the basis of questionnaire data, we determined that 6 of these types of concessions were among the 50 concessions with the highest reported gross revenues to the concessioners in our survey and were initiated in fiscal year 1994. The reported information showed that the agreements were conducive to competition. Bureau of Reclamation responded that some revenue data were not available mainly because concessioners were not required to report revenues for certain concessions where they generally paid a flat concessions fee. Survey information was not available for the 225 concessions agreements that are managed. The 37 concessioners represent only a portion of the agency’s concessioners, according to the agency. The agency could not market Native Americans arts and crafts—an activity the agency couldn’t do, the agency said. It also could not charge a limited profit rate for concessioners. investment income (interest earned from the investment of operating funds in U.S. Treasury securities) Harbor maintenance fees; commissions on pay telephone stations; charges for testing, inspecting and grading services. fees and other charges for miscellaneous services and Consolidated Omnibus Budget and Reconciliation Act (COBRA) The objectives of our review were to determine (1) the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, (2) the rate of return the federalGovernment received from concessions, and (3) how it compared to other governments’ rates of return. that agencies sent to us; (2) checked agency totals for concessions revenues and fees against prior GAO reports; (3) followed up with agency staff in selected cases to clarify their responses. (4) manually reviewed all pages of each form; (5) had specially trained staff convert the data to computer-readable format and verify their entries. (6) manually checked computerized data against the original forms, including all data on concessions revenues. and fees; and (7) conducted computerized checks for data consistency. but delegated concessions management to park managers. As shown in appendix VI, concessions agreements entered into on a competitive basis had higher rates of return than those that were not competed. For campground permits where agencies reported both revenue and fee data, agencies reported that they competed 82 percent of the permits issued in fiscal year 1994. The impact of competition on the rate of return remained when the differences among services were considered. Questionnaire information showed that nonland management agencies competed more of their concessions than the land management agencies. initiated or extended in fiscal year 1994. We calculated the rate of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of (1) concessions fees and (2) the amount concessioners deposited into special accounts for improvements. The rate represents the percentage of reported concessioners’ gross revenues that the federal government is to receive. Our analysis of the reported data showed a rate of. return of 2.8 percent for the 6 land management agencies’ concessions, 9.2 percent for. the nonland management agencies' concessions, and 3.1 percent for 50. concessions initiated on a noncompetitive basis. agreements comes from only the agency’s questionnaire responses for the agreements. Because agencies did not collect revenue data on all concessions, we could calculate the rate of return only for those agreements where agencies reported both the revenues and fees. We used the detailed information they provided on agreements containing both revenue and fee data that rate of returns were calculated. We also interviewed federal concessions management staff at both headquarters and field levels and officials of the National Parks and Conservation Association and the National Park Hospitality Association. Fifty components from 29 of the 75 federal agencies we surveyed said they received income of $20.5 billion in 1994 from activities that were not concessions. New agreements with preferential right of contract renewal resulted in a 3.8 percent rate of return, and those without the preference resulted in 6.4 percent. New and extended agreements granting possessory interest resulted in. a rate of returns of 3.7 percent. Those without possessoryinterest resulted. in a rate. of return of 4.5 percent. For the purpose of this assignment, we defined “concessions’ as private or public entities using federally owned/leased property. Concessions services included, but were not limited to, food operations, vending machines, retail shops, public pay telephones, barber/beauty shops, transportation, lodging, marinas, and campgrounds. We excluded day care centers, employee association stores, and services provided by the visually impaired under the Randolph-Sheppard Act. All 75 agencies responded to our request. State officials said key factors for selecting concessioners were the amount of fees generated for the government and bidders’ experience and financial status. According to state officials, agreements exempted from competition included short-term permits expecting to gross a low level of revenue, generally $5,000 or less. Officials for one state also said the state would enter into a noncompetitive agreement with a business that initiated a proposal for a concession, but if the operation proved lucrative after 1 year, they would renegotiate the concessions agreement. The preferential right for contract renewal is the right of incumbent concessioners to match or better the best offer received from firms competing for the concessions contract. The existing concessioner must have performed satisfactorily and must have been under the existing contract for 2 years. This preference reduces competition because it may limit the number of prospective concessioners. Businesses are reluctant to expend time and money preparing bids in a process where the award is most likely going to the incumbent contractor. The National Water Authority is a government agency. Local governments supply many of the services and accommodations provided on federal property to the public. Each year, millions of people use the services made possible through these agreements. A long-term agreement, which generally involves a large financial investment by the concessioner for construction or capital improvements, may last up to 50 years. A short-term permit or license, which typically requires little or no financial investment in facilities by the concessionser, mayLast up to 5 years. Each agency is responsible for developing, implementing, and monitoring its concessions program to ensure that Most land management agencies generally have discretion whether to compete concessions agreements. Concessions Policy Act of 1965, governing National Park Service concessions, is the only law covering concessions that specifically requires competition. Nonland management agencies reported that they either entered into concessions agreements using the Federal Acquisition Regulation or other policies that under most circumstances provide for competition.that nonland management agency entered into 101 of the agreements and competed 96 percent of them. The land management agency initiated 2,133 of these concessions agreements and Competition 8.6 percent of the time. National Park Service to give the public the right to compete for concessions contracts. However, competition is limited by the requirement that existing concessioners who perform satisfactorily be given a preferential right of contract renewal when the agreement expires. Officials in the land management agencies said that more competition is needed, but they also said it can not always be used. They said some operations could not be competed, such as ski areas where major portions of the operations are located on private land and the concessioners have a substantial financial investment in the activities. No overall federal concessions policy exists. In exchange for use of federal property, concessioners pay the government a concessions, franchise, permit, or license fee. The primary purpose of the six land management agencies’ concessions programs is to encourage operation of a public-private partnership to provide recreation for visitors to national parks, forests, and other public lands and waters. Concessions services include food service, retail sales, ski resorts, lodging, and marinas. We revised the questionnaires on the basis of their detailed feedback. Nonland management agencies such as the General Services Administration and U.S. Postal Service provide concessions services. The primary purpose of their concessions programs is to provide high-quality merchandise and convenient services at reasonable prices. Their concessions services include food service, retail sales such as gift shops, vending machines, and coin-operated photocopiers. Since the mid 1970s, we have conducted several reviews of the concessions programs in the land management agencies. (See the list of Related GAO Products on pp. 43 and 44.) rate of return. He added that three other factors also affect the rate of return: the National Park Service’s periodic operational reviews of concessioners, which may increase maintenance costs. The legislative requirement calls for National Park service concessioners’ prices to be comparable to those of similar services and facilities under similar circumstances, he said. It is likely that all larger concessioners would incur the costs of financial and routine maintenance audits, regardless of the agencies’ requirements, the author said. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965 gives National Park Service concessioners the right to be compensated for improvements they construct on federal lands. The legislation specifies that unless otherwise provided by agreement, the compensation must be based on “sound value,” which is generally defined as reconstruction cost less depreciation, not to exceed fair market value. In 1993, the Park Service issued a new policy covering standard concessions contract language, which included a provision to reduce possessory interest for contracts awarded after January 7, 1993. About 70 percent of the 42 agencies or agency components responding to our survey said retaining fees is or would be beneficial to them. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965 grants existing National Park Service concessioners a preferential right of contract renewal when their agreements expire. An official from one of the agencies that retained fees said that since the fees support agency operations, staff put forth extra effort to obtain a high rate of return on concessions. Bureaus of Land Management and Reclamation—reiterated the statement in our report that the primary purpose of the land management agencies’ concessions programs is to provide a service to the public. Park Service said that between 1985 and 1989, 28 of 29 contracts up for renewal were awarded to the incumbent concessioner. Officials from the four states and Canada said their regulations do not allow concessioners to acquire possessory interests. However, they said they consider the amount of a concessioner’s investment when deciding the length of the contract. According to the officials, concessioners are given enough time to make a profit and amortize their investments, but the maximum term of contracts is 20 years. From this reported information, we calculated the rate of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees and special accounts. The information showed that these five states had relatively high rates of return. We visited two of the states—Maryland and Tennessee—and met with their officials. We selected the five states on the basis of each government’s rate ofreturn. The data we obtained from objectives one, two, and four and sent a questionnaire to five state governments and Canada. return. California, Maryland, Michigan, and Missouri reported obtaining rates of return ranging from 11 to 17 percent. Canada reported receiving a 9.8 percent rate of return on its concessions operations. Canada and the four states reported that their concessions services included marinas, food service operations, campgrounds, and retail sales. All four states and Canada said they generally compete concessions agreements. The National Parks and Conservation Association noted the states as having high rates ofreturn from concessions. The states were California,Maryland, Michigan and Missouri. The rates of return ranged from a low rate of 2 percent to a high rate of 47 percent for the 15 service categories. Food service operations averaged the lowest rate of return (2 percent), and coin-operated copiers in U.S. Postal Service facilities averaged the highest rate ofreturn (47 percent) Four states and Canada reported on average a 12.7 percent rate ofReturn. Other governments reported receiving higher rates ofreturn from concessions operations than the overall federal rate. The rates ofReturn ranged from the low rates of2 percent to the high rates of47 percent. Federal Lands: Views on Reform of Recreation Concessioners (GAO-T/RCED-95-250, July 25, 1995). Federal Lands: Improvements Needed in Managing Short-Term Concessioner (GAo/RCed-93-177, Sep. 14, 1993). Federal Land: Little Progress Made in Improving Oversight of Concessiones (GAE/T-RCED -93-42, May 27, 1993) Forest Service: Little Assurance That Fair Market Value Fees Are Collected From Ski Areas (GAA/RCeds -93 -107, Apr. 16, 1993.) National Park Service: Policies and Practices for Determining Concessioned’ Building Use Fees. Parks and Recreation: Interior Did Not Comply With Legal Requirements for the Outdoors Commission ( GAO/RCedes -88-65, Mar. 25, 1988). Needs of the National Park Service (GAO/T-RCED-88-27, Mar. 23, 1988). Parks and Recreation: Limited Progress Made in Documenting and Mitigating Threats to the Parks. Parks and Rec: Recreational Fee Authorizations, Prohibitions, and Limitations. Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation’s Recreation and Construction Backlogs. The National Park service Has Improved Facilities at 12 Park Service Areas. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. We selected Canada to obtain information on another country’s experience. Because it was impractical for us to obtain comments from all 75 agencies, we provided copies of a draft of this report to the heads of the departments of the six land management agencies for comment. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of the concessions. On March 25, 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. Their comments are discussed on the U.S. National Park System. The report was published in November 1995. 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. The officials said they generally agreed with the facts as presented in the draft. Officials from four of the agencies—National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Reclamation—said they agreed with draft report. The report was published in 1996 and is available on the National Park Service website and on the Internet at http://www.nps.gov/nps/nr/nr-nr/npr/nr.html.