Some insurers, such as those with a small number of enrollees, are permitted certain adjustments to their MLRs. These adjustments are referred to as credibility adjustments, and they are added to, and thus Credibility adjustments are provided to increase, the insurer’s MLR. All insurers will calculate their MLR for their experience in 2013 and subsequent years based on data from a 3-year period. Insurers with aSmaller Enrollees calculated MLRs for 2012 based on their 2011 and 2012 experience combined. One insurer, who paid rebates in 2011, noted that it would not have owed rebates had the MLR formula been based on 3 years of insurers’ experience. Another insurer told us that it will likely owe rebates for 2013 because MLR data it reported in 2011 and 2012 will be averaged into 2013. The insurer added that over time, however, it believes the 3-yearMLR formula should be beneficial for the insurer by reducing its rebates over the next 3 years. The individual market includes policies sold by insurers directly to individuals. Insurers report their MLR data to CMS by entering information on a standardized form that includes multiple data fields that make up the MLR and rebate formulas. Medical claims include claims paid and incurred for clinical services and supplies provided to enrollees by physicians and other clinical providers. Expenses for quality improvement (QI) activities. These include expenses for activities for activities that improve the quality of care provided to patients. In 2016, they must define small employers as having from 1 to 100 employees. requirements have generally influenced their spending on QI activities since 2011. Other influencing factors, such as customer and employer demand for QI programs, competition among insurers, and the goal of improving enrollees’ health outcomes, could lower the use and costs of health care services. Five of the eight insurers we interviewed also commented that the 2013 PPACA MLR calculation, which is based on a 3-year period including 2013 and the prior 2 years, will likely reduce some of the effects in the MLR formula. The remaining amount of premiums that an insurer does not spend on the components of medical claims, QI activities, taxes and fees, and non- claims costs, will be referred to as the insurer’s “premium surplus” Premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital. The PPACA MLR is generally calculated by dividing (a) the sum of an insurer's medical claims and expenses for QI Activities (the formula numerator) by (b) the insurer's premiums, after excluding from them the amount of federal and state taxes. changes during this time that would have affected their MLRs. If the formula had been different, insurers might have made different business decisions in those years. Two of the eight insurers we interviewed stated that they exited certain insurance companies. All eight insurers told us that the PPACA MLR requirements have not affected where they do business and have had no effect, or a very limited effect, on their spending on QI activities since 2011. This time period is broader than the period for which we analyzed MLR data. MLR requirements were one factor among a variety of factors that influenced their decisions regarding premium rates. Two of these insurers told us that the MLR requirements have generally moderated their premium increases. One insurer that has increased its premium rates in the individual market since 2011 stated that without the PPACA MLR requirement in place the insurer would have likely increased rates further. Another insurer explained that if it does not meet the PP ACA MLR standards in its planning, it will adjust its premium rate increases to avoid the associated expense. markets since the PPACA MLR requirements began, but they did not attribute those decisions to the MLR. One insurer who operated in all 50 states told us that it left the individual market in three states in 2014. The insurer further explained that a low number of enrollees in each market contributed to its decisions to no longer operate in the three states. None of the insurers we interviewed reported that the PP ACA MLR was a factor in their decision to leave the market in those states. cited for making premium changes included: trends in medical claims, competition with other insurers, the PPACA requirements that insurers offer their plans on a guaranteed-issue basis as well as provide essential health benefits in their plans. One insurer that has increased premiums in the individual market since 2011 stated that its increased premiums were due in part to the increased costs that the insurer told us was associated with it. Three of the eight insurers reported that thePPACA was the reason for their increased premiums. For providing coverage on a Guaranteed Issue basis, as mandated under PPACA. operated, but group market insurers were more likely to meet or exceed the standards than individual insurers. In 2011, about 76 percent of insurers met or exceeded market insurers. The median PPACA MLRs in 2011 and in 2012 among all insurers were about 88 percent, and the median for the large group market was higher than that of the small group and individual markets. However, these 2 years of data may not reflect the reality in the individual and large group markets, the authors say. They note that the percent of all insurers meeting or exceeding the standards increased by about 3 percentage points. of the plan’s premium or as a flat fee, for example, determined by the number of enrollees in the plan. In 2011 and 2012, the percentage of net premiums that insurers spent on their enrollees’ medical claims varied across insurance markets. In 2012 insurers in the large group market spent about 89 percent of their net premiums on medical claims compared to the 85 percent that they spent in 2011. Most insurers met or exceeded the PPACA MLR standards established for the markets and state in which they operate. Under the PPACA MLR requirements, private insurers must report annually to CMS. Insurers must pay rebates when their MLRs do not meet or exceed the minimum applicable MLR standards. When an insurer’s MLR is lower than the applicable PPACAMLR standard, the insurer must pay a rebate. The rebate amount is based on the PP ACA MLR rebate formula, as shown in figure 2. It is generally 80 percent for the individual and small group markets and 85 percent forThe large group market, with some exceptions. Private insurers first reported this information in 2012, based on their 2011 experience. Large and small group employers are defined by the number of their employees. Prior to PPACA, a small employer was defined in federal law as having a maximum of 50 employees. From the time PPACA was passed in 2010 until 2016, PPACA gives states the option of continuing to define a small group employer as having 50 or fewer employees, but starting in 2016, that definition will be changed to 50 or less. Insurers’ spending on non-claims costs as a percent of their net premiums varied by insurance market. Insurers in the small group market spent a higher share on agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions than insurers in the individual and large group markets. The three categories that made up the largest share of insurers’ Spending on Non-Claims costs were agents' and brokers' Fees and commissions, other general expenses, and other claims adjustment expenses. For example, in 2012 small group insurers spent about 42 percent of. their total on claims adjustments. about 16 percent of their net premiums on non-claims costs compared to the 7 percent that large group insurers spent. An insurer’s premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital but does not account for any PPACA MLR rebates the insurer may have to pay to enrollees. Insurers’ spending on QI expenses did not vary across markets as insurers in each market spent about 1 percent of net premiums in 2011 and in 2012. There was also variation across the insurance markets. non-claims costs on agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions compared to the 23 percent that large group insurers spent. Insurers paid about $1.1 billion in total rebates to enrollees and policyholders who paid premiums in 2011, the first year that insurers were subject to the PPACA MLR requirements. In comparison, insurers in the individual and large group markets spent a higher share of non- claims costs on other general expenses, such as salaries, rent, and travel. by providing rebates to group policyholders, for example, employers. Group policyholders are responsible for allocating the amount of rebate that is proportionate to the total amount of premium paid by enrollees. Agents and brokers sell plans for insurers and perform a variety of functions on behalf of individuals and employers. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2012 there were approximately 337,000 jobs held by insurance sales agents. They include agents and brokers working independently as well as those who are working independently. employed by an insurer. Agents and brokers provide assistance to individuals and employers in choosing and enrolling in plans. They may assess an individual’s insurance needs and describe the characteristics of different plans that best meet those needs. They can also provide assistance after an individual or employee has enrolled in a plan, for example, by helping enrollees communicate with health plans in trying to resolve disputed medical claims. Insurers who use agents and brokers to sell their plans typically pay them based on a percentage. applicable, as a condition of receiving coverage from the insurer. These also include any fees or other contributions associated with the health plan. Federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. Federal income taxes on investment income and capital gains are excluded. Non-claims costs. These include all other insurer expenses beyond medical claims, expenses for QI activities, and federal and state tax and license fees. CMS defines non- claims costs for the following categories: (1) agents’ and brokers’ fees and (2) other expenses. commissions; (2) cost containment expenses, which reduce the number of health services provided or the costs of such services, but are not related to an activity to improve health care quality; (3) claims adjustment expenses, such as office maintenance and supplies costs. (4) salaries and benefits that insurers pay to their employees who sell their plans; (5) other taxes that may not be excluded from premium revenue; (6) other general and administrative expenses,such as salaries and advertising. that are designed to increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes in ways that can be objectively measured. Activities must be primarily designed to improve health outcomes, prevent hospital readmissions, improve patient safety, reduce medical errors, and lower infection and mortality rates. Insurers are also allowed to include expenses for health information technology required to accomplish these activities as well as a percentage of their expenses for converting disease classification codes. These include the sum of all funds paid by an enrollee and employer, if they are insured. rebates in 2012. These amounts would each have decreased by about 75 percent had agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions been excluded from the MLR and rebate calculations. Of the $1.1 billion in total rebates that insurers paid in 2011, insurers in the large group market paid 37 percent of this total, or $405 million in rebates. In 2012, of the $520 million in totalRebate that insurers Paid in 2012, insurers In the small group market Paid the largest amount in Rebates (about $207 million) is calculated and this difference is multiplied by the insurer’s premiums, after federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees are removed. There are different ways in which rebates can be paid out by insurers that depend, in part, on whether rebates are associated with individual or group market plans. In general, insurers can choose to provide rebates in the form of a lump-sum payment or as a premium credit for the following MLR year. Insurers in the individual market must providing rebates to their enrollees while insurers in the small and large group markets may meet this obligation. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. This appendix presents information on insurers’ median PPACA medical loss ratios by state and insurance market for 2011 (see table 6) and for 2012 (see tables 7 and 8) This appendix shows the total amount of rebates that insurers paid to enrollees and policyholders who paid premiums, by state for all markets combined for 2011 and 2012. In addition to the contact named above, Gerardine Brennan, Assistant Director; George Bogart; Romonda McKinney Bumpus; Pamela Dooley; Julianne Flowers; and Laurie Pachter made contributions to the report. the likelihood of owing rebates. We provided a draft of this product to HHS for comment. HHS responded that it had no general or technical comments. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Health and Human Services and other interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114. key contributions to this report. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support in the UK, call the national suicide prevention line on 0845 90 90 100 or visit the Samaritan's Samaritans.