Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress CNCS Nomination Action During the 111th Congress Incumbents in Full- time PASPositions. FHFA Nomination action During the 11th Congress. EPA action During 11th Congress. NFAH action during 11th congressional session. ODNI action during 12th Congressional session. SSA action during 13th Congressional recess. OMB action during 14th Congress recess. and nominations withdrawn. The table also provides, for each of the four categories, the mean and median number of days to confirm a nomination. Appendix C provides a list of department abbreviations. Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress ARC Nomination Action During the 111Th Congress Incumbent in Full time PAS positions as of end of 111th Congress. AOC Nomination action during 111th Congress. The GAO nomination action during 110th  Congress. The IMF nomination action During 111th th Congress. Government Ethics ONHIR—Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation OPIC—Overseas Private Investment Corporation SBA—Small Business Administration SSA—Social Security Administration SSS—Selective Service System TDA—Trade Development Agency USAID—United States Agency for International Development Executive Office of the President (EOP) CEA—Council of Economic Advisers CEQ—Council on Environmental Quality OMB —Office of Management and Budget ONDCP --Office of National Drug Control Policy OSTP--Office of Science and Technology Policy. Development IJC—International Joint Commission, U.S. and Canada IMF—International Monetary Fund Legislative Branch Agencies AC—Architect of the Capitol GAO—Government Accountability Office GPO —Government Printing Office LC—Library of Congress. IJC is the International Joint Commission of the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. IMF is the IMF's legislative branch of the International Monetary Fund. GPO is the Government Printing Office. LC is the Library of Congress' library of records. and Other Agencies Appendix B. Nomination Action by Agency Type, 111 th Congress Appendix C. Agency Abbreviations Independent Agencies ARC—Appalachian Regional Commission BBG—Broadcasting Board of Governors CIA—Central Intelligence Agency CNCS—Corporation for National and Community Service CSOSA—Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia DRA—Delta Regional Authority EPA—Environmental Protection Agency FMCS—Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service GSA—General Services Administration MCC—Millennium Challenge Corporation is in recess, either during a session (intrasession recess appointment) or between sessions. Recess appointments expire at the end of the following session of Congress. Presidents have occasionally used the recess appointment power to circumvent the confirmation process. In response, Congress has enacted provisions that restrict the pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances. Under the provisions, if the position falls vacant while the Senate is in session and the President fills it by recess appointment, the appointee may not be paid from the Treasury until he or she is confirmed. preclude payment of an appointee who is given successive recess appointments to the same position. Although recess appointees whose nominations to a full term are subsequently rejected by the Senate may continue to serve until the end of their recess appointment. A provision of the FY2008 Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act that is still in effect today may prevent them from being paid after their rejection. The provision reads, "Hereafter, no part of any appropriation contained in this or any other Act shall be paid to any person for the filling of any position for which he or she has been nominated" inadequate amount of time for consideration, or factors that may not be directly related to the merits of the nomination. Pending nominations also may be returned automatically to the President at the beginning of a recess of more than 30 days, but by the Senate within 30 days before the end of the session and an individual other than the one whose nomination was rejected thereafter receives a recess appointment. A recess appointment falling under any one of these three exceptions must be followed by a nomination to the position not later than 40 days after the start of the next session. Nominees must be returned to the White House if the Senate goes on recess for more than 30 days. The Senate sometimes waives those rules, but just before the August recess, it returned 16 controversial nominees. The practice reportedly stemmed from a lack of agreement between the Senate majority leader and the Senate minority leader regarding the disposition of pending nominations over the break. The move is part of an ongoing tug-of-war between President Obama and Senate Republicans, who are opposed to Obama's nominees. she has been nominated after the Senate has voted not to approve the nomination of said person." Prior to this provision, similar wording was included in annual funding measures for most or all of the previous 50 years. Another recent congressional response to the President's use of recess appointments was the decision to restructure the Senate's longer recesses into a series of shorter recesses divided by pro forma sessions. Premised on the notion that the President can be restricted from making recess appointments during a recess. is no more than three days, the Senate sought to prevent recess appointments. The Senate did not use the pro forma session practices during the first session of the 111 th Congress. At the end of the 2010 pre-election break as a series of shorter recesses separated by proforma sessions. In this case, the use of the pro-forma session practice was used during the final week of the second session of Congress, when the Senate was in session for the first time in a year. The Senate will avoid a lengthy recess by having short pro-forma sessions ... every few days. Congress has provided limited statutory authority for the temporary filling of vacant positions requiring Senate confirmation. Under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, when an executive agency position requiring confirmation becomes vacant, it may be filled temporarily in one of the pro-Forma sessions. Those pro- forma sessions will keep the White House's nominations alive but also block any recess appointments. The two sides this week could not agree on which nominees to return to the House and which to keep active. three ways: (1) the first assistant to such a position may automatically assume the functions and duties of the office; (2) the President may direct an officer in any agency who is occupying a position requiring Senate confirmation to perform those tasks; or (3) the president may select any officer or employee of the subject agency who has been with the agency for at least 90 of the preceding 365 days. The temporary position is filled by a temporary employee who is paid at the minimum rate of pay at the GS-15 level. Some agencies had no nomination activity during this period of time. The first of these two tables identifies, as of the end of the 111 th Congress, each full-time PAS position in the department, its incumbent, and its pay level. For most presidentially appointed positions requiring Senate confirmation, the pay levels fall under the Executive Schedule. As of January 2011, pay levels ranged from level I ($199,700) for Cabinet-level offices to level V $145,700 for the lowest-ranked positions. This report explains the process for filling positions to which the President makes appointments with the advice and consent of the Senate. It identifies, for the 111 th Congress, all nominations to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation in 41 organizations in the executive branch. Of these nominations, 92 were confirmed, 14 were returned to the President, and 1 was withdrawn. The length of time a given nomination may be pending in the Senate varies widely. Some nominations are confirmed within a few days, others may not be confirmed for several months, and some are never confirmed.  appendix B provides a table with summary information on appointments and nominations by four agency categories. It identifies the agency involved and the dates of nomination. The table indicates if and when a nomination was confirmed, withdrawn, or returned. The mean and median numbers of days taken to confirm a nomination are also provided. For each of these categories, the table provides the number of positions, nominations, individual nominees, confirmations, nominations returned, and the date of confirmation of a nomination to the White House. for each independent agency nomination confirmed in the 111 th Congress, the number of days between nomination and confirmation ("days to confirm") The mean (average) number of. days taken by the Senate to confirm a nomination to a position covered by this report was 93.1. The median number of Days to Confirm a nominee was 65.5. The agency profiles provide data on presidential nominations and appointments to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation, and Senate action on the nominations. Data on appointment actions during the 111th Congress appear in two tables for each agency. the same position. This was typically because the President submitted a nomination following a recess appointment (recess appointments are also included in the table). When a nominee is awaiting Senate action and he or she is given a recess appointments, a follow-up nomination is usually submitted to comply with the requirements of 5 U.S.C. §5503(b) (see section entitled " Recess Appointments ," above). The nomination tables that have more than one nominee to a position also give statistics on the length of time between nomination and confirmation. incumbent's name followed by "(A)" indicates an official who was, at that time, serving in an acting capacity. Vacancies are also noted in the first table. The nomination action table provides, in chronological order, information concerning each nomination. It shows the name of the nominee, position involved, and date of nomination, date of confirmation, and number of days between receipt of a nomination and confirmation. The numbers of days shown in the tables in this report include days during the longer recesses around August and between sessions of Congress. appointment is for 210 days, but the time restriction is suspended if a first or second nomination for the position is pending. The act does not apply to positions on multi-headed regulatory boards and commissions or to certain other specific positions which may be filled temporarily under other statutory provisions. During the 111 th Congress, President Barack Obama submitted to the Senate 107 nominations for the Supreme Court seat vacated by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia. The Senate voted 107-0 to approve the nomination of Elena Kagan to be the next Supreme Court Justice. mean and median. Presenting both numbers is a better way to look at the central tendency of the data. A nomination that took an extraordinarily long time might cause a significant change in the mean, but the median would be unaffected. Appendix A presents a table of all nominations and recess appointments to positions in independent and other agencies, organized alphabetically by last name and following a similar format to the table in Appendix A. The data is presented in terms of both the mean and the median, which is a more familiar measure but may be influenced by outliers. by the Senate executive clerk, who arranges for the referral of the nominations to committee. Committee nomination activity has generally included investigation, hearing, and reporting stages. Hearings provide a public forum to discuss a nomination and any issues related to the program or agency for which the nominee would be responsible. Senators have used hearings to explore nominees' qualifications, articulate policy perspectives, or raise related oversight issues. If the committee votes to report a nomination to the full Senate, it has three options: it may report the nomination favorably, unfavorably, or without recommendation. determines whether or not to confirm a nomination. The Senate has shown particular interest in the nominee's views and how they are likely to affect public policy. Two other factors have sometimes affected the examination of a nominee's personal and professional qualities: whether the President's party controlled the Senate, and the degree to which the President became involved in supporting the nomination. Much of the Senate confirmation process occurs at the committee level. Administratively, nominations are received by the White House and sent to the Senate. report means the nomination will not be reported to the Senate. If the committee declines to report a nomination, the Senate may discharge the committee from further consideration of the nomination. Rarely, however, has a vote to confirm a nomination failed on the Senate floor. Failure of a nomination to make it out of committee has occurred for a variety of reasons, including opposition to the nomination, and the lack of support for the nomination from the Senate majority leader at the time. The Senate historically has confirmed most, but not all, executive nominations. appointment by 90 days. This provision might give some additional flexibility to an incoming President. It might also lengthen the appointment process for some positions by, in effect, extending the deadline by which a permanent appointment must be completed. For positions located within a state, the President normally nominates an individual recommended by one or both Senators (if they are from the same party as the President) from that state. If neither Senator is from the President's party, he usually defers to the recommendations of party leaders from the state. The President solicits recommendations from Senators of the opposition party because of their positions in the Senate. If circumstances permit and conditions are met, the President could give the nominee a recess appointment. Recess appointments have sometimes had political consequences, however, particularly where Senators perceived that such an appointment was an effort to circumvent their constitutional role. Some Senate-confirmed positions can be filled by recess appointments. The President would likely consider how it will fare in the confirmation process before making a nomination to a federal position. may also be temporarily filled under the Vacancies Act. A nominee who is hired by the agency as a consultant while awaiting confirmation may serve only in an advisory capacity. Authority to act comes once there is Senate confirmation and presidential appointment, or if another method of appointment, such as a recess appointment or a temporary appointment, is utilized. For further information on these methods, see section entitled " Recess Appointments " and " Temporary Appointment " below. In the second stage, the Senate alone must approve the nominee. providing information on Senate activity (confirmations, rejections, returns to the President) as well as further related presidential activity. The profiles also identify, for each agency, positions requiring Senate confirmation, the incumbents in those positions as of the end of the 111 th Congress, and the pay levels of those officials. The Constitution (Article II, Section 2) empowers the President to nominate and, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint the principal officers of the United States. Three distinct stages mark the appointment process: selection and nomination, confirmation, and appointment. In the first stage, the White House selects and clears a prospective appointee before sending a formal nomination to the Senate. There are a number of steps in this stage of the process for most Senate-confirmed positions. First, with the assistance of, and preliminary vetting by, theWhite House Office of Presidential Personnel, the President selects the nominee. Then, the Senate confirms the nominee, and the President nominates a successor. the Senate rule providing for this return is often waived. In the final stage, the confirmed nominee is given a commission, which bears the Great Seal of the United States and is signed by the President. The President may sign the commission at any time after confirmation, at which point the appointment becomes official. Once the appointee is given the commission and sworn in, he or she has full authority to carry out the responsibilities of the office. The Constitution also empowers the President to make a limited-term appointment without Senate confirmation. a candidate for the position. Members of Congress and interest groups sometimes recommend candidates for specific PAS positions. They may offer their suggestions by letter, for example, or by contact with a White House liaison. In general, the White House is under no obligation to follow such recommendations. In the case of the Senate, however, it has been argued that Senators are constitutionally entitled, by virtue of the advice and consent clause noted above, to provide advice to the President regarding his selection. The extent of this entitlement is a matter of some debate. Senators have sometimes exercised their procedural prerogatives to delay or even effectively block consideration of a nomination. During the clearance process, the candidate prepares and submits several forms, including the "Public Financial Disclosure Report" (Standard Form (SF) 278) and the "Questionnaire for National Security Positions" (SF 86) The Office of the Counsel to the President oversees the clearanceprocess, which often includes background investigations conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and Office of Government Ethics (OGE) which the candidate is to be appointed. If conflicts of interest are found during the background investigation, OGE and the agency ethics officer may work with the candidate to mitigate the conflicts. Once the Office of the Counsel to the President has cleared the candidate, the nomination is ready to be submitted to the Senate. The selection and clearance stage has often been the longest part of the appointment process. There have been, at times, lengthy delays, particularly when many candidates have been processed simultaneously, such as at the beginning of an Administration. Amendments to the Presidential Transition Act of 1963 encourage a President-elect to submit potential nominees to high-level national security positions as soon as possible after the election. A separate provision of law, enacted as part of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, lengthens, during presidential transitions, the potential duration of a temporary position. The White House says it will continue to seek qualified candidates for the position of national security adviser until a nominee is confirmed by the Senate or House of Representatives.