In 1994, the Army decided to terminate the final year of the FMTV production contract. The contractor had to stop new production for 5 months and produced only 175 new trucks during the other 4 months. The Army found that the first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the requirements for FMTV. The combination of inexperience and an aggressive production schedule were major contributors to the contractor’s production problems and schedule delays. The contract extension added an estimated $85 million to the original contract price. fleet of older, less reliable trucks. First 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the FMTV corrosion protection requirements. The Army’s decision to award a $1.2-billion FMTV contract to a company that was not experienced in truck production, did not have truck production facilities, and was not affiliated with an experienced producer. Further, the Army contract contained an aggressive production schedule, considering an inexperienced contractor, that further added to the cost of replacing the older trucks. At a projected cost of $15.7 billion, the FMTV program is one of the Army’s largest acquisition programs. The Army plans to purchase 85,488 FMTV trucks to replace its aging medium truck fleet. Under the program, the Army will purchase a family of 2.5- and 5-ton trucks based on a common truck cab and chassis. The trucks will consist of cargo, long wheel base cargo, dump, fuel tanker, and trailer variants, among others. as of December 31, 1997. To accomplish this, we first determined operating tempo for the older M35 2.5-ton and M809 5-ton trucks. A project office official said that the older trucks were the trucks the FMTV trucks would be replacing. The FMTV project office provided a 3-year average operating and support cost per mile for the Older trucks. It also provided an estimated operating andsupport costs permile forFMTV trucks. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. This provided the monthly additional operating and support costs to operate the older 2.5- and 5-ton trucks. We did not independently verify the accuracy of material receiving and shipping report data obtained from the Defense Finance and Accounting Service. We multiplied the delay in months by the number of FMTV trucks delivered late. This gave us an estimate of the additional costs that the Army might have incurred as of December 31, 1997, because of delayed FMTV truck deliveries. We then multiplied that product by the monthly Additional Operating and Support costs for the older trucks. truck average was based on the trucks used in three Army major commands. We determined an average operating tempo for each truck. This information was reported by the U.S. Cost and Economic Analysis Center in its fiscal year 1996 tactical systems cost report, which was updated as of October 27, 1997. We computed monthly operating and support costs for the older trucks and FMTV trucks using the operating tempo. We then computed the difference between the cost for the Older and theFMTV trucks.. database that used the same original source documentation. The Defense Finance and Accounting Service also relies on its database to make payments to the contractor for delivered vehicles. We also did not verify the accuracy of operating and support cost factors and operating tempo for the older 2.5- and 5-ton trucks and FMTV trucks provided by the U.S. Army Cost and Economic Analysis Center. This data is part of the operating and. support management information system managed by the Army. It is the Army’s source of historical operating andsupport cost information for more. was extended 2 years. Stewart & Stevenson completed production under the contract in November 1998. The initial production contract does not include the 5-ton fuel tanker, 5- ton van, and both trailers. These vehicles will be included in future production contracts. In our November 1998 report, we found that the Army had not (1) instituted safeguards to ensure that existing production problems did not occur in follow-on production contracts and (2) performed a cost and benefit analysis of its plan to develop a second source for the trucks. contract, it established a source selection board, which evaluated the proposals of the three competing contractors. The Army gave highest consideration to the technical and cost factors of the proposals. Stewart & Stevenson was selected because its proposal offered the best value for meeting the Army’s overall requirements and receives the highest score for the technical factor and was the lowest cost. The board considered the government's previous experience with the prototype contractors as part of the Army's overall production readiness evaluation. This evaluation noted that Stewart and Stevenson had no prior experience in high volume production of combat. tractor, van, and wrecker—and a 5-ton trailer. In the prototype phase, three companies were awarded contracts to develop and produce prototype trucks for evaluation and testing. On October 11, 1991, the Army awarded the winning contractor a $1.2 billion, 5-year fixed-price production contract for the first 10,843 FMTV trucks. The fifth year of the contract was subsequently restructured and the contract an experienced truck producer was awarded. Stewart & Stevenson was a distribution and service company for various products. or tactical vehicles, (2) needed to convert European engineering drawings to U.S. specifications and standards, and (3) had unsatisfactory delivery performance on past low dollar purchase orders. The contractor, which was inexperienced in truck production, had difficulties in both establishing a production line and producing trucks that would pass test requirements. To acquire FMTV truck production capability, Stewart & Stevenson purchased a plant from an oil-drilling equipment manufacturer, configured the plant for truck production and established a tactical truck division. Stewart.& Stevenson was affiliated with an experienced military truck producer (Steyr-Daimler-Puch, AG. of Austria). Stewart & Stevenson subcontracted with Steyr to design and develop FMTV prototypes based on the design of a truck Steyr produced for the Austrian army. Steyr completed its subcontract work before Stewart &. Stevenson submitted its production proposal and was not included in the production phase of the program. When the Army issued the solicitation for the production, Steyr was not selected. The Army did not execute a low-risk acquisition strategy. To reduce the time to develop and field FMTV trucks, the Army streamlined its strategy. The Army believed this strategy would be low- risk partly because the contractors participating in the prototype competition either had produced military trucks in the past or were affiliated with an experienced military truck producer. The production contract solicitation did not require the contractor to be experienced in truck production or affiliated with a military truck company. It also did not perform a cost and benefit analysis of its second source plans before continuing with them. The Army used a streamlined acquisition strategy to reduce the time required to develop and field FMTV trucks. The reduction in time was to be achieved by combining the demonstration and validation phase and the engineering and manufacturing development phase into a single prototype competition phase and by conducting concurrent tests. The Army and contractor agreed to accelerate truck production during testing even though the trucks were not meeting test requirements. These problems resulted in substantial delays in delivering the trucks. In response to the schedule delays, the Army agreed to accelerated truck production. officials and reviewed various FMTV program documents. For early historical data, we had to rely mainly on oral testimony because many documents dealing with the early program were unavailable. To determine the impact of delays in delivering FMTV trucks, we calculated additional operating and support costs the Army might have incurred. We were able to obtain some of the earlier documents, mostly those dealing with FMTV truck testing, by reviewing our workpapers from previous reviews of the program. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. The Army did not include experience or affiliation with an experienced truck producer as a requirement in the production contract solicitation. The contract contained an aggressive production schedule that did not take into account the contractor’s inexperience. The contractor had been affiliated with a truck producer during the prototype phase but did not maintain its affiliation. The inexperienced contractor was awarded the FMTV multiyear production contract to a contractor that was neither experienced in truck production nor affiliated with an experience truck producer. The Army awarded the contract to an inexperienced contractor. schedule to an inexperienced truck producer, who had no affiliation with an experienced truck producer. DOD noted that the decision was based on funding demands from higher priority programs. DOD also said that the FMTV program’s schedule and production problems weakened its ability to compete with other programs for funds. The decision was made to terminate the final year of theFMTV contract, which was set to expire in 2015. The contract was supposed to be a low-risk acquisition strategy, DOD said. to galvanized steel. In commenting on a draft of this report, DOD generally agreed that it identified lessons learned from a historical perspective. DOD included with its written comments an enclosure providing additional contextual information for some of the issues in the report. In the enclosure, DOD stated that it believed the acquisition strategy for the FMTV program has been appropriate. According to DOD, the competitive source selection took into account a balance of factors, including the contractor’s assessed production capabilities. We did not find the combination of awarding a contract with an aggressive production. The contractor took much longer than expected to deliver trucks capable of passing production qualification and operational tests. Production qualification testing was originally scheduled to be completed in August 1993; the test was not completed until December 1994. The trucks failed the test because they did not meet reliability and some performance requirements. The Army identified over 90 problems that the contractor was required to correct.and did not deliver 85 trucks until March 1994. Operational testing of the new trucks began in April 1995 and the Army completed both tests in June 1995. They were assessed as having met the FMTV requirements in both tests. that passed the tests, the contractor did not receive approval to begin full-rate production until August 1995. The first unit was not equipped with FMTV trucks until January 1996, 2 years and 3 months later than planned. The trucks that were produced could not meet FMTV technical and operational requirements. About 1,474 trucks had to be disassembled to their frames and remanufactured. This additional work delayed the production of new trucks during the 1995-96 period. The production contract allowed the contractor to deliver up to 150 trucks a month until the testing phase was completed. For example, the FMTV data package provided by Steyr was in German and used metric measurements. Stewart & Stevenson did not accurately translate the instructions or convert the measurements. Production disruptions occurred when instructions did not work as intended and when subcontractor parts, produced using drawings furnished by the contractor, did not fit. As a result, the contractor was late in delivering trucks for testing. The contract required the contractor to deliver a minimum of 85 trucks by October 1992 for production qualification testing, initial operational testing, and technical manual verification. House Committees on Government Reform, Armed Services, and Appropriations; the Secretaries of Defense and the Army; and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. Please contact me on (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, orders should be mailed to: accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (202?) 512-6061. We conducted our review between July 1997 and November 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the Chairmen and Ranking Minority Members of the Senate Committees on Governmental Affairs, Armed Services, and Appropriations and of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, Columbus, Ohio. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. disprove the contractor’s claim. The Army and the contractor concluded that using galvanized (zinc coated) steel to produce the cabs may be the only way to meet the 10-year corrosion protection requirement. They also believed that galvanization would likely provide more than 10 years of corrosion protection. Because the galvanized cab has the potential to protect against corrosion beyond the contract requirement, the Army agreed to share the cost of the cab. The contractor continues to be required to meet corrosion protection requirements. The FMTV project office first became aware that FMTV trucks had corrosion problems in late 1995. The Army later tested the corrosion repairs made on two cabs and found the repairs unacceptable. The contractor offered to provide a 10-year corrosion protection warranty on the cabs, cargo beds, frame rails, and crossmembers truck was corroded in 60 areas. Army officials said that since the Army had specified the material to be used in 20 of the areas, it agreed to pay for necessary changes in these areas. Army agreed to the warranty and again began accepting trucks with corrosion repairs. At the same time, the Army agreed to release to the contractor all funding previously withheld because of corrosion problems. The modifications set a ceiling of $7 million on the Army’s share of costs. The contractor produced 3,751 trucks with galvanized cabs under the first production contract. The Army is designing a new corrosion test to determine the number of years of protection the new design will provide. They also said that the corrosion protection enhancements and the corrosion test of these enhancements will be included as requirements in future FMTV truck production contracts. corrosion protection requirements, the contractor agreed to repair the corroded trucks. The contractor produced 2,491 trucks under these new procedures. The Army and the contractor ultimately concluded that galvanized steel cabs may be needed to fully meet the truck’s 10-year corrosion prevention requirement. The contract was subsequently modified to require the galvanizedsteel cabs. It did not test or require the contractor to provide a corrosion warranty on the 2,492 trucks produced prior to the switch. The Army surveyed all of the trucks in storage and discovered corrosion on other truck cabs. They determined that the main causes of the corrosion were inadequate cleaning and painting procedures by the cab subcontractor, McLaughlin Body Company. McLaughlin subsequently improved its procedures at no cost to the Army. These improvements would be reflected in trucks produced after February 28, 1997. The Army withheld $1,000 or $2,000 per truck, depending on type, pending the contractor’s corrective action plan. than 400 systems deployed in tactical units. We based our estimate of the potential cost of replacing all of the cabs on trucks covered by the corrosion warranty on an Army estimate. The Army used a replacement cost of $8,000 per air drop cab and $6,000per standard cab to develop its estimate. We were not able to determine the number of air drop and standard trucks in the 2,091 trucks not included in the Army’s estimate. To produce a conservative estimate, we multiplied the standard cab cost by 2,000 trucks.