Under the statute, "proprietary trading" covers buying and selling of "financial instruments" by banking entities as "principal" for their "trading accounts" "Financial instruments" include securities, derivatives, and contracts for future sale or for options on any commodity other than foreign exchange or currency. The regulation focuses on restricting short-term trades. It establishes a rebuttable presumption that any financial instrument held for fewer than 60 days is a banned proprietary trade unless all relevant facts and circumstances rebut the presumption. in the definition of "proprietary trading," including the following: acquisitions or sales of financial products pursuant to a repurchase and reverse repurchase agreement. "highly liquid" securities as part of a valid liquidity management plan, which "the banking entity does not reasonably expect to give rise to appreciable profits or losses" as a result of short-term price movements. "Derivative clearing activities," such as in connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding, are also included in the definition. "Trading account" also covers trades by banking entities that are securities dealers and swap or swap-based securities dealers. The Rule, embodied in the regulations, expressly provides that certain activities are not included in the trading account category. The trading account is used to buy or sell one or more financial instruments "principally" for "short-term resale," to benefit from " short-term price movements," or to hedge any of these. It also covers market risk capital transactions and hedges. The Rule carves out numerous exclusions and designates myriad activities as permissible so long as various terms and conditions are met. The statutory language provides only general outlines of prohibited activities and exceptions, while empowering the Office of the Comptroller of purpose of that law. Foreign-based funds that raise money to sell or invest in securities and whose ownership interests are offered and sold exclusively outside the U.S., that either are sponsored by a banking entity or have ownership interests held by the banking entity, are among the prohibited activities. The ban on proprietary trading does not apply to a banking entity's underwriting activities. Underwriting activities must be related to the bank's role as a securities underwriter. The banking entity must have an internal compliance program, and certain other requirements must be met. The regulation's requirements include that "[t]he amount, types, and risks of the financial instruments ... are designed to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" The ban on market making activities also doesn't apply to banking entities. applicability of the Rule. It then separately analyzes the two distinct components of the rule. The Rule is to broadly prohibit banking entities from engaging in these two broad categories of activities. It also carving out specific exclusions from the scope of the two categories and exceptions for certain activities. These excepted activities are designated as permissible under the Rule unless they would involve or result in a material conflict of interest;. They are not subject to the same restrictions as those for proprietary trading or investing in and sponsoring covered funds. as they meet the same terms and conditions necessary to comply with the exceptions for underwriting and market making from the ban on proprietary trading. According to the preamble to the final regulations, [t]he Agencies believe that providing a separate provision relating to permitted underwriting. and market-making-related activities for ownership interests in covered funds is supported by [12 U.S.C. §1851(d)(1)(B)]. For underwriting activities, the requirements are the same as those for covered fund activities. Investments permitted under Bank Holding Company Act are conducted solely outside the United States. The regulation also includes various other restrictions. The agencies used this broad authority to define the scope of the regulation. The statute provides the agencies with discretion to permit proprietary trading for any other activity that they "determine, by rule, ... would permit promote and protect the safety soundness of the banking entity and the financial stability of the U.S. of the United states" The regulation is expected to go into effect in early 2015. The Volcker Rule establishes an outright prohibition on proprietary trading by a "banking entity" Subsequent provisions of the legislation provide activities that are excluded from the definition of "proprietary trading" Riskless principal transactions, where a banking entity buys or sells a financial product "to offset a contemporaneous sale or purchase" of a customer, are exempt from the ban. The statute permits trading by insurance companies for their general accounts.under certain circumstances will be permitted to trade foreign government obligations. Regulations would allow U.S. banks to purchase and sell "any municipal security" and other domestic government obligations without running afoul of the prohibition against proprietary trading. Under certain circumstances, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.s. banks under certain circumstances will be permitted to trade foreign government obligations. Under the regulations, banking entities would be able to buy and sell obligations of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Home Loan Banks, Farmer Mac, and Farm Credit System institutions. compliance programs, internal controls, and recordkeeping systems to control and monitor the risk of trading and investment activities. Compliance requirements vary in accordance with the size of the banking entity. Banking entities with total assets below $10 billion may fold. banking entities conducting no proprietary trading activity (other than trading of federal, agency, or state and local obligations) and having no investments in covered funds are not required to develop a Volcker Rule-specific compliance program but must do so if they begin to conduct such activities. of material conflicts of interest, threats to safety and soundness, or exposure to high-risk assets or trading strategies. documentation of plans for seeking unaffiliated investors to meet investment limits. Board of director and senior management involvement; and CEO attestation. The regulations require any banking entity engaging in any activity or making an investment in violation of the Volcker Rule to terminate the activity and divest the investment promptly. They also authorize the agencies to "take any action permitted by law to enforce compliance ..., including directing the banking entity to restrict, limit, or terminate any or all activities" Volcker Rule compliance measures into existing compliance programs. The standard compliance requirements apply to banking entities with assets of $10 billion or more. In addition to complying with the standard compliance program, banks with $50 billion in assets or more are subject to Enhanced Minimum Standards. The Volcker Rule includes requirements for written policies and procedures documenting compliance and verifying exemptions, according to the regulations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Banking entities must be ready to purchase and sell financial instruments in commercially reasonable amounts and throughout market cycles. Underwriting positions must be "designed not to exceed the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties"; and it must have an internal compliance program. Whether the goal of the agencies for flexibility sufficient to maintain robust capital markets has been achieved, particularly with respect to some specialty markets with limited participants, awaits time and further study of the regulations. The requirements include that the banking entity "routinely stands ready to buy and sell ... financial instruments ... " (2) internal control systems, (3) management frameworks, (4) independent testing and review, (5) personnel training, and (6) recordkeeping. For banking entities subject to the standard compliance program, the final regulations also require and establish methods of calculating quantitative measurements that banking entities must furnish for seven aspects of each trading desk. Appendix A sets forth non-exclusive recordkeeping and reporting requirements, including quantitative measurements of risk factor sensitivities, position limits and usage, profit and loss attribution, inventory turnover and aging, and customer facing trade ratio. metrics, for banking entities with "significant trading assets and liabilities" The preamble to the final regulations make clear, however, that these are not safe harbors. "Banking entities [must ensure] that they have robust measures in place to identify and monitor the risks taken in their trading activities," the regulations say. The Enhanced Minimum Standards include instructions as to the specific ingredients of the entity's policies, the regulation says. The proposed rule is expected to come into effect in early 2015. and procedures applicable to its trading desks and to its covered fund activities or investments. For the trading desks of banking entities that are subject to the heightened compliance program, there are specific requirements regarding how the trading desk "identif[ies], authoriz[es], and document[s] financial instruments to be purchased or sold" "types and amounts of risks allocated" to each trading desk; how those risks will be measured; why those risks are appropriate; "the process for setting new or revised limits"; and types of permissible customers and counterparties. compensation arrangements. There are also provisions on describing the firm's risks and risk management process. For covered fund activities or investments, the Enhanced Minimum Standards requirements include management involvement in reviewing and testing the identification and documentation of all covered funds sponsored or organized by components of the organization. The requirements include identification of the lines of authority with respect to such funds; explanations of monitoring for and prohibition of covered funds; and specifics of its analytical policies and procedures and quantitative measurements. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/business/finance-finance/firms-must-report-their-risk-management-process-to-the-fraudulently-dodged-investment-authorities. activities any transaction or class of activities, otherwise permitted, that would involve or result in a material conflict of interest. The regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" The Rule also provides standards by which the regulators may set further limits or conditions on these permissible activities, and includes authority for the regulators to add to the list of permitted activities. It provides standards for how the regulators might set limits on these activities. to meet a list of widely divergent objectives. The statute states the prohibitions and conditions in very broad terms and applies them to an array of financial institutions. It applies to community and global banks, every variety of insurance firm, securities firms, and foreign banking institutions operating in the United States, among others. The federal financial regulators have been tasked with diverse objectives, among which are the following: promoting safety and soundness of the entities covered by the Rule; protecting taxpayers and consumers; limiting inappropriate transfers of money. the safety net provided by FDIC deposit insurance. reducing conflicts of interests between the entities and their clients. limiting unduly risky activities by these entities. "appropriately" accommodating the business of insurance; and " appropriately" timing divestiture of illiquid assets affected by the Rule. It includes a broad explicit delegation of discretion to exclude from the basic prohibitions of the statute "[s]uch other activity as the appropriate [federal] activity" The statutory language requires the regulators to explicate such critical terms as "banking entity," "covered fund," and "illiquid fund" Risk-mitigating hedging activities are "related to individual or aggregated positions ... that are designed to reduce the specific risks to the banking entity" The final rule seeks to make it clear that portfolio hedging will not be permitted; or otherwise significantly mitigate the specific, identifiable risk. Banking entities must have written internal programs in place to ensure that hedges comply with the Volcker Rule both at the time of acquisition, as well as through the life of the bank. The limitation to "specific, identifiablerisk[s]" appears to prohibit portfolio hedges akin to the JPMorgan London Whale trades. This provision is aimed at preventing incidents like the $6 billion loss that JPMorgan & Co. suffered in 2012 as a result of derivatives trades. The statute authorizes the purchase and sale of U.S. obligations, obligations of federal agencies and obligations of Ginnie Mae and GSE Obligations. The provision was passed in response to the Senate Banking Committee's investigation into the London Whale trading scandal. The trading was conducted by a trader known as the London whale and which were documented in a Senate investigation. that are treated like bank holding companies pursuant to the International Banking Act of 1978. This includes foreign-based banks that are permitted to operate branches in the U.S. An affiliate is "any company that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with [a company described in categories 1-3]." 4. Affiliates and subsidiaries of companies described in 1-2. The Volcker Rule applies to all depository institutions and to most companies that are owned by or have a common ownership interest with a depository. The Volcker Rule prohibits banking entities from holding an ownership interest in a covered fund. The prohibition does not apply if the interest is acquired by a banking entity while "acting solely as agent, broker, or custodian," fiduciary, or trustee for a customer. A banking entity's ownership interest will be considered an "other similar interest" if the banking entity has any of the following: 1. control over the removal or hiring of acovered fund, or 2. any control over an employee compensation plan organized for the benefit of the bank's employees. The Volcker Rule authorizes banking entities to acquire ownership interests in, sponsor, organize, and offer covered funds. The rule allows banks to act as a securitizer or, in accordance with the credit risk retention requirements of Section 15G(a)(3) of the Exchange Act, to hold investments in a covered fund that is an issuer of asset-backed securities. The banking entity takes certain steps to assure the investors in the fund that losses of the fund will be borne solely by its investors. for the purposes of the Volcker Rule. This broad definition of ownership interest has caused some consternation among banking entities. For example, certain collateralized debt obligations (CDO) backed by trust preferred securities (TruPS) generally was a prohibited investment under the original Volcker rule regulations. The American Bankers Association and several community banks are among those who are concerned about the rule's impact on their operations. The rule's effect on the U.S. economy is expected to be felt in the first quarter of 2014. a material exposure to high-risk assets or high- risk trading strategies; pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the banking entity. The report concludes by addressing other aspects of the Rule that apply generally to banking entities. The Volcker Rule is not likely to remain static over time, the report says. Rather, regulators likely will modify and clarify the requirements through regulations and guidance to address unforeseen complexities, it says. The thrust of the Volcker rule's restrictions applies to banks. On December 10, 2013, more than two years after the statutorily mandated deadline, five federal financial regulators published final regulations. The regulations are implementing Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Together these are known as the Volcker Rule, which is designed to prohibit banks and their affiliates from engaging in risky, short-term, speculative trading. These are practices long condemned by the Rule's namesake, former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker. The Volcker Rule aims to distinguish prohibited activities from activities considered essential to the safety and soundness of banking institutions or to the maintenance of strong capital markets. The report begins by analyzing the integral definition of "banking entity," which serves as the foundation for the Volcker rule. It then analyzes the details of the rulemakings to fill in the details and complete the difficult task of crafting regulations. The full report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/business/volcker-rule-report-1.html. The Federal Reserve Board set the date when conformance with the Rule is required as July 21, 2015. That date could be extended an additional two years, and banking institutions and their affiliates are under an obligation to meet that date with full compliance. The Volcker Rule, which according to an analysis by one of the issuing regulators might impose significant costs on covered institutions, could trigger the need for future bailouts, the FRB said in a statement. The FRB added that the Volcker rule is not intended to replace conventional banking principles. banking organizations promptly filed a lawsuit challenging this aspect of the financial regulators' interpretation of the Volcker Rule. The financial regulators responded by issuing an interim final rule on January 14, 2014, that will serve as a companion to the December 10 Volcker rule regulations. Shortly after the regulators issued the interim final rules, the plaintiffs withdrew their lawsuit. While the focus of theinterim final rule is on TruPS issued and issued, it will also apply to TruPS-backed CDO (or similar investment vehicle) Under the FRB's recent extension, the conformance date is July 21, 2015. The statute generally requires divestiture of nonconforming activities within two years of the Rule becoming effective. The FRB has authority to extend this two-year period one year at a time, not to exceed an aggregate of three years. For a company that was not a banking more time to conform, developing an appropriately specific conformance plan, and immediately terminating any stand-alone proprietary trading operations.this part and dispose of any investment. entity or a subsidiary or affiliate of a banking entity on that date, conformance is required before the later of July 21, 2015, or two years after the date on which the company becomes a banking entities. A company becoming a banking. entity on July 21,. 2015, thus, would have two years, until July 21. 2017, to conform its activities and investments. Banking entities are expected to engage in good faith efforts to be in compliance with the rules. by not expanding covered activities or expecting them to. illiquid fund, the entity may apply to the FRB for an extension which may be granted for no more than five years. divestiture would be required either at the end of the five years or on the contractual date—whichever is earlier. The entity would then have to sell off the assets to pay off the debt. The FRB has the power to grant or deny an extension to any of the powers granted to it by the European Court of Justice or the European Convention on Human Rights. generally excluding debt and equity securities, subject to various terms and conditions. Covered Bonds Vehicles. Funds holding a pool of loans or certain other permissible assets "for the benefit of holders of covered bonds" Smaller Business Investment Companies (SBICs) and Other Public Welfare Investment Funds . Small business investment companies and similar. Small business Investment Companies and other public welfare Investment Funds. Small Business Investment Company (SBI) Funds. SBIs and similar public welfare investment funds. SBICs and such public welfare funds. companies organized "to make investments [d]esigned primarily to promote the public welfare" or investments in certain qualified historic tax credit programs. Registered Investment Companies and Business Development Companies (BDCs) Issuers registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940 and business development companies regulated by the SEC. FDIC Conservatorship or Receivership. Issuers organized " to facilitate the disposal of assets acquired in the FDIC's capacity as a conservator or receiver [of a depository institution or non-bank financial institution]." Banking entities that are organized in a foreign country and are not controlled, either directly or indirectly, by a U.S.-based banking entity may be exempt from the Volcker Rule. Insurance companies and their affiliates generally may sponsor or acquire ownership interests in covered funds if those interests are retained solely for the insurance company's or its affiliate's own account. Such investments comply with a state insurance regulatory regime, unless the federal banking regulators jointly determined that the state law permitting such investments "is insufficient to protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity" banking entity that is an insurance company or an affiliate of an insurance companies is permitted to buy or sell financial instruments for its own account. The transaction "is conducted in compliance with, and subject to, the insurance company investments laws" of the applicable state. Federal banking regulators, in consultation with the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and relevant state or foreign insurance regulators, may jointly proscribe otherwise permissible insurance company investment activities if the state regulation of those activities "is insufficient to protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity" a foreign jurisdiction. Separate Life Insurance Accounts. Issuers of certain asset-backed securitizations, including certain loans, foreign exchange derivatives, and interest rate derivatives, but not life insurance policies. "A separate account, provided that no banking entity other than the insurance company participates in the account's profits and losses," says the FDIC. "No banking entity (or multiple banking entities) to acquire life insurance. policies for its benefit so long as the banking entity does not control the. account's investment decisions" to "banking entities" "Banking entity" is defined as: 1. FDIC-insured depository institutions. 2. Companies that own or control these depositories. 3. Foreign-based companies that hold a controlling share of a company's stock or influence over its decision-making process. "Bank holding companies" are typically organized as bank holding companies (BHCs), financial holding company (FHCs) or savings and loan or thrift holding companies. For more information, go to: http://www.finance.gov/. "banking entity," as discussed below. Because they may engage in little or no activities that are banned by the Volcker Rule, the recordkeeping and reporting requirements and other compliance standards that apply to community banks and their subsidiaries and affiliates generally will not be as onerous as those imposed on the country's largest FHCs. As another example, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.S. banking entities may not be subject to the same recordkeeping requirements as their American-based counterparts. affiliates, directors, and employees. Wholly Owned Subsidiaries. Entities that are directly or indirectly owned entirely by the banking entity. Joint Ventures. Joint ventures between a banking entity or its affiliates and up to ten unaffiliated entities. Merger and Acquisition Vehicles. Issuers established for the sole purpose of effectuating "a bona fide merger or acquisition" Foreign Retirement and Pension Funds. Retirement or pension funds that are organized in, subject to regulation in, and provide benefits to residents or citizens of. De minimis investments in covered funds are subject to both per fund and aggregate caps. A de minimis investment made by a banking entity and its affiliates must "not exceed 3 percent of the total number or value of the outstanding ownership interests of the fund" The Rule establishes various methods for calculating per Fund De Minimis Cap. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. fund de minimis investment caps based on the type of fund in question. Total ownership interests in covered funds by a banking entity and its affiliates "may not exceed 3 percent of the tier 1 capital of the banking entity" For those banking entities that must report tier 1capital levels to appropriate banking regulators in accordance with other law, the calculation will remain the same for the purposes of the Volcker Rule. However, the final regulations establish how tier 1. capital levels will be calculated in the future. Capital should be calculated for those banking entities that are not otherwise required to maintain and report capital levels. The FRB may provide up to two additional years to conform with the per fund de minimis cap if such an extension "would be consistent with safety and soundness and not detrimental to the public interest" Certain SEC-registered business development companies, investment companies, and foreign public funds, which generally are excluded from the definition of "covered fund" as described above, will not be considered an affiliate of a banking entity if the banking entity does not own, control or hold with the power to vote 25 percent or more. Banking entities are permitted to take ownership stakes in covered funds for hedging purposes subject to important limitations. Such acquisitions are only permissible to the extent that they are "designed to demonstrably reduce the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties"; and the banking entity must have an internal compliance program. Any ownership interest acquired by a banking entity conducting underwriting or market making activities with a covered fund must be included in both the per fund and aggregate de minimis investment cap calculations discussed above. fund's managers, directors, or investment advisors, except when exercising creditor rights upon a default or acceleration trigger. A right to share in a covered fund's "income, gains, or profits"; 3. a right to receive all or a portion of excess spread"; 4. a duty to pay acovered fund for the ownership interest that could be reduced based on lower interest rates owed on the covered fund; and 5. a "right" to receive "all or a part" of the fund's assets. such ownership interest or as a result of a loss in value of the fund's assets; 6. any earnings of pass-through income from the covered fund; or 7. "any synthetic right to have, receive, or be allocated any of the rights in [1-6]." The regulations state that, under certain circumstances, "restricted profit interests" held by a banking entity or one of its current or former employees that served as a trading or investment advisor, manager, or similar service provider is not considered an ownership interest. minimis interest in the funds; (4) the banking entity and its affiliates engage in no transaction with the fund that would be designated as a "covered transaction" under Federal Reserve Act (FRA) Section 23A; (5) the Banking entity does not guaranty the obligations of the covered fund; and (6) thecovered fund does not have the word "bank" in its name or share a name with the banking securities so long as the banking entities retains only a de minimis interest. Banking entities that provide advisory or investment management services to or hold a permissible interest in a covered fund are prohibited from entering into a transaction that would be considered a "covered transaction" for the purposes of FRA Section 23A with the covered fund. Any permissible transactions between covered funds and banking entities and their affiliates must be entered into in accordance with the "arms-length" requirements of Section 23B. The statute requires the federal financial regulators to issue regulations to "insure compliance with [Section 619]." its name or share a name with the banking entity. No director or employee of the banking entities, other than those directly engaged in providing investment advisory or other services to the covered fund, acquires an interest in the fund. The banking entity takes certain steps to assure the investors in the hedge fund or private equity fund that losses of the fund will be borne solely by its investors. Although not explicitly excepted by the statute, pursuant to the regulations, banking entities generally may engage in underwriting and market making activities for covered funds. The Volcker Rule regulations define "covered fund" to largely encompass entities that are exempt from various registration requirements with either the SEC or CFTC. The term includes issuers that rely on Investment Company Act of 1940 Sections 3(c)(1) or 3( c)(7) to avoid being considered investment companies. Even if a banking entity acquires an investment in or sponsorship of a covered fund that meets one of the permissible exceptions described below, it could still be barred by the Volcker rule. Act of 1940 if such funds were subject to U.S. securities laws. The rule explicitly excludes a number of activities and products from the "covered fund" definition. These exclusions include the following: Foreign Public Funds. Issuers that are not organized or established in the United States that "issue ownership interests to retail investors in [their] home jurisdiction" and such interests are sold "predominantly" through one or more public offerings outside of the United states. This exemption only applies if "the ownership interests in the issuer are sold predominately to persons other than such sponsoring banking entity" and their