days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to Representative Eva Clayton, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, Nutrition, and Forestry, House Committee on Agriculture. We will also send them to Senator Richard Lugar, Chairman, and Senator Tom Harkin, Ranking Member, Senate committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry. We are also sending them to Representative Larry Combest, Chairman of the House Agriculture Committee, and Representative Charles Stenholm, Ranking minority Member, House committee on agriculture. and Representative Janice Schakowski, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management and Intergovernmental Relations. We will also send copies to the Honorable Ann M. Veneman, Secretary of Agriculture; the Hon honorable Mitchell E. Daniels, Jr., Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Should you have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at (202) 512-6257 or Stephen A. Schwartz, Senior Assistant Director, at (Washington, D.C.) 512-6213. out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders by mail: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Orders by visiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list, call (202) 512-6000. from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Web site: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.htm e-mail: fraudnet@gaO.gov 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) or call the toll-free number at (1-800) 456-6000. By the December 18 deadline, the CBAs had successfully established a common Internet Web site. However, none of the 100-plus RD forms that theCBAs expected to have deployed on the Web site by the deadline were available. OMB had not approved these forms because some forms appeared to be for the department’s internal use, did not have clear and user-friendly instructions, or did not include forms instructions that conformed to the format standard established by OMB and the USDA. implementing all the separate e-file activities. purchased an on-line common forms software tool for selected a total of 219 forms (57 from FSA, 6 from NRCS, and 156 from RD) coordinated with OMB to develop a user-friendly format and are working to obtain OMB approval for each new electronic form. designed and is implementing a common Internet Web site that can utilize a single Internet address to provide user access with common search and retrieval functions for all forms. tool for creating electronic forms, selected forms to post on the Web, and designed and begun implementing a common Internet Web site. CBAs still need to obtain OMB approval for each electronic form, complete testing of the Web page, train county-based field staff in the new e-file procedures, publicize the department’s e- file services, and notify the public on how to use them. The CBAs progress in meeting the E-File Act's December 18 deadline was discussed in a report to Congress on December 22, 2000. As of December 31, 2000, RD had not resubmitted any of its forms for OMB review. A marketing brochure, being developed by the CBAs, was still in production at the end of December 2000. CBAs decided not to issue any press releases publicizing the new e-file Web site. Training needs for service center employees were minimal at this phase of the project. informational directives on the new program were provided to employees in lieu of giving them training. Fully meeting all able to file paperwork electronically with USDA if they choose to do so. RMA administers the federal crop insurance program, which helps protect producers against losses due to drought, flooding, and other unavoidable causes. By December 1, 2000, it was to submit to Congress a plan for enabling producers to obtain forms and information, such as crop insurance applications and production and yield reports, over the Internet. Implementation of the plan is to be completed by December 1,. 2001. The Freedom to E-File Act requires that by 2003, federal agencies provide the public, where practicable, the option of submitting, maintaining, or disclosing. In response to the E-File Act, RMA began work on the required December 1, 2000, plan for allowing agricultural producers the option of obtaining, over the Internet from approved insurance providers, all forms and other information. RMA’s initial efforts focused on establishing and distributing guidelines and policies for crop insurance providers to follow in meeting their e-file responsibilities. USDA has not assigned a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and managing the program. Conservation Service (NRCS), and Rural Development (RD) mission area--hereafter referred to collectively as County- based Agencies (CBAs), and the Risk Management Agency (RMA) to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system. Provides separate requirements for the CBAs and RMA. an Internet-based system enabling agricultural producers to access all forms and shall submit to Congress a report that describes the progress made. Not later than June 20, 2002, the system shall be expanded to enable producers toaccess and file all forms. remaining e-file mandates to successfully establish effective and secure electronic filing capabilities by June 2002 poses far more complex and difficult tasks for USDA. USDA officials working on these activities believe that these tasks can be accomplished by the December 18 deadline. establishing full e-government services across a broad range of USDA building in solutions that also address GPEA and OMB requirements. reengineering numerous existing programs and systems, using multiple electronic submission processes to accommodate various categories of agency customers. designing and investing in technology to securely connect service center agencies to customers. E-File Act requires USDA to continue providing services in the traditional way to customers who choose not to use the Internet. CBAs must support dual service delivery functions--one electronic and one paper-based. identified how much funding and staff resources will be needed to fully implement the act. The E- File Act provides that the Secretary is to reserve, from applicable accounts of the CBAs, not more than $3 million for fiscal year 2001 and $2 million for each year after that.  USDA agreed that it had problems meeting the act’s initial December 18, 2000, deadline for deploying electronic forms on the Internet. USDA said that it fully supports the spirit and intent, as well as the legal mandates, of the e-file act. We continue to believe that having a senior-level official vested with sufficient accountability and authority is important to the success of USDA's e- file implementation efforts. USDA also stated that successful implementation of the act will require continued funding, along with ensured ensured. recommend that the Secretary direct the assigned senior official to include both e-file and GPEA requirements in the department’s comprehensive plan to help better coordinate actions across USDA agencies. We recommend that this official provide quarterly reports to the Secretary describing the results of USDA's efforts to implement each of these actions and all e- file requirements. On November 8, 2000, we provided a copy of our unclear whether the department planned to implement our recommendation for assigning a senior-level official with overall e-File responsibility, authority, and accountability. understanding and support of the USDA’s programs or “owners” of the business being transformed. USDA agreed with our recommendation for making RD forms available on the Internet as soon as possible. The department also agreed that comprehensive plans must be developed for implementing the Freedom to E-File Act and GPEA. However, the department stopped short of describing the extent to which its comprehensive plan will include all the detailed steps we recommended or what the department's time frame is for completing it. document a comprehensive plan for implementing all E-File Act requirements. In developing the department’s comprehensive plan, we further recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture direct the assigned senior official to document and track all critical activities and milestones. The plan should clearly describe all project tasks, their priorities, and time frames and milestones for their completion. We also implementing all the separate activities to ensure that critical tasks are completed on time and within budget and that all federal mandates are met. USDA has also not yet developed and documented a comprehensive e-file implementation plan. The Secretary of Agriculture issued a memorandum to the undersecretaries of the affected agencies and assigned them and mission area leaders with collective responsibility. The Secretary’s memorandum also required that one shared plan be developed and implemented to meet E-File Act requirements. The Office of Chief Information Officer (OCIO) was given the role of coordinating and facilitating e-file implementation planning and required that the plan be submitted to OCIO no later than September 30, 2000. The report, which included two separate sections covering the CBAs and RMA, provides general information on USDA activities to address e- file requirements. “Mission Area Report on Freedom to E-File Legislation” to OCIO on October 17, 2000. It lacked specifics on activities and milestones, dependencies among USDA activities, and needed resources. It also did not assign a senior-level official with overall accountability for managing and ensuring the implementing disparate e-file activities. To address their e- file requirements, the CBAs had two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s December 18, 2000, deadline. information--such as employment records, tax forms, and loan applications-- electronically, instead of on paper. On the basis of guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), agencies are preparing plans for implementing GPEA, including the use of electronic signatures. Secretary issued a memorandum to the undersecretaries for the affected agencies, requiring that one shared plan be developed and implemented to meet E- File Act requirements and the plan be submitted to Office of Chief Information Officer (OCIO) no later than September 30, 2000.  implementing full e-filing capabilities for all its farm service customers by the deadlines set by the act poses a far more complex and difficult challenge. A component critical to the success of any such initiative is the necessary authority and responsibility to manage it across different departmental entities. To ensure that USDA fully meets its E-File Act mandates, we recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and carrying out implementation for both CBAs and RMA E- File Act requirements. USDA’s CBAs provide services such as farm loans and conservation assistance. Under the E- File Act, these agencies were required to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system by December 18, 2000. The law further mandated that by June 20, 2002, agricultural producers be able to access departmental forms via the Internet. The Secretary of Agriculture was also to report to Congress by that date on progress made in implementing the act, according to the law. The deadline for establishing the forms-retrieval system was December 18.