In the event of a future disaster, providing comparable services to all responders would ensure more equitable access to services. HHS has taken steps to ensure that responders are registered, but it has not developed a develop a list of responders. NIOSH’s proposal for a project to develop strategies for addressing responder health issues is a step in the right direction, but HHS has not yet developed a plan to address these issues. Timely implementation of such a system, prior to a disaster or emergency occurring, is important. HHS has not indicated whether its policies and actions following a disaster or emergency would apply these lessons. HHS has not described the roles and responsibilities of its components in designing and implementing responder health programs. Until HHS completes this work, responders to a future disaster could be left vulnerable if they experience health problems as a result of carrying out critical response and recovery activities. The NRF recommends that the Secretary of HHS take the following action: develop a department-level responder screening plan that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC. to provide screening and monitoring services for certain individuals affected by a presidentially declared disaster, including responders. The act also authorizes the President, acting through HHS, to establish cooperative agreements with a medical institution, including a local health institution. Such a program may include collecting exposure data, developing and disseminating information and educational materials, performing baseline and follow-up clinical and mental health evaluations, establishing and maintaining an exposure registry, studying short- and long-term health effects through epidemiologic and other health studies. occurs following a disaster. However, our discussions of the lessons on the importance of registering responders and of designing responder health programs to foster epidemiological research noted that implementing these lessons would help public health officials determine whether a specific disaster resulted in health effects and whether long-term monitoring was necessary. HHS also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days after its issue date. Using experience gained from the WTC disaster, HHS’s ATSDR has developed and tested a Rapid Response Registry (RRR) survey instrument. The RRR survey instrument is designed to collect information that would enable officials to inform individuals about follow-up health services. NIOSH officials plan to meet with state health department representatives in May 2008 and to conduct a focus group with risk managers with an interest in responder safety and health in June 2008. The proposed guidance document would include guidelines for tracking responders during an event, including their activities, exposures and physical and mental health effects. department or a consortium of medical institutions, to carry out this program. We have identified five important lessons from the experience of the WTC health programs. These lessons relate to activities during the response to a disaster as well as during the recovery period, when follow-up monitoring or treatment may be needed. Some of the difficulties encountered by the WTC programs resulted from the unique nature of the World Trade Center disaster. applying these lessons could help to improve the response and recovery from future disasters, the authors say. would help ensure that responders are contacted before some scatter and become more difficult to locate. Having a complete registry could improve the ability of responder health programs to conduct outreach. Designing and implementing screening and monitoring programs that foster the ability to conduct epidemiologic research could help determine the need for ongoing monitoring. Despite an accumulation of evidence about the health effects experienced by responders, researchers have acknowledged that there is still a long way to go before we know the full extent of responders' health problems. Thousands of responders to the WTC disaster have experienced serious physical and mental health problems as a result of their response and recovery efforts. The federal government has provided significant resources to support screening, monitoring, and treatment services for these responders. Designing and implementing these services has involved many challenges. We have identified lessons from this experience that include both practical issues, such as the need to provide screening and monitoring programs, and the need for epidemiologic research. The project’s objective to develop a responder surveillance system acknowledges aspects of the second lesson. HHS is the primary agency for coordinating the federal government’s public health and medical response. OSHA is the lead agency for responding to worker safety and health concerns, with HHS as a cooperating agency. HHS can also assist state, tribal, and local officials in establishing a registry of potentially exposed individuals and conducting long-term monitoring for potential health effects. Under ESF#8, HHS can deploy its publichealth and medical personnel, including civilian volunteers, to the affected area. The Environmental Protection Agency or the American Red Cross can also activate and deploy its medical personnel. surveillance and monitoring and for evaluating the need for longer-term medical monitoring of response and recovery workers. OSHA and NIOSH have established an interagency agreement that broadly describes NIOSH’s role in carrying out the Worker Safety and Health Support Annex. FEMA issued a mission assignment to OSHA for such activities and OSHA in turn assigned activities to NIOSH. In addition to the NRF, there are certain statutes that are relevant to HHS's responsibilities concerning responder health. components would be used, and how efforts would be coordinated. NIOSH developed a proposal in February 2008 for working with some of the relevant HHS components to develop strategies to ensure responder safety and health. A NIOSH official told us that the purpose of the project would be to help HHS determine how it would respond to an activation of the NRF and how to implement the SAFE Port Act. One of the objectives of theproject would be for HHS to develop a plan for responding to an NRF activation. HHS says the recommendations and guidance are intended to reach a larger audience than HHS. HHS says long-term monitoring and treatment, including referral for treatment, are appropriate each time a Stafford Act declaration is made. NIOSH has held or is planning meetings with state health department representatives, risk managers with an interest in responder safety and health, and other federal organizations, such as the United States Army Corps of Engineers, to obtain their perspectives on the project, HHS says. The draft report says it is possible to infer from our draft report that long- Term Monitoring and Treatment, including Referral for Treatment, is appropriate for Stafford Act declarations. As of February 2008, 21 states had included the RRR survey in their disaster planning. NIOSH has also taken some steps that relate to the registering of responders. In 2005, NIOSH posted interim guidance on its Web site to help occupational health and other clinicians conduct postexposure medical screening of workers leaving hurricane disaster recovery areas. The data would be collected and maintained by state or local entities with ATSDR’s and RTI’S assistance. The instrument has been shared with other federal agencies, all state health departments, and local response organizations. NIOSH partnered with other HHS components, such as ASPR and NIEHS, to develop the proposal. NIOSH officials plan to meet with ATSDR officials about adapting the RRR and other surveillance tools to collect more specific data. A second objective would be to develop a responder surveillance system to document and integrate data on exposures and health effects. The goal is to identify ways to control potential hazards and determine the need for long-term monitoring, NIOSH said in a statement. ATSDR established a contract with Research Triangle Institute International (RTI) to support state and local efforts to implement the RRR survey instrument during responses to disasters. RTI’s responsibilities include providing information to the entire at-risk population on how to enroll in the R RR. The RRR is intended to collect basic demographic and health information, including contact information; exposure information; and information on exposure-related health effects, immediate health and safety needs, and health insurance. According to research studies. guidance states that all responders should receive some basic screening services. The guidance outlines minimum screening information needs, including contact information, health status information, type of response work, exposure information, and injuries or symptoms. Although ASPR is required under the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act to register federal public health and medical personnel who are deployed under the Secretary of HHS’s authority, it has not completed efforts to ensure that these responders would be registered in the event of an are reprinted in appendix II. According to the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, HHS is the lead federal agency for public health and medical responses to emergencies and disasters. The act specifies that ASPR must carry out certain functions during a response, including registering federal public health, medical personnel. These personnel include members of the National Disaster Medical System (NDMS) Section 709 of the Security and Accountability for Every Port Act of 2006 provides that the President, acting through HHS, may establish and implement a program. ATSDR has developed a survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt to register responders. ASPR is also taking steps to establish a system to register HHS employees and certain other volunteers, but it has not completed its effort. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for designing and implementing responder health programs that incorporates the lessons from the WTC health programs. In the absence of a plan, NIOSH developed a plan for responding to emergency situations in the emergency room and community. emergency or a disaster. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for designing and implementing responder health programs that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC health programs. As part of its efforts, ASPR recently established the Center for Responder Safety, Health, and Risk Management. The Center is working to develop a system to register responders and record their health problems and make referrals. An ASPR official told us that the Center is exploring how to adapt two existing electronic record systems used by NDMS. All responders, excluding FDNY firefighters and emergency medical service technicians and current federal employees. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) Until December 26, 2006, ASPR was the administrator. GAO-08-429T. September 11: Improvements Needed in Availability of Health Screening and Monitoring Services for Responders outside the New York City Area. Washington, D.C.: January 22, 2008.GAO-09-429t. September 9: Improvements still needed in availability of health screening and monitoring services. WTC health programs and other researchers have helped to identify the physical and mental health effects of the WTC disaster. Physical health effects included injuries and respiratory conditions, such as sinusitis, asthma, and a new syndrome called WTC cough. Almost all firefighters who responded to the attack experienced respiratory effects. One study conducted by researchers affiliated with the FDNY WTC Program found that exposed firefighters on average experienced a decline in lung function equivalent to that which would be produced by 12 years of federal funding for research. program is based in FDNY’s Bureau of Health Services, which has an established research infrastructure. In contrast, the NY/NJ WTC Consortium has had more difficulty conducting research. There have been fewer studies conducted by researchers affiliated with the Consortium, and it has taken longer for the studies to be published. The NY/ NJ WTC Consortium serves a more heterogeneous responder population of workers and volunteers. It lacks baseline health status information on this population. In addition, in our discussions indicated a need for treatment. through December 2007 have totaled about $369.2 million. The four programs are the FDNY WTC Medical Monitoring and Treatment Program; the NY/NJ WTC Consortium; HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program; and the WTC Health Registry. Unlike the other key programs, the WTC Registry does not provide in-person screening or monitoring services. Instead it uses periodic surveys of self-reported health status to collect health information on responders, as well as people who resided, worked, attended school, or were present in the vicinity of WTC. WTC health programs have been able to collect information only on responders who seek out their services or fill out their surveys. Without a complete registry of responders, it is difficult to accurately determine the incidence and causes of health problems experienced by the responder population. There was no registry with reliable information on the amount, duration, and types of exposure (e.g., physical hazards, environmental toxins, psychological trauma) experienced by responders. For example, a WTC health program official told us that not knowing where responders are located around the country has made it difficult to determine how to design services. of screening and monitoring services. Neither NYC nor the federal government developed a registry of all responders who worked at the WTC disaster site. WTC health program officials had to compile a list of responders who were potentially eligible to receive services. According to WTC Health Registry officials and WTC Federal Responder Screening Program officials, the list of potentially eligible responders was only partially successful. The list was compiled by contacting government agencies, private-sector employers, and volunteer organizations to locate employees who had responded to the World Trade Center. The effort to compile a list of responders potentially eligible for the WTC Health Registry cost about $1 million and took about 19 months. Some government agencies and many employers did not cooperate with program officials, primarily because of concerns about confidentiality. Not registering responders during disaster response efforts affects outreach activities and hinders efforts to plan services. An official from the NY/NJ WTC Consortium said that without a definitive list, the program had to issue widespread and costly public service announcements to identify and enroll eligible responders. by responders, it has been difficult to determine the relationship between level of exposure and changes in physical and mental health. The WTC health programs have had to rely on participants’ recollection of their exposure. Responders to the WTC disaster were at high risk for mental health problems. Many workers and volunteers worked for extended periods of time without sufficient respite. Some of them did not have training in disaster response and were therefore more vulnerable to the stress of the event. The mental health status of responders did not receive as much attention as physical health. A study conducted by WTC Health Registry researchers found that responders’ risk of newly diagnosed asthma increased with greater exposure to the WTC disaster site. The Mount Sinai School of Medicine clinical center of the NY/NJ WTC Consortium found that about half of the participants in its screening program met the threshold criteria for being referred for a clinical mental health evaluation. Commonly reported mental health effects among responders and other affected individuals included symptoms associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), according to the study. WTC health programs need to be able to scientifically document the health effects of a disaster. NIOSH officials identified a need for additional funding to allow the monitoring programs to conduct research and answer important scientific questions about the health of WTC responders. Providing timely mental health screening and monitoring that is integrated with physical health screening is a key component of the WTC health programs, the authors say. In addition, conducting scientific research of health effects can help public health officials determine whether long-term monitoring is needed. that there remains some uncertainty and controversy about the health risks associated with the disaster. In addition to a lack of information about the number and identity of responders and their exposures, another serious limitation to understanding the health effects of the WTC disaster is the fact that the WTC screening and monitoring programs were not explicitly designed and implemented to conduct research, in particular epidemiologic research. NIOSH officials told us that the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium were not designed to collect and analyze data. with clinicians and researchers affiliated with the NY/NJ WTC Consortium, they raised concerns such as the program lacking sufficient in-house experience for conducting research. For example, it did not have an adequate electronic medical records system. In addition, information collected by the program had to go through a protracted data cleaning process before it could be analyzed. WTC health program officials and others also noted that there was a lack of previously tested, scientifically based protocols for conducting physical and mental health screening, making it difficult to obtain conclusive results. initially as their physical health status. Mount Sinai School of Medicine is one of the clinical centers in the NY/NJ WTC Consortium. The mental health status of responders was initially assessed with a short written questionnaire, and depending on a person’s score, individuals were referred for an in-person clinical mental health evaluation. Recognizing the seriousness of mental health problems among responders, the Mount Sinai school of Medicine Department of Psychiatry sought private funding from the Robin Hood Foundation. The program is federally funded. to develop a broader mental health component to the screening program. With the additional funds, the program was able to develop and use a more extensive mental health questionnaire and have a trained mental health professional conduct in-person interviews. Such programs can improve the ability to accurately diagnose and differentiate physical and mental health conditions. For example, gastrointestinal problems can sometimes be a sign of psychological stress. Timely mental health screening can help identify and treat mental and physical health conditions, experts say. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program provides screening services to federal responders nationwide through its network of FOH clinics. Beginning in late 2002, NIOSH funded services for nonfederal responders residing outside the NYC metropolitan area. Responders who traveled to NYC from around the country following the attack have testified before the Congress about having difficulty receiving services. Officials involved with the WTC health programs have recognized the value of designing responder health programs that provide comparable services to all responders and their employers. NIOSH took steps to increase the availability of services to nonfederal responders outside the NYC metropolitan area. In June 2007 it arranged for QTC Management, Inc., to provide screening and monitoring examinations nationwide for 1 year. In March 2008, CDC issued a request for organizations to indicate their interest in coordinating a national program for WTC responders that would ensure that all WTC responders who reside outside of NYC have access to federally funded screening, monitoring, and other services. For more information, visit www.nihos.org. depression, and anxiety. Behavioral health effects such as increased alcohol and tobacco use were also reported. In previous reports we noted limitations of the WTC health programs and problems with their implementation. For example, we reported that federal responders were eligible only for screening services and did not receive monitoring services as other responders did. We also reported on the service interruptions in the WTC Federal Responder Screening Program. HHS established the program in June 2003, suspended it in March 2004, resumed it in December 2005 and suspended it again in January 2007. and monitoring can also prevent some mental health conditions from progressing to more serious disorders. For example, obtaining treatment for mild depression might prevent a major depressive disorder from developing. Before federal funding became available in fiscal year 2006 to pay for treatment of responders’ health effects, WTC health program officials told us that it was a challenge to find providers who would treat responders whose screening or monitoring examination was done. Including a treatment referral process in screening and monitoring programs could improve the ability of responders to gain access to needed treatment. need of care to treatment services. Screening and monitoring programs for responders to the WTC disaster were set up as separate programs. Making comparable services available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location, could ensure more equitable access to services for responders. Data collected about responders’ health are consistent and comprehensive, the NIMH says. The agency says providers who identified a need for treatment during screening examinations acquired a responsibility to provide access to care. The NIMh says it has no plans to change its screening and monitoring program. and monitoring plan that defines the roles and responsibilities of HHS components. This plan should facilitate the registration of all responders and ensure that screening and monitoring services are designed to foster epidemiologic research. It should provide timely mental health screening and. monitoring that is integrated with physical health screenings and monitoring. It must include a treatment referral process; and make comparable services. available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location. HHS reviewed a draft of this report and provided comments on our findings. Screening and Monitoring Services for Responders. September 11: Monitoring of World Trade Center Health Effects Has Progressed, but Program for Federal Responders Lags Behind. GAO-07-1229T. Washington, D.C.: September 10, 2007. HHS Needs to Ensure the Availability of Health Screening. and Monitoring for All Responders for World Trade Centre Health Effects. September 9: HHS Has Screened Additional Federal Responder for World trade center Health Effects, but Plans for Awarding Funds for Treatment Are Incomplete. HHS officials, clinicians involved with the WTC health programs, and other experts said that an integral part of screening and monitoring is the establishment of a linkage to treatment services. Some indicated that as professionals they also felt an ethical obligation to be able to refer people in. Case study: WTC responders who carried out cleanup services after the WTC attack often did not have health insurance, according to a labor official. Case case: WTC workers who were construction workers often lost their health insurance when they became too ill to work the number of days required for coverage. Secretary of Health and Human Services, congressional committees, and other interested parties. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114 or bascettac@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. for Federal Responders. September 11: Health Effects in the Aftermath of the World Trade Center Attack. GAO-04-1068T. Washington, D.C.: September 8, 2004. September 10: September 10, 2005. September 12: September 12, 2006. September 13: September 14: September 15. September 16: September 17. September 17: September 18: September 19. September 19: September 20: September 21. September 21: September 22: September 23: September 24: September 25. In December 2004, DHS issued the National Response Plan (NRP), which detailed missions, policies, structures, and responsibilities of federal agencies. The NRP was to be invoked when the President issued a major disaster or emergency declaration under the Stafford Act. The NRF is intended to provide resource and programmatic support to states, localities, and other entities. It was first invoked in August 2005 in response to Hurricane Katrina and was subsequently updated in May 2006. In January 2008, DHSissued the NRF to supersede the NRP. a coordinated approach to disaster and emergency response and short-term recovery. FEMA is responsible for assigning work and providing funding to other federal agencies for performing operations included in the NRF. To execute this responsibility, FEMA uses mission assignments, which are interagency agreements. When a disaster or emergency is declared under the authority of the Stafford Act and FEMA issues a mission assignment, a federal agency has 60 days after the declaration to complete tasks described in the mission assignment. unless time is extended by FEMA due to unusual circumstances. conduct epidemiologic research but rather were established as clinical programs focused on the health of individual responders. For example, the programs were not designed to test specific hypotheses about health effects. FEMA primarily provides funding for programs to address the short-term effects of a disaster, in its interagency agreement with NIOSH to establish the monitoring. A NIOSH official told us NIOSH did not design and implement FDNY and Consortium’s monitoring programs to conduct research because of restrictions that FEMA placed on the funding for the programs. programs, FEMA specified that the funding it provided could not be used for research. HHS’s Federal Responder Screening Program also was not designed to collect any information on responders’ health for the purposes of research. The interagency agreement between FEMA and ASPR to establish the program limited the program to a onetime screening examination. HHS officials said they did not have the resources to conduct epidemiologic research with the federal responder population. In hindsight, such research clearly would have provided useful data and benefited the program. FEMA collaborates with HHS on health issues related to disasters. FEMA provided funding to HHS to establish certain WTC health programs. HHS’s disaster response and recovery activities operate within an administrative and legal framework that helps to define federal agency roles and responsibilities and gives HHS certain authorities. Following the attack on the WTC, the Congress appropriated approximately $8.8 for the WTC health program, which was later expanded to include other buildings. The World Trade Center was damaged in the September 11, 2001, attacks. services for nonfederal responders residing outside the NYC area were not continuously available for all responders. In addition, some of the screening and monitoring programs initially faced difficulties referring responders for treatment. Throughout the history of these programs, program officials have raised concerns about whether the duration of federal funding would be adequate. HHS’s disaster response activities, including efforts to address the health of responders, operate within an administrative and legal framework, according to the HHS website. In response to the attacks on September 11, 2001, the Congress enacted the Homeland Security Act of 2002, which established DHS and required the department to consolidate existing programs. FEMA entered into interagency agreements with HHS agencies to implement health screening and monitoring programs for responders and other affected groups. In fiscal year 2006, the Congress appropriated $75 million to CDC that was available for monitoring and treatment services for certain WTC responders. The Congress made additional appropriations to CDC available for the same purpose in fiscal years 2007 and 2008. Federal funds appropriated or awarded for the WTC health programs from October 2001 to October 2008. $1.billion to FEMA, over several years, for response and recovery activities.