Education(GAO/OCG-99-5, Jan. 1999). Risk-BasedCapital:RegulatoryandIndustryApproachestoCapitaland Risk. High-RiskSeries:StudentFinancialAid. StudentLoanLenders:InformationontheActivitiesoftheFirst IndependentTrustCompany. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Ordersbyvisiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. between $2,500 and $20,000. Some secondary markets reported that their trustee charged this initiation fee each time they issued bonds to raise capital. Annual trustee fees reported by ineligible lenders ranged between $4,500 to $75,000, depending on a number of factors. These lenders reported that the fees could be a flat fee or calculated as a percentage of outstanding loan balances or on the outstanding balance of bond issues. Ineligible lenders reported the annual costs are used to pay for trustee fees. Some ineligible lenders feared that the provision of HEA that makes trustees fully responsible for trustee-held loans might have an impact on costs. They reported that costs did not significantly increase or decrease after the 1998 amendments were enacted and that they did not see a change in the role of the trustee. According to ineligible lenders, the trustee’s decision to charge administrative fees on a per-loan basis rather than as a flat fee, and the additional services the trustee will perform for the ineligible lender, such as payroll services, are key factors. maintain the arrangement and cover the necessary services provided by the trustee. Some eligible and ineligible lenders reported that a variety of other factors could influence the size of both initiation and annual fees. Some of these factors included the structure of the trustee arrangement and the complexity of the the geographic region in which the trustee and ineligible lender operate. The trustee handles paperwork associated with the guarantors and servicers involved in the loan transactions, and carries out administrative activities associated with obtaining financing to originate or purchase loans. the loan servicing organization it has chosen. In addition, some trustees review the structure of the financing method used by the ineligible lender to raise the capital necessary to originate or purchase loans. This review might include examining a rating agency’s report on the transaction. Trustees and ineligible lenders also reported that their contracts included similar clauses covering trustee and ineligible lender resignations. For example, they reported that trustee resignation clauses allow the trustee to resign from the arrangement by giving a specific number of days’ notice. 60 or 90 days. If ineligible lender is unable to locate another trustee within that time period, the resignation clause sometimes provides for additional time to obtain a new trustee. Most trustees and ineligible lenders reported that the trustee would probably remain in place until a new one can be engaged, even if the designated time periods have elapsed. The trustee arrangements we reviewed were also similar in the requirements placed on the ineligible lender and the amount of monitoring the trustee performed. For example, trustees generally require ineligible lenders to abide by HEA requirements. Eligible lender trustees and ineligible lenders reported limited day-to-day interaction. One trustee reported no daily interaction. Some trustees reported that they interact with the ineligible lender only when it is necessary to sign forms, such as quarterly reports that must be submitted to the Department of Education. Trustee arrangements come with some protections, but not all trustees feel they have enough protection to oversee the loan servicer, the report says. The report says the trustees perform limited monitoring activities and mostly review annual reports and audits. the names of the parties involved in each trustee arrangement, the lender identification numberassociated with each arrangement, and the outstanding loan balances. These data represent the best information available, and an Education official acknowledged that the list might be incomplete. In determining the total outstanding balance of loans associated with trustee arrangements, we included information only for arrangements that allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans and securitizations of these loans. We included balance info only for the Student Loan Marketing Corporation’s privatized business and the ineligible lenders it owns. We focused our review on trustee arrangements created to allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans. To determine the number of existing trustee arrangements, we obtained data from Education’s lender database. We are sending copies of this report to the Honorable Richard Riley, Secretary of Education; eligible lender trustees; ineligible lenders; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others on request. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-7215. Ineligible lenders fall into two categories: secondary marketsthat have not been designated as an eligible lender for a state and private companies that wish to make and hold student loans. Eligible and ineligible lenders agree that participation by ineligible lenders increases competition among lenders and can, in turn, contribute to improved service and lower costs for student borrowers. Some ineligible lenders, however, believe that two factors—HEA requirements and the general evolution of financial markets could affect their participation in student loan markets. For example, some secondary markets raise capital increasing the amount of loan capital available to students. government were owed monies on an ineligible lender's loans, it could recover those funds by withholding the SAP on the eligible lender trustee’s self-originated loans. Because ineligible lenders do not receive any payments directly from Education, it does not have an ability to collect liabilities by offset. Obtaining a trustee arrangement does not appear to be a widespread problem among ineligible lenders to date. If eligible lenders remain unclear and therefore continue to interpret the 50-percent rule as applying to loans they hold as a trustee, the number of trustees could decline. To determine the protections offered the federal government by trustee arrangements, we identified and synthesized applicable legislation and regulations. We also interviewed eligible and ineligible lenders, guaranty agencies, servicers, Education officials, and other student loan market participants on the responsibilities of an eligible lender trustee. We obtained the perspectives of participants on whether trustee arrangements have a positive or negative effect on lenders’ participation in the student Loan Market. We identified past, current, and potential problems lenders faced in using trustee arrangements. lenders we interviewed, current initiation and annual trustee fees do not prohibit them from conducting business in the student loan market. Trustees and ineligible lenders reported similar criteria used by trustees to evaluate ineligibles before they entered into arrangements. For example, trustees reported that most important in deciding whether to enter an arrangement is the business reputation of the ineligible lender. These organizations must use a trustee to originate or purchase loans, because these organizations must Use a Trustee to Originate or Purchase Loans. Four ineligible lenders reported they had a difficult time obtaining their current trustee arrangement. Several others said that finding a trustee in the future would become more problematic. Ineligible lender representatives expressed concern that because trustees also originate student loans for themselves, trustees may decide to end their eligible lender trustee services rather than continue to provide the mechanism for a competitor to do business. A few ineligible lenders stated they were uncomfortable with trustees having the final say as they originate student loan loans for their competitors. The Federal Reserve is expected to announce a plan to consolidate student loan institutions in the coming months. penalties, refuse to make future payments, or recover payments already made to lenders and agencies for such things as interest subsidies and insurance claims. In 1998, HEA was amended to include a provision stating that eligible lenders that act as trustees are responsible for meeting statutory and regulatory requirements for the loans they hold as trustees. According to Education officials, the HEA provision that holds trustees responsible for an ineligible lender’s loans allows the federal government to recoup the losses from the eligible lender trustee rather than the ineligible lender. The Department of Education reports that approximately 125 trustee arrangements exist between eligible and ineligible lenders. These arrangements account for approximately $400 million in student loans. servicer problems that may result in loan guarantee loss can also occur on loans held by eligible lenders and are not unique to trustee arrangements. The Department of education reports that about 125 trustee arrangement exist between ineligible and eligible lenders. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. by selling tax-exempt bonds to investors. Report is concerned primarily with trustee arrangements used to enable ineligible lenders to make and hold student loans. At FFELP’s outset, the government expected to share the program's financial risks with state-designated guaranty agencies. When states failed to establish such agencies, the Congress enacted legislation with several incentives to increase lender and guaranty agency participation. In providing these incentives,. the Congress kept the financial risk almost entirely with the federal government. Congress has since shifted some risk back to the guaranty agencies and lenders by reducing the maximum reimbursement and insurance rates on defaulted loans. These actions were intended to encourage both lenders and guaranty agency to work with borrowers to prevent them from defaulting on their loans. Apart from the defaults that occur when borrowers fail to repay their loans, some loans lose their federal guarantee because lenders, servicers, or Guaranty agencies fail to follow the Department’s requirements for making, servicing, and collecting loans. ineligible lenders are generally not subject to financial safety and soundness reviews by government agencies. Most eligible lender trustees also hold student loans in their own name and receive regular FFELP- related payments from the government for those loans. Given these issues, some ineligible lenders believe their market presence could diminish in the future. The presence of an eligible lender from whom the government can recoup its financial losses is critical since Education has no direct oversight authority to ensure that ineligible lenders are operating their programs in accordance. Education administers and oversees federal student aid programs authorized by HEA. Among these financial aid programs is FFELP. The five principal entities involved are students, schools, lenders, guaranty agencies, and Education. Most lenders contract with a third-party entity to service the loan and collect payments from borrowers. If the student defaults on the loan, the lender files a claim with the guaranty agency for reimbursement of most of its loss. In general, HEA designates which entities are eligible to makeFFELP loans to students. The most direct protection comes from an HEA provision that holds eligible lenders fully responsible for any loans they hold as trustees. For example, a loan may lose its guarantee because of servicing errors or because of negligence on the part of the servicer or the lender. When these problems occur, the federal government will not reimburse the guarantor. To ensure the government’s investment in FFELP is secure while allowing ineligible lenders to participate in the program, the HEA must be changed. The 125 arrangements represent liaisons between 16 eligible lender trustees and 31 ineligible lenders. Ineligible lenders can be further grouped as 17 secondary markets and 14 other ineligibles. Costs of trustee arrangements fall into two categories—payments to initiate the agreement and annual fees to maintain it. The ineligible lenders we interviewed reported that initiation costs were generally a flat fee ranging from $1,000 to $2,000.for $25.3 billion in outstanding loans— approximately 19 percent of the outstanding balance of all FFELP loans as of December 1999. stated he had turned down eligible lender trustee business because the additional trustee-held loans would put the bank above its 50-percent allocation of student loans. Most ineligible lenders we interviewed stated that the number of available trustees has decreased as eligible lender banks have merged with each other in recent years. Recent mergers include First National Bank of Chicago and Bank One, Norwest and Wells Fargo, and Firstar Bank with Star Bank and Mercantile Bank. The number of eligible lender trustees is expected to grow over the next few years.  HEA currently states that a bank functioning as an eligible lender cannot have as its primary consumer credit function the making or holding of student loans. Education interprets the act to mean that the lender’s FFELP loans cannot total more than one-half of the lender's combined consumer credit loan portfolio, including home mortgages held by the lender or its subsidiaries. This provision is commonly known as the 50-percent rule. The student loan market in the future is expected to be much larger. holding FFELP loans that total more than one-half of their combined consumer credit loan portfolio applies to loans held by the trustee for an ineligible lender. Education agreed with our recommendation that it clarify its interpretation of how the HEA provision applies. Education said that it has not yet decided which policy to establish nor how to formalize the decisionOnce it is made, Education did not say when it expected to implement our recommendation. We incorporated technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate, into our report. of the Student Loan Marketing Association, including any subsidiary of the Holding Company, or an agency of any state functioning as a secondary market. The majority of organizations making loans to students fall into one of these eligible lender categories. However, organizations that do not meet HEA criteria may still participate in FFELP by contracting with an eligible lender to serve as its trustee. These ineligible lenders include: a Rural Rehabilitation Corporation; under certain circumstances, any nonprofit private agency functioning in any state as asecondary market; and a consumer finance company subsidiary of a national bank. Lenders have expressed confusion regarding application of the rule. Some ineligible lenders and other student loan market participants believe that the 50- percent rule applies to loans held as a trustee. Education officials told us that although Education has inconsistently applied the regulations in the past, it currently interprets the provision as excluding trustee-held loans in determining the lender’s primary consumer credit function. But Education has not formally promulgated its interpretation of the 50 percent rule, officials said. The regulations do not specifically address these loans. an eligible lender is defined as under certain circumstances, a national or state chartered bank, a mutual savings bank, or a savings and loan association. A pension fund as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security is an insurance company that is subject to examination and supervision by an agency of the United States or a state. An eligible institution is also defined as the Student Loan Marketing Association or the Holding Company. A single state agency or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state is an eligible institution. believe the federal government is likely to recover its losses from trustees. Most financial institutions that serve as eligible lender trustees are subject to federal (and in many instances, state) oversight. Among the most important of these regulations are those dealing with minimum capital standards. These capital standards provide benchmarks against which regulators can assess the safety and soundness of a bank’s operations as well as its financial condition. Education officials stated that because of this, they believe the government will recover the losses.