faced in implementation. PACOM’s plan did not address training limitations in South Korea and Japan. In 2005, we reported that without more complete, clear, and consistent reporting of various items, Congress lacked the complete picture it needed to evaluate the annual military construction funding request. These agreements depend largely on the political environment and economic conditions in host nations. They can affect the extent of host nation support—access to facilities or funding—to U.S. forces. Accordingly, the resulting agreements may increase or decrease costs for future infrastructure changes. The plans continue to improve each year by providing more complete, clear, and consistent information and descriptions of the challenges DOD faces overseas. Congress should consider requiring the Secretary of Defense to ensure that future overseas master plans address the extent to which the regional commands are seeking residual value compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. We believe that identifying these issues would provide Congress an awareness of potential challenges of recouping funds. To help ensure the best application of limited federal funds and the leveraging of all available options. recommended that overseas regional commands address residual value issues and that PACOM explain how it plans to address existing training limitations. We believe that identifying these issues would make Congress aware of potential challenges to obtaining residual value and to training U.S. forces in South Korea, which may affect facility requirements and funding in this country. Even though our prior recommendations have not been fully addressed, we continue to believe that they have merit and that Congress would benefit from disclosure of this information. DOD’s planning effort for the buildup of military forces and infrastructure on South Korea. needed to address their concerns about the status of residual value negotiations or the implications for U.S. funding. We continue to believe that the Secretary of Defense should require commands to explain the issues with obtaining residual value from each host nation. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that future PACOM plans may not be clear enough to all users of the plans, we urge Congress to consider requiring commands to report on the implications of their plans. We believe that this would be a wise move for the secretary of defense. necessary. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration, the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense stated that DOD already provides status reports on its residual value negotiations to the Committees on Appropriations and Armed Services. Prior legislation outlines reporting requirements on the closure of foreign military installations worldwide, with specific reporting requirements throughout the residual value negotiation process. While we were aware of these reporting requirements, these reports do not provide users of the master plans the kind of information that is needed, the official said. The bill would require that future overseas master plans address the extent to which commands are seeking residual value compensation. The master plans do not address the issue of residual value. Remaining value is based on the reuse of property being turned over to the host nation. DOD officials believe that residual value cannot be readily predicted and therefore should not be included in the plans. The master plans are expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year. The plans will be released to the public at a date to be announced later this year or in the spring. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. be assumed in the master plans. The U.S. government has received approximately $592 million since 1989 in residual value and payment-in-kind compensation from property returns in EUCOM’s area of responsibility. EUCOM continues to aggressively seek compensation for U.s. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. We continue to believe that OSD should require commands, at a minimum, to explain the issues with obtaining residual value in each host nation and report the implications for funding requirements. year, all of the commands identified a common strategic end state date of 2013, which identifies the last fiscal year of the construction time frame. Previously, OSD had provided the commands the discretion in choosing an end date from 2011 to 2015. Host nation funding levels were reported at the project level for fiscal year 2008 and at the aggregate level for 2008. The strategic endState date provides users a more complete and clearer basis for tracking progress in meeting the command infrastructure objectives for their areas of responsibility. master plans for the changing infrastructure requirements for U.S. military facilities in each of its overseas regional commands. At a minimum, the plans are to identify precise facility requirements and the status of properties being returned to host nations. The Senate report also directed DOD to provide congressional defense committees a report on the status and implementation of those plans with each yearly military construction budget submission through fiscal year 2015. The plans should also identify funding requirements and. the division of funding responsibilities between the United States and cognizant host nations, according to the report. Congress lacked the complete picture it needed to evaluate the annual military construction funding requests. This year, the plans provided a much more comprehensive description of challenges and the potential effects on implementation. All of the regional commands describe to varying degrees the status of recent negotiations and agreements with host nations in their fiscal year 2008 master plans. In our review of the overseas master plans in 2005, we found that none of the commands fully explained the status or potential effects of their projects. We found that the prior plans did not always describe such challenges and their potential effects. The first report was due with the fiscal year 2005 military construction budget submission and is to be updated each succeeding year. The House conference report accompanying the 2004 military construction appropriation bill also directed the department to prepare comprehensive master plans with yearly updates through fiscal year 2009. The Senate report also directed GAO to monitor the comprehensive master plan being developed and implemented for the 2008 fiscal year.year 2008. The first report is due to be released in time for the start of the new fiscal year on October 1. future requirements. In 2006, we reported that the master plans did not always explain how their implementation could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. We also reported that while the plans addressed a number of challenges that DOD faced, they did not explain how they would affect other activities. Without such explanations and linkage, it was difficult to determine the extent to which the master plan was coordinated and synchronized with other defense plans, we said at the time. We said it was also difficult to see the effects these other activities had on infrastructure and funding requirements. result, the fiscal year 2008 master plans identify how implementation of the plans could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. For example, PACOM’s force structure plans are linked to the military buildup on Guam. CENTCOM's increased troop strength and facilities in Iraq and Afghanistan are also linked to ongoing operations. Facility requirements and costs, time frames for an end state, base categories, host nation funding levels, and effects of other defense activities are included in the master plans. The fiscal year 2008 overseas master plans have been updated to reflect our prior recommendations for improving the plans. They do not address the issue of residual value as we recommended in 2004. As a result, OSD provided additional guidance on October 12, 2006, to the regional commands in preparing this year’s plans. The commands provide information involving environmental activities. This provides the users of the plans with the ability to compare and comprehend how costs have varied and how these costs may affect planned U.S. funding levels. We compared the reporting requirements in the congressional mandate and the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) guidance, which incorporated our prior recommendations. In order to identify improvements to the overseas master plan, we compared and contrasted the fiscal year 2007 and 2008 plans. We assessed the quantity and quality of information provided by the Defense Department. We also assessed the extent to which the plans address the challenges faced by the Department of Defense during implementation.members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. effort and to develop a master plan. JGPO falls under the direct oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Installations and Environment. In our prior work, we found that while DOD’s master plans generally exceeded the reporting requirements established by Congress, opportunities existed for the plans to provide more complete, clear, and consistent information and to present a more definitive picture of what is going on in the Navy. The Navy has been working with the Department of the Interior to create an interagency task force to address issues relating to commerce, transportation, environment and other areas. quality of one plan’s responses for each of the data elements, including details on base categories, host nation funding levels, facility requirements and costs. We compared them to equivalent responses in other plans; formed conclusions as to the completeness, clarity, and consistency of the latest plan's responses. We also discussed with DOD officials our observations and recommendations, specific reporting requirements, and whether improvements in the guidance and reporting were needed. we also interviewed cognizant officials from DOD about the plans. In September 2001, DOD issued its Quadrennial Defense Review Report. The report called for developing a permanent basing system that provides greater flexibility for U.S. forces. In August 2004, President Bush announced plans for a permanent base in the United States. The Pentagon has been reexamining overseas basing requirements to allow for greater flexibility to combat conventional and asymmetric threats worldwide. The U.N. Security Council has approved a resolution that would allow for permanent bases in the U.K., France and Germany. The integrated global presence and basing strategy is the culmination of various DOD studies. The initiative is intended to close bases no longer needed to meet Cold War threats. It also aims to bring home many U.S. forces while stationing more flexible, deployable capabilities in strategic locations around the world. In 2004 the United States.announced what has been described as the most comprehensive restructuring of U.s. military forces overseas since the end of the Korean War. The integrated global. presence and. basing. strategy is a culmination of several DOD studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study, the overseas presence. study, and the U.N. global posture study. In 2004, before DOD issued its initial overseas master plans, we reported that various factors could affect the funding of U.S. infrastructure overseas. At that time, we recommended that the overseas regional commands address these and other factors in the development of their plans. This year’s plans provide information to respond to most of our prior recommendations. But they do not address residual value, that is, the value of property being turned over to the host nation based as changes occurred and decisions were made. European Command, U.S. Army Europe, and Special Operations Command. In general, we discussed the reporting requirements contained in OSD’s guidance, host nation agreements and funding levels. We also analyzed available reports, documents, policies, directives, international agreements, guidance, and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing changes in overseas defense basing strategies and requirements. To see firsthand the condition of the bases, go to www.cnn.com/cnndefense. forces from Seoul and other locations. Last year, CENTCOM did not report any environmental issues. This year, EUCOM identified areas for cleanup, groundwater investigation, and monitoring. CENTCOM’s master plan identified funding requirements for a wastewater treatment plant and a water treatment and distribution system at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan, in hopes of avoiding potential environmental problems. The extent to which there were no environmental issues last year in the command's area of responsibility has not been determined. The amount of contamination at one site did not present an unacceptable risk to human health or the mission. This year, all of the regional commands identified their precise facility requirements and costs for fiscal year 2008 and for fiscal years 2009 through 2013. CENTCOM provided information on supplemental appropriations for facilities and projects at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan. Base categories. All of the commands categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating base, forward operating site, and cooperative security location. The commands also supplemented the information on the infrastructure plans and requirements at these sites. The bases also provided a clearer picture of the infrastructure Plans and requirements. The plan discussed the challenge of ongoing operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The plan also reflected land return actions in Kuwait and Uzbekistan. CENTCOM’s plan identified how future basing and infrastructure will be defined by ongoing contingencies and global defense posture. The master plans have continued to evolve and have provided more comprehensive data every year since 2004. But two key topics continue to be omitted from the master plans, CENTCOM officials said. The plans also discussed efforts to solicit host nation contributions and the amount of coordination. focus first on the mission and then on requirements by providing the type of mission the site has, the unit that it could host, and its role in the region. All of the commands provide similar information for their main operating bases, forward operating sites, and cooperative security locations. Even with the department’s effort to update the plans, there are still some areas that need to be addressed, such as the need to strengthen capabilities for rapid and flexible response in the central Asian states, the report says. base categories with detailed data on the installations’ capabilities, overall mission, population, and types of equipment and facilities located at each site. CENTCOM and EUCOM also identified adjustments to the base categories, such as redesignating a main operating base as a forward operating site. EUCOM provided specific details on sites no longer considered cooperative security locations in Bulgaria, Romania, and Poland. Sites with no operational importance and a commercial facility readily available for military use that did not require U.S. investment or presence. Last year, EUCOM’s master plan did not explain the potential effect of implementing base realignment and closure recommendations on the movement of troops from Germany to bases in the United States. This year, PACOM discussed this topic as well as the progress of bilateral negotiations with Japan and challenges associated with this realignment. EUCOM and Army officials told us that any delay in implementing the recommendations could have a negative impact on the U.S.-Japan relationship. The U.N. Security Council is expected to vote on a resolution on the issue this week. in the implementation of base realignment and closure recommendations would cause them to delay the movement of Army servicemembers and their families. This would delay the closings of Army installations in Europe and increase costs to operate those installations while they remain open. Last year, CENTCOM’s master plan only made general references to operations in Iraq and did not fully explain the potential for overseas restructuring. This year, the overseas master plan identified that the baserealignment andclosure recommendations supported overseas restructuring and that EUCOM's transformation depends on this effort. installations, such as Naval Air Station Keflavik, Iceland; Naval Support Activity La Maddalena, Italy; selected sites in Germany, Belgium, and Turkey. The plan also recognized that current U.S. basing may not adequately support either strategic changes in an expanding North Atlantic Treaty Organization Alliance or the requirements of a rapidly changing area of responsibility. EUCOM also explained that its transformation execution depends on host nation negotiations, political-military considerations, base realignment and closure, and fiscal limitations. relation to this initiative, the command did identify the need for U.S. military construction funds to support realignment costs not paid by the Japanese government. EUCOM provided information on North Atlantic Treaty Organization contributions and discussed a burden-sharing arrangement with the Government of Norway. CENTCOM also provided host nation estimates and explained that its efforts to attain host nation funding were ongoing. All of the commands described the effects of other defense activities on implementation of their master plans. Last year, only PACOM’s plan gave some indication of how its implementation could be. EUCOM's master plan stated that the U.S. signed individual agreements with the governments of Romania and of Bulgaria in 2005 and 2006. EUCOM also provided additional details, such as the mission, planned capabilities, equipment and aircraft, and population. Furthermore, EUCOM provided a status of ongoing transformation realignments in its operations in Eastern Europe. The United States is working with South Korea to establish a military presence in South Korea. The goal is to create a network of forward operating sites and cooperative security locations. Under Secretary assigned overseas regional combatant commands responsibility for preparing comprehensive master plans for their areas of responsibility. As shown in figure 3, PACOM coordinates East Asia and South Asia; EUCOM coordinates much of sub- Saharan Africa and Europe. CENTCOM coordinates efforts in the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, and Central Asia. Not shown are Northern Command, which coordinates activities in North America, and Southern Command,. which coordinates Activities in South America, Central America,and the Caribbean.detailed, comprehensive master plan. cooperation, extend humanitarian assistance, and build partnership capacity on the African continent. At the time of our review, U.S. involvement in Africa is shared among three combatant commands. PACOM is responsible for Madagascar, the Seychelles, and the Indian Ocean area off the African coast. EUCOM isresponsible for the largest swath of the continent: North Africa; West Africa, including the Gulf of Guinea; and central and southern Africa. CENTCOM covers the Horn of Africa—including Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Djibouti, and Sudan. area of responsibility, including listing the return of facilities to host nations, changes to its basing categories. The master plans also described recent efforts to proceed with formal negotiations with the governments of Poland and the Czech Republic on establishing missile defense sites. This year, DOD forecasted changes for next year’s master plans involving the development of a new command responsible for Africa, which is expected to be established by September 30, 2008. The President announced in February 2007 that the U.S. military will establish a new, separate U.s. Africa Command to enhance security. New U.S. Africa Command eventually will encompass the entire continent of Africa except for Egypt. Discussions are ongoing on the possible headquarters location and what kinds of military forces would be assigned to the command. This year, the changes identified in the plans provided useful information on evolving costs and facility requirements in overseas basing. In addition, the commands continue to focus first on the mission and then on the infrastructure requirements needed to support the mission. For example, in CENTCOM’s master plan, the descriptions of each forward operating site are included.  PACOM described the importance of relocating 8,000 marines and their dependents from Okinawa to Guam. PACOM provided information updating the status of the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan, including a list of U.S. military camps and sites returned to the Government of South Korea, and describing the results from the South Korean military relocation program. The United States will retain a forward Marine Corps command and control capability to ensure a balanced, flexible contingency response capacity within the Asia-Pacific region. fiscal years 2009 through 2013, which provided users a better basis to determine the extent to which U.S. funding is needed for facility requirements. PACOM identified host nation funding for its bilateral agreements in South Korea, such as the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan. While the Government of Japan’s share for the Guam relocation is $6.1 billion, the government of Japan has not made an official, public estimate of the costs for several major realignments within Japan. Potential Government of Japan financial constraints may result in U.S. facilities in Japan requiring more financial support. EUCOM’s master plan identified specific information on efforts to close or return bases. USFK provided details on current realignment efforts, including the Government of South Korea’S approval of the Land Partnership Plan and Yongsan Relocation Plan. The plans also discussed USFK's efforts to work with South Korea to complete the transition of wartime operational control from the United States to South Korea in the future. challenges in this year’s overseas master plans. In 2005, none of the commands identified environmental remediation and restoration issues. PACOM provided information on remediation actions taken by USFK before returning installations to South Korea, such as skimming fuel from groundwater at five camps. Last year, USFK also discussed its efforts to coordinate with the Government of South Korea on remediated U.S. bases. Officials expect these efforts will accelerate the return of vacated facilities and areas to the Government. We did not include Northern and Southern Commands in our review because they have significantly fewer facilities outside of the United States. There are also four functional unified combatant commands that are assigned worldwide functional responsibilities not bounded by geography. Initial implementation details for the movement of U.S. Marines to Guam and associated military construction projects took place under the leadership of PACOM. In August 2006, OSD directed the Navy to establish JGPO to facilitate, manage, and manage the military construction on Guam. various changes and challenges that were identified within the plans. We met with officials from OSD and each of the following commands and agencies: U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM); U. s. Army Pacific; Commander, U. S. Pacific Fleet; U.s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific. U.N. Secretary-General's Security Council meeting to be held later this month in New York City to discuss military operations in the region. The meeting will also be held in Washington, D.C. to discuss the future of the military in Asia. OSD recognized that further changes will result as it continues to implement the global defense posture decisions. PACOM’s master plan discussed the progress of dynamic realignment initiatives, which will relocate military personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. The department reported that as the overseas political and military environment and strategic landscape further evolve,global defense posture plans will continue to mature to address new priorities. On its reuse of property, PACOM updated on its use of property. This year, PACO updated on how the U.S. Air Force uses its property. As EUCOM continues to return facilities in Germany, Italy, and Iceland, this figure may increase. We continue to believe that residual value should be addressed in the master plans. PACOM’s master plan provided details on other challenges, it did not describe the challenges the command faces in addressing training limitations for the Seventh Air Force in South Korea. Senior officials told us that these limitations could cause the United States to pursue alternatives, such as training in other locations, downsizing, or relocating. The Seventh Air Force may be unable to maintain combat capability in the long term because of a lack of adequate air-to-surface ranges. For decades, the Government of South Korea has attempted to relocate the Koon-Ni range. The air and ground range management of the Koonsi training range was transferred to the Government in 2005. While there is an agreement with the Government, there is no guarantee that the range will be relocated by the end of the current military mission in 2011. of South Korea to train at other ranges, according to senior Air Force and USFK officials. Other ranges do not provide electronic scoring capabilities necessary to meet Air Force’s air-to-surface training requirements. As a result, the Air Force has been using ranges in Japan and Alaska to meet its training requirements, which results in additional transportation costs to the U.S. government. In May 2007, officials said that some progress had been made in addressing the Air Air Force's training challenges in South Korea. address training limitations in its area of responsibility. Deputy Under Secretary of Defense responded that validated training requirements that are affected by force posture transformation plans should be addressed in overseas master plans. He further stated that nonprogrammed and nonvalidated training limitations experienced by service components were not appropriate for inclusion in the overseas commands’ risk assessment. While we are not aware of any nonProgrammed andnonvalidatedTraining limitations, our report discusses only those training limitations raised by senior command officials during our review. We assume that if there is a need to make a distinction between nonvalidations versus validated training limitations, OSD and the overseas Commands would work together to identify those validated limitations. be completed by mid-2007. PACOM plan described the training limitations involving bombing and live fire training ranges and the effects of airspace access restrictions in Japan on C-130 training. In addition, the plan discusses how noise and land use sensitivities and maneuver area limitations in Okinawa require U.S. forces to deploy to other Pacific Rim locations to supplement their training, which results in additional transportation requirements and costs. The plan also discussed efforts by U.s. Forces Japan and the Government of Japan to engage in bilateral discussions to address training shortfalls. Corps force, because of inadequacy in size or lack of availability. The services are in the process of conducting a training study that includes Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific, officials stated that live fire artillery training, amphibious landings, and tracked vehicle operations will be challenging. Still, they are optimistic that the study, which will include environmental limitations, facility, facility and other factors, will be successful. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year. could also swell further because DOD’s estimates do not include DOD civilians, contractors, or Navy transient personnel from an aircraft carrier. Preliminary analysis indicates that 15,000 to 20,000 workers will be required to support the development on Guam. Foreign workers would have to temporarily enter the United States on temporary visas. The increased demand for workers may require workforce training for the local population and possibly a need for foreign workers. For example: Construction capacity on Guam has been approximately $800 million per year, as compared to more than $3 billion per year projected to be needed to meet the fiscal year 2014 completion date for realignment actions. requirements, real estate requirements, and estimated costs, will result in the identification and development of new training areas. The effects of the increase in military forces, in terms of population and military infrastructure, on Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements have not been fully addressed. The population of Guam is estimated to be 171,000, and the projected future military population could increase it by more than 15 percent. The active duty military personnel and dependent population is estimated at 14,195 in Guam, and it is expected to increase to 39,130. nonagricultural workers visas, capped at 66,000 per year. DOD officials have already indicated that visa waivers might be needed in order to mitigate limitations on the number of visas allowed into the United States each year. Other challenges associated with an increase of foreign workers in Guam include providing support facilities and services, such as housing and medical care for these workers. Possible social tensions between the local population and foreign workers because of job competition. Public infrastructure. The effects of the increased demand on Guam’s roads, port capabilities, and utility services. Guam is strategically located in the Pacific Ocean approximately 3,810 miles southwest of Honolulu, Hawaii. It is 1,600 miles east of Manila, the Philippines; and 1,560 miles southeast of Tokyo, Japan. Given its strategic location, Guam is an integral part of DOD’s logistical support system and serves as an important forward operational hub for a mix of military mission requirements. About 29 percent of the U.S. territory is made up of the Hawaiian Islands, which are the westernmost territory of the United States. maintenance costs currently borne by the Government of Japan and for the costs of the additional strategic lift needed after the move. Additional costs will be incurred from building facilities that will house equipment and aircraft during inclement weather. Guam is located in an area of the Pacific commonly referred to as Typhoon Alley, where on average 31 tropical storms develop annually. Also, earthquake risk in Guam is caused by the island’s proximity to the Mariana Trench, which leads to earthquakes throughout the island. The Marine Corps move from Okinawa to Guam is estimated to cost about $10.3 billion. Of this amount for the move, the Government of Japan has agreed to contribute Afghanistan and procurement costs for weapons systems. Other costs not included in the $13 billion cost estimate associated with the Marine Corps’ move to Guam that will increase overall costs. For example, the relocation to Guam will increase the Marines’ annual funding requirements by $465 million for operations and maintenance. The costs of other defense agencies to support the additional military personnel and dependents on Guam will eventually be identified.  funding requirements for the military buildup on Guam are yet not fully identified and may be difficult to meet given other priorities and existing funding constraints. DOD agencies, such as the Defense Logistics Agency and Defense Education Activity, that will help support the services’ influx of personnel, missions, and equipment to Guam will likely incur additional costs that are not yet included in the current DOD $13 billion cost estimate. According to DOD officials, this cost estimate includes the costs to move Marine Corps forces in Guam, and authorized the Japan Bank for International Cooperation to invest in businesses for Guam development.  Guam is one of the more expensive locations for military construction in comparison with other locations in the United States and its territories. The construction costs for Guam are 2.64 times more expensive than the baseline average for the region. Additional costs will occur when constructing to Guam’s typhoon and seismic standards—including concrete and structural reinforcement and providing backup and redundant utility systems. Estimated costs to build infrastructure in Guam are based on the DOD Facilities Pricing Guide. The area cost factors identify Guam as a more expensive location for militaryConstruction. treatment, and solid waste disposal—have not been fully addressed. Future DOD operations may be constrained on Guam if improvements are not made to Guam’s infrastructure. The Government of Guam has estimated that it will cost about $2.6 billion to improve the local infrastructure to accommodate forecasted military and civilian growth. Although the Government of Japan has agreed to provide $700 million for utilities infrastructure on DOD bases in Guam, this funding is neither intended nor is it sufficient to improve infrastructure throughout the island. about $6.1 billion to develop facilities and infrastructure on Guam. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected to be direct contributions. The remaining $3.3 billion will consist of investment incentives for family housing and on-base infrastructure, such as utilities, which over time could be recouped by Japan in the form of rent or service charges. For example, the Government of Japan will finance construction of family housing units in Guam, but these construction costs will be reimbursed by payments from the servicemembers’ housing allowance. are in poor condition and, when ordnance (ammunition and explosives) is unloaded from ships for the Air Force now and for the Marine Corps in the future, it must be transported on one of these major roads. The Government of Guam plans a number of projects to upgrade the capability and efficiency of Guam’s port facilities that total about $155 million with only $56 million funded at the time of our review. The utilities transmission lines are antiquated and the system is not reliable, and voltage and frequency fluctuations are common. Marine Corps Air Station Futenma in hopes that it will lessen the effect of military aviation operations on the local citizens of Japan. The Government of Japan may encounter challenges in funding its share of the Marine Corps move considering Japan’s other national priorities and its commitments associated with funding several other major realignments of U.S. forces in Japan under the Defense Policy Review Initiative. At the time of our review, the Japanese legislature had approved $228 million for planning and initial construction funds for force posture realignment. made available until it has agreed to specific infrastructure plans for Guam. DOD officials recognize that the failure or delay of one plan outlined in the Defense Policy Review Initiative may affect another. For example, if the Futenma replacement facility in Okinawa is not built, the Marine Corps relocation to Guam may be delayed. The facility is estimated to cost from $4 billion to $5 billion and is intended to replace the Marine Corp Air Station FutenMA. The initiative is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. DOD’s Defense Policy Review Initiative established a framework for the future of U.S. force structure in Japan. The initiative also includes a significant reduction and reorganization of the Marine Corps posture on Okinawa, Japan, to include a continuing presence for U.s. forces. The goal is to create the conditions to reduce the burden on local Japanese communities, including relocating units to other areas, including Guam, while repositioning U.N. forces to respond better to regional crises. The military construction appropriation request for fiscal year 2008 included approximately $21.3 billion for military construction and family housing. As of fiscal year 2006, DOD had 3,731 installations, with 766 installations located overseas. In recent years, DOD has been undergoing a transformation to develop a defense strategy and force structure capable of meeting changing global threats. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The area cost factor is used by planners to adjust average historical facility costs to a specific project location. It takes into consideration the costs of construction material, labor, and equipment, along with factors such as weather, climate, seismic conditions, mobilization, overhead and profit. Marine Corps officials expect there will be additional facility repair costs periodically as a result of damage from typhoons and seismic shocks. Several operational challenges, such as providing appropriate mobility support and training capabilities to meet Marine Corps requirements, have not yet been addressed. Examine the Navy’s plan to enhance the infrastructure, logistic capabilities, and pier/waterfront facilities to support transient nuclear aircraft carrier berthing at Naval Base Guam. Evaluate placing a ballistic missile defense task force (approximately 630 servicemembers and 950 family members) in Guam. The environmental impact statement will examine potential effects from activities associated with the task force to include operations, training, and infrastructure changes. DOD officials recognize that the results of this environmental assessment process may affect the development and timing of DOD's plans. The Navy is planning on periodically berthing an aircraft carrier in Guam. A new carrier pier with additional capabilities will need to be constructed in order to accommodate this plan. Most of the aircraft from the aircraft carrier will also require temporary beddown at Andersen Air Force Base, which may cause additional facilities requirements. The exact size and mix of the Army missile defense task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. The Army is currently training with the U.S. Air Force on how to defend against missile attacks. analysis and the individual service and joint planning processes. The Marine Corps is still determining the specific mix of units and capabilities needed to meet mission requirements on both Guam and Okinawa. Approximately 10,000 marines plus their dependents are expected to remain on the island of Okinawa following the realignment of forces to Guam. Marine Corps forces remaining on Okinawa will consist of Marine Air-Ground Task Force elements, such as command, ground, aviation, and combat service support, as well as a base support capability. relocating 8,000 marines and their estimated 9,000 dependents to Guam. The initiatives also include the relocation of Carrier Air Wing Five from Atsugi Naval Air Facility to Iwakuni Marine Corps Air Station, Japan. The relocation of a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier at Yokosuka Naval Base, Japan; deployment of a transportable ballistic missile defense radar system; relocation of training activities; land returns; and shared use of facilities. Guam is a U.S. territory. been fully addressed. The Marine Corps depends on strategic lift for its operational and training- related movement needs, including transportation of forces and equipment. For example, in a contingency operation that requires sealift, the ships may have to deploy from Sasebo, Japan, or another location to transport soldiers and equipment in Guam and then return to the U.S. Marine Corps in Guam will depend on strategic sealift and airlift to reach destinations in Asia that will be farther away than was the case when the units were based in Okinawa. area of responsibility where the contingency is taking place. The Marine Corps estimated additional costs for strategic lift operating from Guam to be nearly $88 million annually. Existing training facilities and ranges on Guam are not sufficient to meet the training requirements of the projected Marine Corps force. A DOD analysis of training opportunities in Guam concluded that no ranges are suitable for the needs of a projected Marine force of about 1,000. The contingency may include expanding staging facilities and systems support for both sealift and airlift. The results of this environmental impact statement will influence many of the key decisions on the exact location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development on Guam. DOD officials said that additional time is needed to fully address the challenges related to funding uncertainties, operational requirements, and Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements. In the absence of this information on how challenges will be addressed in the future, Congress is not in a position to help ensure the best application of limited federal funds. GAO is not recommending executive action. for supporting the military buildup on Guam until DOD prepares a master plan. Congress should consider requiring the Secretary of Defense to report periodically to all the defense committees on the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam. DOD also provided technical comments on a draft of this report, which we incorporated where appropriated. We are sending the comments to the Department of Defense for further study and consideration. The Deputy Under Secretary of defense for Installations and Environment responded that congressional action is not costs for the U.S. government. years to identify U.S. funding levels and sources planned for the military buildup in Guam. To identify challenges associated with the buildup in this planning effort, we met with the aforementioned DOD officials and other interested parties. We did not evaluate concerns raised by the officials, but we reviewed relevant federal laws and discussed them with DOD officials. We also analyzed available reports, documents, international agreements, and other available documents and information. The Guam Women’s Group, the Chamber of Commerce, the Civil Military Task Force, and the Office of the Delegate from Guam to the House of Representatives were also consulted. implement force structure plans with currently held land although they are now reviewing the possibility of using additional land to prevent future encroachment. In terms of existing land, DOD owned about 40,000 acres of land in Guam at the time of this review. There are political sensitivities to using former DOD land areas, since local community officials in Guam are concerned with the community’s possible expansion of land holdings on the island. Until DOD provides further information on how these challenges will be resolved, it will not know the precise costs of the Guam realignment plans to the U.S. government. land is controlled by DOD (see fig. 2), 52 percent is privately owned, and 19 percent is under the supervision of the Government of Guam. In 2003, the Senate Appropriations Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been updated to reflect the new realities of the post-Cold War world. The committee has also expressed concern about the use of military construction budget authority for projects at bases that may soon be obsolete because of changes being considered in overseas presence and basing. The Senate Appropriations Committee noted the ambitiousness of the military construction program and the need for a well-developed master plan. In July 2006, the committee recommended deferral of two military construction projects at Andersen Air Force Base that were included in the President’s budget request until such time as they can be incorporated into a master plan for Guam. The committee also asked the military to provide the congressional defense committees with a report each year giving an assessment of the plans for the U.S. military presence on Guam. in addition to military construction funds; environmental remediation and restoration issues; population levels; and facility requirements and funding levels for Hawaii, Guam, U.S. territories, and other insular areas in the Pacific. Congress and other users did not have the best data available to facilitate their annual review and oversight. Also, we reported that without the detailed information on individual construction projects and the anticipated strategic end state of the command’s overseas basing infrastructure, Congress did not has the best available and consistent data on which to track progress. The Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides the best available information on the projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for future Guam realignments. DOD officials told us that their planning effort was still in its initial phases with many key decisions and challenges yet to be addressed. We visited and toured facilities at Camp Schwab, Camp Kinser, Camp Foster, Torii Station, Yokosuka Naval Base, and Yokota Air Base, Japan; Camp Humphreys and Kunsan Air Force Base, South Korea. DOD is planning on basing a ballistic missile defense task force in Guam. The size and mix of this task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. At the time of this review, Army officials projected that the missile defense site will be located at Andersen Air Force Base. DOD faces several significant challenges associated with its master planning effort for Guam, including funding requirements, operational challenges, and community impacts that could adversely affect the development of the island. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. to generate land and facility requirements for basing, operations, logistics, training, and quality of life involving the Marine Corps, Army, Air Force, Navy, and Special Operations Forces in Guam. DOD officials told us that the plan was not a master plan because it did not include specific information on facility requirements, associated costs, and a timeline for specific actions. In addition, the development plan does not direct individual service programming actions or provide for specific funding requirements. We conducted our review from September 2006 through July 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing. GAO: DOD needs several more years to complete a master plan. DOD faces a variety of funding challenges, operational challenges, and community impacts that may both affect the development and timing of the Guam master plan and increase the cost of the project. Congress would benefit from disclosure of this information. We continue to believe that these recommendations have merit and that Congress wouldbenefit from disclosure.and viewed in that context. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. inconsistency led to our recommendation that Congress require such reporting. We continue to believe that this information is necessary to provide a complete picture of the potential effects on infrastructure and funding requirements in South Korea. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that the Secretary of Defense report periodically to all the defense committees on the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam, the Deputy Under Secretary of defense responded that the Guam master plan is scheduled to be completed in 2008, at which time a copy will be provided. Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides information on projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for the Guam realignments. Additional time is needed for DOD to address several challenges before JGPO can develop a Guam master plan. The results of the environmental statement will affect many of the key decisions on the exact location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development. Based on the expected completion of theEnvironmental impact statement, the master plan may not be completed until fiscal year 2009.  execute requirements associated with the rebasing of Marine Corps assets from Okinawa to Guam, including master planning efforts. The office’s responsibilities include integration of operational support requirements, development, program, and budget synchronization; oversight of the construction; and coordination of government and business activities. JGPO was tasked to lead the coordinated planning efforts among the DOD components and other stakeholders to consolidate, optimize, and integrate the existing DOD infrastructure capabilities on Guam. It is expected to work closely with the Government of Japan and the local Guam government, other federal agencies, and Congress. JGPO is initiating a master plan that will reflect the building of flexible infrastructure that could accommodate any type of military units that may relocate to Guam. This determination will define the training and facility requirements, such as barracks, family housing, schools, and other infrastructure. However, in the absence of information on the number and mix of forces, it will be difficult to provide an accurate assessment of specific facility requirements to support the Guam realignment actions. DOD is still determining requirements for the Guam base. to prepare an environmental impact statement pursuant to the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) Examine the potential environmental effects associated with relocating Marine Corps command, air, ground, and logistics units from Okinawa to Guam. Examine potential effects from activities associated with Marine Corps units’ relocation to include operations, training, and infrastructure changes. The notice of intent in the Federal Register states that the Environmental Impact Statement will examine the potential effects of relocating the Marine Corps. An environmental impact statement must include a purpose and need statement, a description of all reasonable project alternatives and their associated environmental impacts. An analysis of the environmental impacts of the proposed action and each alternative are essential to implementing NEPA. For example, federal agencies such as DOD such as the U.S. Navy may need to consider the environmental impact of a proposed military base on Guam. The statement must also include the purpose of the project and the need for the project, as well as an analysis of each alternative. are required to ensure the professional integrity, including scientific integrity, of the discussions and analyses in the environmental impact statement. Federal agencies such as DOD are required to obtain the comments of any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law or certain special expertise. Until an agency issues a finalEnvironmental impact statement and record of decision, it generally may not take any action concerning the proposal that is being considered by the agency. The agency is also required to seek the comment of appropriate state and local agencies, Native American tribes, and any agency that requests it receive such statements. copies of this report to the Secretaries of Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and the Director, Office of Management and Budget. Copies will be made available to others upon request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4523. standards.com. In addition to the contact named above, Mark Little, Assistant Director; Nelsie Alcoser; Kate Lenane; Erika Prochaska; Roger Tomlinson; and Cheryl Weissman made major contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.