We conducted a national Web-based survey of all 55 Disability Determination Services (DDS) directors in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Western Pacific Islands, and the federal DDS. DDSs are the agencies responsible for conducting periodic CDRs to determine if beneficiaries’ medical conditions have improved and if they are able to work. We received 54 completed surveys for a response rate of 98 percent. In total, we conducted in-depth interviews with 80 SSA and DDS managers and line staff. case files from the DDSs in California and Texas. We asked CDR supervisors to provide several cases that were (1) discontinued for medical improvement, (2) continued because the beneficiary was clearly disabled, and (3) ambiguous cases. These case files serve to illustrate the difficulties examiners face when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. In addition, we interviewed seven disability policy experts from national disability research and advocacy organizations to obtain their input on the impact of the law. responded that in practice, CDRs are conducted with the presumption that a beneficiary continues to have a disability. Thirteen directors commented that the individuals are already receiving disability benefits. Some directors also noted that they make this presumption because the beneficiary was found disabled when initially awarded benefits, and examiners must show medical improvement to remove them from the programs. Since a majority of DDSs are conducting CDRs with a presumption that beneficiary has a disability, those DDSS may be setting a higher bar than required by the standard for these reviews. as well as SSA regulations and policy, which require that CDR decisions be made on a “neutral basis. SSA defines neutral basis as a review that neither presumes that a beneficiary is still disabled because he or she was previously found disabled. Under a neutral review, it is assumed that beneficiaries had a disability at the time of the prior decision. However, in survey responses, 31 DDS directors said they did not believe that the majority of beneficiaries were still disabled after a CDR. adults and children. We verified the statistical data on CDR outcomes for internal logic, consistency, and reasonableness. We also met with knowledgeable SSA officials to further document the reliability of these data. We conducted our work from October 2005 through June 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. A beneficiary who is found to be not working or working but earning less than the SGA level (minus allowable exclusions) has his or her case forwarded to the state. We did not assess the outcome of CDR mailers or work CDRs. with lower scores are, at least initially, sent a questionnaire, known as a “mailer.” Full medical CDRs involve an in-depth examination of a beneficiary’s medical and possibly his or her vocational status. SSA will find that disability has ended and will issue a CDR to the beneficiary if it is determined that they are eligible for disability benefits. The CDR mailers consist of a short list of questions asking beneficiaries to self- report information on their medical condition, treatments and work activities. prior decision was in error. In order to be removed from the disability programs for one of the exceptions, disability examiners must also show that the individual has the ability to engage in SGA. SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed for is taking actions intended to address some of these problems. Other factors, such as inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the decision process for assessing medical improvement may make it more difficult to determine whether a beneficiary remains eligible for benefits. years; or medical improvement not expected—CDR once every 5 to 7 years. SSA has also developed a method, called profiling, to determine the most cost-effective method of conducting a CDR. In general, beneficiaries with a high score are referred for full medical CDRs. Beneficiaries with a score of more than 50 are more likely to be eligible for a full CDR and to receive a full disability pension. The CDR process can take up to seven years to complete. If functional capacity for basic work activities has improved, then the examiner finds that the medical improvement is related to the ability to work and proceeds with the CDR evaluation. The act allows SSA to discontinue benefits even when the beneficiary has not improved medically if one of the specific “exceptions” to medical improvement appliesthe person benefits from advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology. The disability advocates we spoke with differed in their views on the clarity of SSA guidance on medical improvement. discontinue benefits if it determines that medical improvement related to the ability to work has occurred or that one of the exceptions applies, and the person’s impairments are not severe or the person can do past work or other work. If SSA determines that no medical improvement has not occurred, then benefits are continued. SSA finds that the individual no longer has a disability and discontinues benefits. The individual has the right to appeal the CDR decision, first to another reviewer for a reconsideration, second to an Many disability examiners and DDS officials told us they were unsure about the degree of improvement required to meet the standard. Some said this confusion stems from unclear SSA guidance. SSA instructs examiners to disregard “minor’ changes in a beneficiary’s condition. However, this guidance does not adequately describe what constitutes a minor change, we found. The survey found that 21 reported that the practice of disregarding minor changes is not an impediment to making a disability determination. SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed to meet the standard. SSA policies allow for various exceptions, including when the prior decision was in error. Most of the disability examiners whom we spoke with told us that they were uncertain about when to apply the exceptions. According to our survey, a majority of DDSs incorrectly presume that a beneficiary continues to have a disability when conducting CDRs. It may make it more difficult for examiners to determine if a beneficiary has improved medically. such instances, it is unlikely that the DDS examiner would have complete information for conducting a CDR and determining if medical improvement had taken place. Several officials told us that guidance instructs ALJs to include enough information in their decisions so that the decisions will be legally sufficient. However, the guidance does not specifically instruct ALJ to include all of the evidence that will be needed to assess medical improvement at a future CDR. SSA is taking steps that may help to address the problem of incomplete information. SSA is developing requirements for training examiners to ensure they understand the information needed to make accurate and adequately documented decisions. SSA has adopted guides for decision writing at the appeals level, and is in the process of developing guides for use at the DDS level. Many examiners told us that the judgmental nature of the decision process concerning what constitutes an improvement can make it difficult to assess medical improvement. One examiner may determine that a beneficiary has improved medically and discontinue benefits, for example. administrative law judge, then to the Appeals Council, and finally to federal courts. At the hearing before the administrative law judge (ALJ), the ALJ reviews the file, including any additional evidence submitted after the DDS determination and may hear testimony from the individual as well as medical and vocational experts. SSA’s Office of Quality Performance conducts quality reviews of disability determination outcomes. To conduct these quality reviews, SSA selects a random sample of cases each month from all final CDR decisions. examiner reviews the case to ensure it adheres to SSA guidance. The combined accuracy rate for all CDRs was about 95 percent. On average, about 1.4 percent of all individuals who received a CDR received it were eligible for it, the agency says. The agency says it has a 95 percent accuracy rates for cases where CDR benefits were continued and discontinued of 95 percent and 93 percent respectively. It says the accuracy rates are based on a review of the DDS decision, documentation of that decision, and the evidence contained in the case. SSA officials explained that the exceptions were written to intentionally limit their use in order to prevent examiners from circumventing the standard. In addition, SSA explained that when it issued the final rules governing the medical improvement standard, it intended the exceptions to be true “exceptions”—not to be routinely applied. The agency also noted that a broader application of the error exception would be a violation of the standard, and that their infrequent use is appropriate. The error exception can be used only in the most extreme situations. We obtained written comments on a draft of this report from the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration. The agency generally agreed with our recommendation, but expressed reservations about the need for further guidance on the use of exceptions. SSA believed that its implementation of the statutory exceptions to medical improvement is appropriate and that its instructions are consistent with the intent of the law. As such, SSA was concerned about language in the draft report that characterized SSA’s guidance as discouraging and limiting theUse of the exceptions. SSA has a stewardship responsibility to identify those beneficiaries who have improved medically and are no longer eligible for benefits. The medical improvement standard is intended to help SSA accomplish both of these responsibilities. Several factors associated with the standard pose challenges for ensuring that the standard is implemented in a consistent and fair manner. Potential limitations in SSA guidance regarding the degree of improvement needed to meet the standard as well as a lack of clarity with respect to the appropriate use of the law judges are among the challenges. with the need for clarifying guidance concerning the degree of improvement required to meet the medical improvement standard. However, the agency believed that the report was unclear with regard to whether this part of the recommendation applied only to guidance for determining if there has been any medical improvement, or also to the guidance for determine if any medical improved is related to the ability to work. As stated in the draft report, our discussion of medical improvement encompasses both elements (improvement in a beneficiary’s medical condition and its relation to the able to work) Some DDSs may be inconsistently defining what constitutes a minor change. Five DDS directors said they define minor changes to include those that may actually improve functioning or allow the beneficiary to work. However, this explanation of minor changes is not included in the agency’s guidance. Of the 52 DDS director who answered a question, only one said minor changes don't impact CDRs. The agency's guidance to disregard minor changes impacts CDRs on a case-by-case basis. guidance instructs examiners to ensure a “reasonable relationship” between the amount of improvement and the increase in the ability to perform basic work activities. The guidance does not require a specific amount of increase in functioning. The DDS directors we surveyed reported that they interpret this guidance differently. 17 of 49 directors reported that a large or very large increase in a recipient’s ability to dobasic work activities is required. 24 reported thatA moderate increase is required; and 8 reported that any increase at all is required, we found. survey inaccurately noted that the standard requires that a beneficiary’s improvement be great enough so that it actually enables the individual to work. One of these directors commented that because SSA guidance on this aspect of the standard is open to broad interpretation, it is difficult to document improvement. As a result, some DDSs may be inconsistently applying the standard that could potentially impact decisions to continue or discontinue benefits. We were unable to determine how much of an impact clarification of this guidance would have on benefits. assess the extent to which the standard impacts outcomes of CDRs and determine if the standard poses any special challenges for SSA. We asked the directors about particular elements of the standard and how these elements, alone or in combination with other factors, impact CDR outcomes. We determined that the survey data are sufficiently reliable. Because this was not a sample survey, there are no sampling errors. However, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may lead to some sampling errors in the data. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. ensure that CDRs be conducted on a neutral basis. However, it believed that more adjudicator training in this area would likely have little impact on discontinuing benefits. SSA suggested that we provide additional context for some of the statistical information presented in our discussion of the proportion of DDS directors who are incorrectly applying the neutrality standard. We cannot predict the impact. additional guidance and training would have on continuing or discontinuing. benefits. But, as the report points out, there are large numbers of D DS directors. who are wrongly applying the neutral standard and, in our view, would benefit from additional guidance. The regulations implementing the act define improvement as any decrease in the medical severity of the beneficiary’s impairment(s) since the last time SSA reviewed his or her disability, based on changes in symptoms, signs, or laboratory findings. Improvement related to the ability to work is evaluated two different ways, depending on whether the comparison point decision (CPD) was based on: (1) meeting or equaling a prior disability listing or (2) a residual functional capacity ( RFC) the disability examiner proceeds to next step, the fourth step. A disability examiner compares the beneficiary’s condition with the list of impairments in effect at the time he or she was first awarded disability benefits. If the impairment(s) meets or equals the prior listing, then benefits are continued. If not, then the examiner proceeds with the CDR evaluation. Residual functional capacity assessment: If functional capacity for basic work activities has improved, then considers all of the beneficiary's impairments— those present at the previous decision and any new impairments found in the current review. the examiner finds that the improvement is related to the ability to work and proceeds to step six of the evaluation process. The sixth step is to determine if the current impairments are severe. The law provides for certain limited situations when the DDS may discontinue a recipient’s benefits even though medical improvement has not occurred. The specific group I exceptions are (a) the individual is the beneficiary of advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology, (b) evidence shows that the individual has undergone vocational therapy, and (c) evidence show that any prior determination or decision was in error. is to determine whether the beneficiary has the capacity to do the work that he or she did before having a disability. If the beneficiary does not have the ability to do past work, then benefits are discontinued. The eighth step is to determine if the beneficiary is able to do other work. At this step, the disability examiner considers the complete vocational profile (the beneficiary’s age, education, and past relevant work experience) together with pastrelevant work experience. The evaluation continues to the eighth step. The second step is to determine if the individual’s current impairment(s) is included on the current list of disabilities that SSA maintains. The list describes impairments that, by definition, are so severe that they are disabling. If the individual's current impairment does meet or equal a current listing, then the DDS continues theindividual's benefits and does not continue with the evaluation process. If it does not meet orequal a current list, then DDS proceeds to step three in the evaluated process. Assessing medical improvement may be more difficult in cases that involve certain types of psychological impairments, such as depression. Evidence of these impairments is generally more subjective than evidence of many physical impairments. Two directors commented that determining whether there is medical improvement can also be complicated because medical experts’ opinions can vary. According to some of these officials, an assessment of functionality is more subjective because it relies more on the beneficiaries’ account of their own conditions than on laboratory findings. Some officials reported that the severity of psychological impairment can fluctuate over time, making it difficult to assess whether improvement has taken place. on laboratory findings and more on clinical judgment. Certain tests for physical impairments tend to be less open to interpretation. The potential difficulty of assessing medical improvement in beneficiaries whose disability is based on certain types of psychological impairments is especially relevant. SSA is responsible for assuring that individuals who truly have a disability that prevents them from getting around are not left out of the disability program. The proportion of all individuals in the disability programs whose disabilities are based on a psychological impairment has grown in recent years. case file included a general description of the beneficiary’s medical condition, but lacked sufficient evidence to determine if medical improvement had occurred since the initial decision. As a result, medical improvement could not be shown and benefits were continued. While examiners and officials agreed that it is difficult to show medical improvement in cases that lack adequate documentation, they differed in their opinions about how frequently this occurs. Of the directors who answered our survey question on insufficient documentation, 33 responded that they encounter cases with insufficient documentation infrequently or very infrequently. 17 responded that such cases occurred more often. 15 directors commented that cases decided on appeal were the most likely to lack adequate documentation. One possible explanation for this may be streamlined processes at the appeals level. One ALJ noted that, in an effort to process cases in a timely manner, ALJs sometimes issue quick decisions in which most of the evidence is on tapes that are not transcribed or placed in the beneficiary’s case file. In the survey, respondents differed in their opinions about the types of cases that more typically lackadequate documentation. The ultimate impact of presuming that an individual has a disability on CDR decisions is unknown. Inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the process for assessing medical improvement are two additional factors that make it challenging to assess medical improvement. The standard establishes the prior decision as the starting point for conducting a CDR and requires examiners to find evidence of medical improvement since this last decision. If improvement has not occurred, the disability examiner skips to the fifth step in the evaluation. while another examiner may determine that medical improvement has not been shown and will continue the individual’s benefits. For example, in one of the CDR cases that we reviewed, the examiner conducting the initial CDR determined that medical improved was shown and discontinued the individual's benefits. The recipient was initially awarded disability benefits for a back injury with limited range of motion in the recipient's back. The examiner evaluated all of the relevant evidence and concluded that the individuals’ range ofmotion had improved. not correlate with the findings from both the physical exam and the laboratory findings. As a result, the examiner concluded that medical improvement had occurred. On appeal to reconsideration 6 months later, a different DDS examiner conducted a review using the same medical evidence as the original examiner. The examiner conducting the appeal concluded that the beneficiary continued to experience pain consistent with the back condition, and thus medical improvement was not shown. However, we had no basis for determining which decision was correct. The amount of judgment involved was too high. introduce errors, commonly referred to as nonsampling errors. For example, difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted, in the sources of information that are available to respondents, or in how the data are entered into a database or were analyzed. We took steps in the development of the questionnaire, the data collection, and the data analysis to minimize these nonsampled errors. The draft questionnaire was pretested with a number of state officials before it was released to the public. It was designed in collaboration with GAO staff with subject matter expertise. to ensure that the questions were relevant, clearly stated, and easy to comprehend. The questionnaire was also reviewed by an additional GAO survey specialist. Since this was a Web-based survey, respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire. This eliminated the need to have the data keyed into a database thus removing an additional source of error. We conducted three pretests of this survey with DDS directors in three different states. We modified the survey to take their comments into account. We also provided SSA with we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report. At that time, we will make copies available to other parties upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site. This report does not contain all the results from the survey. The survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. If you or your staff have questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7215. a copy of the survey and incorporated its technical comments into the final version. This report does not contain all the results from the survey. The survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at http://www.gao.gov/cgi- bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. To augment information from our state survey, we conducted independent audit work in three states (California, Massachusetts, and Texas) to examine how SSA policies and procedures are carried out in the field. full medical CDRs are the agency’s primary tool to determine whether a beneficiary has improved medically. Between fiscal years 1999 and 2005, an average of about 26,000 individuals each year (about 5.3 percent) were removed from the disability programs as a result of receiving a medical CDR. More beneficiaries leave the disability program because they either die or convert to social security retirement benefits. About 2.8 percent of those who receive these CDR are found to no longer have a disability under the medical improvement standard. The number of CDRs conducted between fiscal years 1999 and 2005 fluctuated. SSA removes beneficiaries for failing to cooperate during a CDR. For example, a beneficiary may fail to appear for scheduled meetings with disability examiners or physicians and thus may have their benefits discontinued. Our review suggests that several factors pose challenges for SSA’s ability to assess whether beneficiaries continue to be eligible for benefits, the authors say. The authors conclude that SSA's CDR termination rate should be closer to what the U.S. government believes it should be. of the disability programs no longer had a disability and could work. In 1981 and 1982, about 45 percent of those individuals who received a CDR had their benefits discontinued. There was no statutory requirement for SSA to show that a beneficiary had improved medically in order to remove him or her from the programs. By 1984 SSA placed a moratorium on all CDRs. The Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984 included a provision requiring substantial evidence demonstrating medical improvement before ceasing a recipient’s benefits. this throughout the entire report to minimize any confusion on this matter. SSA indicated that clarification of this guidance would probably have little noticeable impact on the number of cases in which SSA finds that a disability has ended. As our report notes, we cannot quantify the impact that clearer guidance would have on the discontinuation of benefits. Even so, we continue to believe that it is important for DDSs to consistently apply this aspect of the medical improvement standard and that, towards that end, additional guidance would be useful. This appendix provides additional details about our analysis of the medical improvement standard (the standard) The standard poses challenges for the Social Security Administration (SSA) when conducting medical continuing disability reviews (CDR) To meet the objectives of this review, we reviewed prior studies by GAO, SSA, and external organizations related to the disability determination process and CDRs. We also reviewed the Social security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984, regulations, and SSA policies and processes. See appendix IV for a listing of major contributors to this report. Is Positioning Itself to Implement Its New Disability Determination Process, but Key Facets Are Still in Development. Social Security Disability Insurance: SSA Actions Could Enhance Assistance to Claimants with Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Other Impairments. Disability: Reviews of Beneficiaries’ Disability Status Require Continued Attention to Achieve Timeliness and Cost- Effectiveness. Disability Rolls Keep Growing, While Explanations Remain Elusive. SSA and VA Disability Programs: Re-Examination of Disability Criteria Needed to Help Ensure Program Integrity. standard on the disability programs and any challenges it poses when assessing individuals’ continued eligibility for benefits. We spoke with individuals affiliated with the following organizations: American Association of People with Disabilities, Center for Health Services Research and Policy at George Washington Center for the Study and Advancement of Disability Policy. Finally, we spoke with representatives from the National Association of Disability Examiners, the National Council of Disability Determination Directors, and the Social Security Advisory Board. We also spoke with the National Organization of Social Security Claimants’ Representatives. the beneficiary’s RFC to determine if he or she has the ability to do other work. If the beneficiary does not have the ability, disability benefits are discontinued. The following team members made key contributions to this report: Kelly Agnese, Jeremy D. Cox, Susan E.M. Etzel, Stuart M. Kaufman, Luann M. Moy, George H. Quinn, Jr., Daniel A. Schwimer, Salvatore F. Sorbello, Wayne T. Turowski, Vanessa R. Taylor. SSI is an income assistance program that provides cash benefits for disabled, blind, or aged people who have low income and limited resources. At the end of calendar year 2005, the SSI program served about 6.8 million people and paid about $36 billion in federal cash benefits throughout the year. These cash benefits are paid from general tax revenues. Unlike the DI program, SSI benefits can continue even after the person reaches full retirement age. The Social Security Act’s definition of disability for adults is the same under both programs. Disability Insurance (DI) is an insurance program that provides benefits to workers who become unable to work because of a long-term disability. Workers who have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund are insured under this program. At the end of calendar year 2005, the DI program served about 8.3 million workers with disabilities, their spouses, and dependent children. DI paid out about $85 billion in cash benefits throughout the year. The Social Security Administration (SSA) administers two programs that provide benefits to people with disabilities. SSA found that they had improved medically. More people leave the programs when they die, convert to full retirement benefits, or leave for other reasons. During fiscal years 1999 to 2005, the proportion of all beneficiaries who were removed from the programs in each of the above categories remained fairly consistent. For example, during this period, about 379,000 SSI beneficiaries were removed. from the SSI program for all reasons other than death and medical improvement (including earnings and resources above the limit allowed by program guidelines) (see fig. 2) must (1) have lasted or be expected to last at least 1 year or to result in death and (2) prevent the person from being able to engage in substantial gainful activity (SGA) for that period of time. People are generally considered to be engaged in SGA if they earn above a certain dollar level. For 2006, SSA considers countable earnings above $860 a month to be SGA for an individual who is not blind and $1,450 a month for an individuals who is blind.