peer review agencywide, including peer review of the next MOBILE model. According to the ORD project director, it is too early in EPA’s study to predict whether the agency may recommend that EPA require its offices to follow the other actions listed above. While concerned about resources, OMS officials explained that making model improvements is an ongoing, continuous process. They pointed out that their goal is for each new version of the MOBILES model to reflect the latest testing, data collection, and research. limitations in the current version of EPA’s MOBILE model and (2) describe EPA's process for improving both current and future versions of the model. To describe the major limitations in theCurrent model, we obtained and reviewed theMOBILE5a User’S Guide; EPA/OMS model documentation; the most recent published sensitivity analyses; and relevant EPA guidance and memorandums. We also discussed model limitations with individuals identified as key stakeholders in the development of the current model. to us by EPA or other representatives, as well as through our own efforts as noted above. To describe EPA’s process for improving both current and future versions of the MOBILE model, we obtained and discussed information from knowledgeable EPA/OMS air quality officials. We also discussed EPA's past, ongoing, and planned actions with representatives of academia, industry, environmental groups, consulting firms, and other government agencies. And we observed one process—EPA’S open solicitation of input by external stakeholders not involved in the model’‘s development—at work. items for improvement in the current model, and EPA and workgroup representatives are examining these limitations. EPA is also in the process of developing new procedures for improving models in general, which are discussed below. Several model experts told us that it is the nature of models such as MOBILE5a to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. Agency officials agreed with this assessment, noting that theCurrent model is better than any previous versions and reflects consistent growth in the quality and quantity of information available. data that were available to them at the time (1991-1992) to estimate the deterioration rate of such vehicles. They also said the model’s correction factor for vehicles with 50,000 or more odometer miles would likely be lowered in MOBILE6. A special subgroup of the FACA mobile model workgroup has been established to address this issue, and their work is still ongoing. A fourth audit will be carried out in the coming months to assess the impact of the changes. emissions model that may one day allow users to model additional parameters, such as the relative emissions impact of sequencing traffic signals to enhance traffic flow. Agency officials said that it is their plan for each new version of the model. An EPA-sponsored FACA mobile model workgroup made up of representatives from other federal, state, and local government agencies, academia, the automobile and oil industries, environmental groups, and others has been assisting EPA in improving the current model. Much of the research to fill data gaps and update aging databases was still ongoing at the time of our audit. in June 1994, established a FACA mobile modeling workgroup in July 1995, and has held five meetings since that time to obtain external views by those not involved in the model’s development. OMS officials acknowledged that some of the key formulas in the current model have not been properly documented. They said they have efforts under way or planned to address these and other modeling needs. Agency officials explained that declining modeling resources have resulted in fewer confirming data, and that the MOBILE model has not been peer reviewed. The revisions to the next MOBILE model have been undertaken with significantly increased openness and input from other government agencies, academia, the automobile and oil industries, environmental groups, and others. Several commended EPA’s efforts in recent years to reach out to persons outside of the agency, and some noted that the outreach effort had given them a much greater appreciation of the model. While acknowledging that, historically, there have been few firm criteria on the processes that should be followed, some said the new approach was a step in the right direction. EPA has a project under way to develop agencywide procedures for improving models. Office of Research and Development (ORD) is planning a workshop in December 1997 to discuss the status of modeling across several media and other modeling issues. The project director also said that the Science Advisory Board’s January 1989 resolution on models was one of the best documents on models. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The SAB executive director and the ORD project director told us that in their opinion, there are specific actions that can enhance a model’s predictive capabilities. Among other things, these actions include the following: Obtaining external stakeholders’ input. Documenting the implicit and explicit assumptions so that others can evaluate the basis of the formulas embedded in the model. The SAB is available on its website at: http://www.sab.org/predictive-models. The SAB executive director pointed out that because of continuing concerns with the quasi-regulatory use of agency models, EPA issued agencywide guidance in 1994 specifically calling for the peer review of such models. The SAB is now conducting peer review to enhance the quality, credibility, and acceptability of the model’s applications. The agency is also performing sensitivity analyses over key parameters to identify the most sensitive parameters and to establish the areas most in need of further research. This is the first time the SAB has conducted such a review. directive was a follow-on to EPA’s January 1993 agencywide policy requiring peer review of the scientific and technical work products used to support agency decisions. In September 1996 and March 1997, we reported and testified on the uneven implementation of EPA's peer review policy. EPA agreed with our recommendations for educating staff and managers about the merits of and procedures for conducting peer review and for ensuring that all relevant products are considered for peer review. The agency has set in motion a three-pronged approach to improve the implementation. 15 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to the Administrator of EPA and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. Please call me at (202) 512-9692 if you or your staff have any questions. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. According to agency officials and model experts we contacted, it is the nature of models to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. As a result, the Environmental Protection Agency has periodically updated the estimating capabilities of its models. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order. EPA’s process for improving models in general with the Science Advisory Board and EPA”s Office of Research and Development. We conducted our review from October 1996 through August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about the process. We will provide a written version of the GAO findings in a future version of this article. the effects of road grade on emissions are obtained, state and local agencies would have to plot road grades for millions of miles of roadways in their jurisdictions. However, as global positioning technologyfor vehicles becomes less costly and more widely available and used, it is envisioned that the impacts of roadGrade emissions will be modeled in the future. According to EPA officials, the amount of data needed to estimate the impact of roadgrade is still years away. They also noted that time would be needed to develop consistent guidance on how state. Research Council report, “Virtually all motor vehicle testing has been based on a limited set of driving test cycles that inadequately represent current urban driving conditions” EPA officials pointed out that there is not a consistent definition of what constitutes aggressive driving, that aggressive driving happens only over a portion of the trip and is highly variable among drivers. However, one model expert told us that it took more than 1 year to evaluate one component of the model and that collecting vehicle emissions data on large data sets is very costly. areawide, trip-based model to a roadway-specific model. Under this revised model, the magnitude of start-up emissions will not depend on vehicle speed or the driving cycle. EPA is proposing to allow model users to model the emissions impacts of cold starts on the basis of local areas’ estimates of the number of such starts. Additionally, model users will be able to estimate emissions for three different types of roadways—freeways, arterials, and local roadways. cars to travel up to 67.2 mph (versus 57 mph for the FTP) The FTP allows for acceleration at a rate of up to 6.9 mph/second. Several model experts believe these parameters more closely approximate actual driving conditions today. According to a 1993 CARB study, the FTP may underestimate hydrocarbon, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide emissions by 27, 68, and 17 percent, respectively. A 1993 study sponsored by EPA’s FTP improvement project found that more than one-third of the trips studied had acceleration rates of more than 7 mph/ second. urban area in the late 1960s. Such a trip is known as a driving cycle, which can be approximated on a dynamometer. EPA added 10 percent to the FTP dynamometer load in an attempt to simulate the effects of air conditioner usage. However, five of the major limitations in the current FTP driving cycle are still in place, including speed, acceleration, flat surface and speed over a 7.5 mile trip. The current parameters stipulate, among other things, that vehicles average 19.6 miles per hour (mph) over the 7. 5 mile trip, do not exceed 57 mph. Some studies have questioned the representativeness of key assumptions as they relate to the FTP. Increases in speeds above 65 mph have left data gaps in the current model that are not adequately represented by existing correction factors. Others have recognized that the MOBILE model’s estimates are inextricably tied to the FT’S parameters. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) commissioned Sierra Research in 1993 to develop an improved driving cycle by using an instrumented “chase car” to better characterize typical urban driving patterns. Heavy duty gasoline-powered vehicles are believed to comprise a significantly larger percentage of the overall vehicle fleet than currently estimated. OMS plans to update the fleet characterization data for MOBILE6, including reflecting the increases in the heavy-duty vehicle population. Similarly, another fleet characterization issue involves urban buses. For example, the current model does not have a separate classification for urban buses, although this is a growing vehicle category in many urban areas with unique needs.to provide their own accumulated mileage estimates. operating characteristics, such as very frequent starts and stops. An eighth concern is the level of distinctions in roadway classifications. EPA plans to expand the current list of vehicle categories from 8 to 20, one of which will be a separate category for buses. The MOBILE model was originally designed only for estimating areawide emissions on the basis of assumptions associated with an entire trip. It was not designed for making decisions for transportation improvement projects for urban interstate, rural arterial, and urban arterial roads. MOBILE6 will allow users to separate start emissions from any linkage to the FTP driving cycle assumptions. The EPA plans to partially fund ongoing research with the Department of Transportation to develop a modal system for MOBILE 6. Several model experts have pointed out that the same average travel speed would indicate smooth traffic flow on a local street but severe congestion on a freeway.or urban feeder/collector streets. For more information, go to the EPA's MOBIle6 website or go to http://www.epa.gov/mobile. concern is MOBILE5a’ emissions credits and assumptions about inspection and maintenance programs. According to a 1995 National Research Council report, vehicle condition—whether the vehicle is well maintained, or has been tampered with or is malfunctioning—is more important than vehicle age in determining emissions. There is a need to update the basic data supporting I&M emissions reduction credits to reflect a growing population of vehicles in which rates of tampering may be diminishing. Also, vehicle owners often replace older, carbureted vehicles with newer fuel-injected vehicles. performed any tampering surveys since 1992. Agency officials said that as a result of this lack of data, the tampering assumptions for MOBILE6 will remain unchanged. EPA’s goal is to provide users with greater flexibility in designing I&M programs, as long as the state or local programs’ estimated I &M credits can be substantiated with state and local data. With respect to newer vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics, because of the limited data on the longer-term emissions impact of this technology, the agency has provided credit for these OBD-equipped vehicles equal to that provided for older vehicles. estimates. EPA has testing under way to determine how to better define this category of vehicles with significant fuel leaks. A sixth concern is the adequacy of the data supporting MOBILE5a’assumptions about emissions for in-use I&M heavy duty vehicles. EPA does not envision at this time that significant changes in the in- use emissions rates for heavy duty cars will be included in MOBIle6. A seventh concern is that much of the fleet characterization data in EPA’s database is quite old. According to agency officials, it is not expected that MOBILE6 will have adjustments for road grade. EPA officials explained that obtaining the basic data from instrumented cars and chase cars to make such adjustments would be expensive at this time. Because of the cost and length of time required for these studies, the impact of road grade will probably not be addressed untilMOBILE7. Additionally, an equally important consideration is that once these basic data on road grade are obtained, it will be possible to make adjustments. of the MOBILE model to reflect the most recent testing, data collection, and research that are available. EPA officials said they plan to address each of the above limitations in the next revision, MOBIL6. The agency will not be able to quantify the uncertainty associated with its MOBILES model estimates. “Uncertainty is pervasive in all three emission modeling components: vehicle activity, activity-specific emission rates, and emission rate correction factors,” the agency said. officials pointed out that there is substantial variability across vehicle types, operating conditions and driver behavior. For these reasons, OMS officials told us they do not plan to develop uncertainty ranges with the next revision to the MOBILE model. Similar to the global positioning issue for road grade, they said significant technological advancement may be needed before it can be used in a vehicle's navigation system. For more information, go to the OMS MOBIle website or go to: http://www.oms.com/mobile-navigation. MOBILE model relate to FTP parameters. These five are emissions from road grade, air conditioner usage, emissions at higher speeds, emissions from aggressive driving, and emissions immediately after engine start-up (cold- start) Agency officials have long recognized that some of these original FTP parameters were not representative of actual driving conditions. EPA has not yet revised the MOBILE. model to reflect the results of recent studies that have led to these FTP rule. revisions but has work ongoing to do so. different fuels. For example, the impact of temperature on emissions can be substantial. While FTP testing has been performed between 68 and 86 degrees Fahrenheit, EPA’s MOBILE model used a correction factor to estimate that 1995 exhaust emissions of hydrocarbons would be 3 times greater at 25 degrees than at the FTP temperatures. However,MOBILE5a does not account for the impact for road grade. Some studies have indicated that both the increased load on the engine from climbing a hill and the decreased load that accompanies engine deceleration significantly increase vehicle emissions. EPA has updated the estimating capabilities of its MOBILE source emissions model 10 times since the model was first introduced in 1978. EPA was also concerned that the report did not clearly distinguish between limitations that may result in only trivial emissions impacts and those that could be significant. We made the language changes suggested by EPA, including adding the citations for four studies referred to in appendix I. We also provided specific citations for some vehicle emissions-producing activities that we provide in the appendix I section of the report. MOBILE5a is a computer program that estimates the emissions of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and nitrogen oxides for eight different types of gasoline-fueled and diesel highway motor vehicles. The model consists of an integrated collection of mathematical equations and assumptions about the emissions from vehicles manufactured from 1960 to 2020. The first MOBILE model was made available for use in 1978; since that time, major mobile source emissions model has been updated to reflect new information as data has become available. MOBIle5a reflects the 10th major revision since the model was first introduced in 1978. in all four areas. EPA officials told us that incorporating new estimates for these emissions-producing activities would be a high priority for MOBILE6, due to be issued in late 1998. For example, in March 1997 agency officials announced their plans to substantially revise the cold-start segment of the nextMOBILE model, moving—for the first time ever—from an old model to a new one. "Given the state of knowledge today, it appears that these activities may not be adequately represented in MOBILES5a," the EPA says.  MOBILE5a likely underestimates the impact of low reid vapor pressure (RVP) fuels on hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions at temperatures above 75 degrees. The report notes that the correction factor for low RVP fuels has not changed since February 1989. limited data on fuels with RVPs lower than 9.0 pounds per square inch (psi) caused EPA to place a constraint code in the model precluding users from being able to calculate reductions below this level. reduction credits for low sulfur fuels (except, according to agency officials, for the lower sulfur effect in reformulated gasoline), although recent studies suggest that lowering the concentration of sulfur in fuel reduces the emissions of hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides. EPA officials said that they plan to eliminate the constraint code in the next model, MOBILE6, which will allow users to receive credit for correction factors for fuels lower than 9.0 psi. However, they noted that work in this area is still ongoing and that the data on the emissions benefits of lower RVP fuels, as well aslow sulfur fuels, is still unclear. The January 1997 Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program (AQIRP) Final Report suggested that reducing fuel volatility by 1 psi, from 9.0 to 8.0 psi, would reduce exhaust CO by 9 percent, exhaust HC by 4 percent, and total evaporative HC by 34 percent (NOx remained unchanged) The RVPs for most fuels used to be higher than 9. 0 psi, but today they can go lower than 7.0. Similarly, the model currently has no emissions. have affected the pace of model improvements over the years. For example, a study of the emissions characteristics of 100 passenger cars for both exhaust and evaporative emissions could cost from $1.4 to £1.6 million. Studies of heavy duty trucks and other larger vehicles would cost considerably more. As an illustration of the magnitude of the task compared with available resources, we obtained EPA’s database of vehicle emissions from the 1970s and 1980s. The database is available at: http://www.epa.gov/vehicle-emissions. estimate of mobile modeling needs in response to the mobile source requirements envisioned for the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments. This June 1990 analysis indicated that the Office of Mobile Sources would need about $60 million for the modeling improvements known at that time. Since then, because of higher priority needs, OMS has been allocated only $21.8 million, cumulatively, for modeling improvements. However, many more groups have become involved in non-EPA-funded vehicle emissions studies than in the past. because precise information about the emissions behavior of the approximately 200 million vehicles in use in the United States is not known. Yet the need exists to estimate the impact of motor vehicles on air quality. For the states, the MOBILE model is a tool for constructing emissions inventories, creating control strategies, producing state implementation plans (SIP), and demonstrating control strategy effectiveness to EPA and others. The states may choose among a number of control options as long as the state’s control strategy achieves at least as many reductions as required by the Clean Air Act. The model’s estimates can affect state policy decisions on issues such as the content and volatility of fuels, and some decisions on highway improvement projects. For example, the 1991 Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) required, among other things, that state transportation improvement programs in certain nonattainment areas conform with the applicable state implementation plan developed under the Clean Air Act. Over the years, the model's original purpose was to support the development of mobile source emissions inventories.  improvements have resulted in the refinement of emissions estimates for evaporative emissions. In its simplest form, EPA’s MOBILE model allows the model user to use the model to make changes to their vehicle. The model is available on the EPA website and is available to the public on the Internet. For more information, visit EPA.gov/MOBILE or go to www.epa.org/mobiline. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. emissions estimates were collected during a 1-hour period during which temperatures were forcibly increased over a range of temperatures. More recent testing over 24-hour and longer periods without constraining temperature increases to a one- hour period indicates some differences from the MOBILE5a estimates. evaporative emissions from vehicles with fuel leaks are now believed to be so significant that, for MOBILES6, EPA plans to model these emissions separately from other evaporativeissions. According to EPA’s most recent data, indications are that some vehicles withfuel leaks can exceed the evaporative emission of MOBIle6 vehicles. operating an enhanced I&M program. A fifth concern is the proper representation of diurnal emissions. Diurnal emissions refer only to hydrocarbons and are a form of evaporative emissions that occur when a vehicle is parked. For all previous versions of the MOBILE model, the data supporting these 8- to 24-hour emissions was not available in time for the new version. The new version will be available to the public in the spring of 2015, the EPA said in a statement. corresponding vehicles by one to two orders of magnitude. EPA officials explained that while they may develop a separate category for some vehicles with significant fuel leaks, this does not necessarily mean there will be a significant overall increase in evaporative emissions estimates. A 1996 automotive industry study of 150 vehicles found that 24-hour diurnal emissions ranged from 0.6 grams ofHC to 777.2 grams of HC, with vehicles with liquid fuel leaks providing the vast majority of the emissions. There is no clear indication that these emissions were significantly underestimated in prior diurnal estimates. years its role and influence have been expanded considerably. Today, its estimates have a substantial influence not only on state and local programs but also on the automobile and oil industries. According to estimates derived partly from the MOBILE model, motor vehicles produce about 90 percent of the carbon monoxide, 50 percent of hydrocarbons, and 30 percent of nitrogen oxides emitted annually in major urban areas. EPA officials are examining 14 areas in the current MOBILES model in which major limitations exist. average vehicle speed from 30 mph to 50 mph will reduce vehicle emissions. The study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model estimates a 24-percent reduction in carbon monoxide emissions by increasing average vehicle speed. However, when a 95-percent confidence interval is applied, the change in emissions can range from a 72-percent decrease in carbon Monoxide emissions to a 75-percent increase in such emissions. Similarly, a 1996 study of EPA's speed correction factors for vehicle exhaust emissions found substantial uncertainty in EPA's current MOBIL model. are limited. In addition, a 1996 National Research Council study suggested that the model may overestimate the benefits of oxygenated fuels. EPA officials agreed that this is also an area that needs more study, but one which is one which needs to be studied more. The study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model “apparently overpredicts the oxygenated fuel effect by at least a factor of two” when the model’‘s estimate of carbon monoxide reductions is compared with observed data. As much as half of all hydrocarbon emissions from motor vehicles are evaporative emissions, under certain conditions. EPA has periodically adjusted its basic formula to approximate vehicle exhaust emissions in a range of situations. In essence, the correction factor is a multiplier added to the basic formula (miles traveled times emissions rate per mile) to adjust the model’s output to more closely reflect actual emissions. Except for California, EPA supplies the baseline emissions rates and correction factors for other model users,primarily state and local agencies. MOBILE5a’ estimates of emissions system deterioration for vehicles with more than 50,000 odometer miles. Studies have questioned the rate and quantity of the data supporting EPA’s significantly higher rate of emissions. EPA acknowledges that these adjustments were made on the basis of limited data and that only recently have 1990-technology vehicles become old enough to accurately assess their emissions deterioration. They plan to address this in MOBILE6, which is scheduled to be released in late 2015. currently overestimates the emissions from vehicles with 50,000 or more odometer miles. EPA’s current model estimated that 80 percent or more of these higher mileage vehicles would be high emitters. Study found that only 32 percent of the vehicles fell into this category. Similarly, an April 1997 study of 227 vehicles (model years 1991 to 1993) found no significant changes in emissions or deterioration as indicated by the current model. OMS officials said they used all the data they could find. made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (202- 512-6061, or TDD (202?) 512-2537. the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The daily list is available on a daily basis. The past 30-day list includes lists from the last three months. The weekly list includes the top 10 news stories of the week, as well as the top ten news stories from the previous week. For the weekly list, please use the daily list and the week-by-week list. Current model provides no additional I&M credits for vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics(OBD), a requirement for all 1994 and later light duty vehicles and trucks. This vehicle computer technology alerts a car owner when an emissions system malfunctions, permitting quicker repairs. newer vehicles have up to 8 years or 80,000-mile emissions control system warranties for two components, which should equate to less-polluting vehicles as a result of the on- board computer and catalytic converter. more durable emissions control systems and the requirement that manufacturers cover the costs of certain repairs. The current model does not provide specific credits for this growing population of OBD-equipped vehicles. More recent and more complete data are needed on the effectiveness of repairs in an I&M program, including the adequacy and durability of these repairs, actual participation rates, and impact of remote sensing efforts. Except for remote sensing, the current model’s estimates for these parameters is based on aging and limited data. High emitters could represent 16.8 percent of the California fleet, or nearly 5 times the assumption in the California model. EPA officials have some concerns that the existing database may underrepresent high emitters. Owners of such vehicles may avoid surrendering such vehicles for inspection and maintenance (I&M) and other testing at a higher rate than the normal population. As noted in a 1996 study, “individuals with intentionally tampered or poorly maintained vehicles may be less likely to offer their vehicles for testing.” In-use credits for heavy duty gasoline-powered vehicles are based on data approximately 20 years old. Heavy duty vehicles are generally older and driven more miles annually than their light duty counterparts. EPA officials said that testing heavy duty vehicles is difficult and quite expensive and agreed that there is a lack of recent data on the in-use emissions from this category of vehicles once they have been tested and approved for use. The certification standards are higher for heavyduty vehicles than theirLight Duty counterparts. The standards for heavy Duty vehicles are higher than those for light duty vehicles. The EPA agreed with the overall message of the report but expressed concerns with imprecise language. EPA suggested several changes to clarify information in the report. EPA also suggested that in lieu of describing some limitations associated with its use of the Federal Test Procedure as a basis for estimating emissions as “FTP assumptions,” since the FTP is a specific, codified test cycle, these would be better described as ‘FTP parameters.’ The report was released to the public last week. of average driving patterns. The Congress has also recognized that the FTP may not reflect actual driving conditions. EPA’s October 1996 final rule on FTP revisions addressed four emissions-producing activities that are not adequately represented, according to the rule’S preamble. In 1990 the Congress added Section 206(h) to the Clean Air Act, which required EPA to review and revise the FTP within 18 months “to insure that vehicles are tested under circumstances which reflect the actual current driving conditions under which motor vehicles are used.” are not accounted for in the current model and that other emissions-producing activities are not adequately represented. EPA officials said that it is important to note that EPA has conducted and/or partially funded some of the studies that have led to the new data that now question the old estimates and assumptions. EPA has work under way to address most of these limitations. For example, since its formation in September 1995, an EPA-sponsored Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) subcommittee workgroup has identified 47 high-priority issues. 1995 that the worst polluting 22 percent of the vehicles produce about 50 percent of emissions. EPA estimates that, overall, from 10 to 30 percent of vehicles cause the bulk of the pollution problems. As noted by the nonfederal co-chair of the FACA modeling workgroup in a 1993 study, “The general problem of failing to control for significant factors is compounded by the likelihood that a small fraction of the vehicle fleet are currently responsible for a large percentage of vehicle emissions.” EPA officials have made periodic adjustments but recognize that the current model’s correction factor adjustments may not reflect the most up-to-date information. The 10-percent additional load intended to simulate the effect of air conditioner usage “is obsolete,” the EPA says. More recent information indicates that nitrogen oxide emissions may be from 30 to 75 percent greater at some speeds than the current models’ estimates.and local agencies should go about collecting these data, the agency says. Experts, workgroup participants, and/or stakeholders we contacted agreed that the limitation is an area of concern. In most cases, EPA officials noted that the agency has ongoing work to address the issue. One concern is the representation of high emitters in EPA’s MOBILE model database. The data now indicate that this group of vehicles accounts for a disproportionate amount of an area's overall emissions. If this subset of the overall vehicle population is underrepresented, the impact on the emissions estimates can be substantial. concerns with the study, its reliance on remote sensing devices, and its applicability to other states. EPA officials believe that the larger data sets provided by their ongoing I&M lane testing in three other states properly identify most high emitters. A second concern is the current correction factors for lower volatility fuels and for oxygenated fuels. For example, EPA officials agreed that appropriate representation of high emitter is important to the model’s emissions estimates. They noted that this is also a high priority issue currently being addressed by EPA and one of the subgroups of the mobile modeling workgroup. issues facing EPA today, primarily because a very small number of vehicles can potentially be responsible for unusually high levels of pollution. This was also a significant issue for one of the Session Chairs for the Coordinating Research Council’s (CRC) April 1997 Workshop, who noted that, in his opinion, this is the single greatest issue that EPA faces. The nonfederal co-chair also noted that if the occurrence of such vehicles is not properly represented in the model, the model's emissions estimates can be seriously flawed. have information about, nor estimates of, the uncertainty associated with its emissions estimates. We agree that researchers viewed some limitations as having a more significant impact on emissions than others. Appendix II contains the agency’s overall written comments. We conducted our review from October 1996 through August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. A detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix III. As arranged with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until the end of the year. it becomes cost-effective to address this issue. For example, future vehicles may have on-board computers with the ability to instantaneously record and later report emissions under different operating scenarios. EPA officials pointed out that it is their plan, at some point in the future, to report uncertainty ranges for some model estimates. They said they are currently saving both qualitative and quantitative descriptors for the data being collected by and for the agency in order to perform these calculations in thefuture. The Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, House Committee on Commerce, asked us to (1) describe the major issues facing the EPA.