IIRIRA added a provision enabling refugees or asylees to request asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. Asylum claims with the INS dropped in the years following the passage of IIRIRA. The Real ID Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-13 ) further revised asylum law. Foremost, it established expressed standards of proof for proof for asylum claims.known as expedited removal), adding time limits on filing claims, and limiting judicial review in certain circumstances. conditions). If the asylum officer approves the application and the alien passes the identification and background checks, then the foreign national is granted asylum status. There has been a 79% decrease in affirmative asylum cases filed since the enactment of IIRIRA in 1996. The number of asylum cases approved more than doubled from 13,532 in FY1996 to 31,202 in FY2002, and then fell to the lowest point over the 14-year period—9,614—in FY2009. is already present, or at a port of entry while seeking admission. This process differs from a potential refugee who begins a separate process wholly outside of the United States. Depending on whether or not the applicant is currently in removal proceedings, two avenues exist to seek asylum. The affirmative and defensive applications follow different procedural paths but draw on the same legal standards. In both processes, the burden of proof is on the asylum seeker to establish that he or she meets the refugee definition specified in the INA. Asylum applications of aliens who are not granted asylum by asylum officers are referred to EOIR immigration judges for formal proceedings. In some respects, these applicants/aliens are allowed a "second bite at the apple" Asylum applicants in the affirmative process are not subject to the mandatory detention requirements while their applications are being adjudicated, though there is broader authority under the INA to detain aliens for other grounds. Defensive applications for asylum are raised when a foreign national is in removal proceedings and asserts. The USCIS schedules a non-adversarial interview with a member of the Asylum Officer Corps. There are eight asylum offices located throughout the country. The asylum officers either grant asylum to successful applicants or refer to the immigration judges those applicants who fail to meet the definition. They make their determinations regarding the affirmative applications based upon the application form, the information received during the interview, and other information related to the specific case (e.g., information about country). The asylum officer makes their determination based on the form and information received from the interview. claim for asylum as a defense to his/her removal. If the alien fails to raise the issue at the beginning of the process, the claim for asylum may be raised only after a successful motion to reopen is filed with the court. The immigration judge's ultimate decision regarding both the applicant's/alien's removal and asylum application is appealable to the BIA. Defensive asylum claims made during EOIR proceedings started at a lower level in FY1996 (84,293) than affirmative USCIS claims (116,877) FY2009. EOIR approved 5,131 in FY1996 and 10,186 in FY2009. DHS' Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officer must summarily exclude a foreign national arriving without proper documentation, unless the alien expresses a fear of persecution if repatriated. Absent a stated fear, the CBP officer is allowed to exclude aliens without proper. documentation from the United States without placing them in removal proceedings. This procedure is known as expedited removal. According to DHS immigration policy and Asylum seekers are often detained with criminal aliens, a practice that many consider inappropriate and unwarranted. Detention is psychologically damaging, some argue, to an already fragile population. Proponents for current law warn that releasing asylum seekers in expedited removal undermines the purpose of the law. They argue that mandatory detention of asylum seekers is an essential tool in maintaining immigration control and homeland security.. Any loosening of these policies, they allege, would divert the CBP and ICE officers from their homeland security duties to track. asylum seekers were three times as likely to obtain asylum if they had legal representation, to emphasize the need for legal counsel. Supporters of current law maintain that the one-year rule prevents abuses of the asylum system. They point out that foreign nationals have the option of seeking asylum defensively during removal proceedings. Others have observed that many asylum seekers who fail to file within one year of arrival subsequently receive withholding of removal or relief under the United Nations Convention Against Torture. They assert such people would have qualified for asylum but for the one year deadline. Research has revealed disparities in asylum decisions. Many are calling for greater congressional oversight of the immigration courts. Some are pushing for an increase in funding for immigration judges and law clerks. Others, however, contend that the problems related to disparities in Asylum decisions lie with the U.S. government. Without making the United States more vulnerable to unauthorized migrants, criminals, or terrorists, it would not be as vulnerable as it would otherwise be, they say. It would be more secure and less vulnerable to criminals and terrorists. to consider cases in pairs or panels of three asylum offers. Despite concern over the disparate decisions, there is an argument that greater congressional oversight might politicize the process. Legislative intervention to promote more consistent decisions presumably might undermine the independence of the asylum adjudicators and immigration judges. Because none of the studies that documented the disparities had access to the case facts and evidence, the rationale for decisions remains unknown and thus may indeed be justified. Immigration removal proceedings are civil in nature and, thus, do not entail the right to legal counsel that criminal proceedings do. less in the funding shortages and more in the quality of immigration judges. Some are recommending higher recruitment standards for immigration judges and more training, particularly training in the culture of asylum seekers' homelands. Some further recommend a requirement of written opinions in asylum cases. Still others maintain that the USCIS asylum officers also display disparate outcomes among similarly situated asylum cases, and that enhanced training and research support should be available. Establishing mechanisms to foster communication among asylum offices is offered as an option to improve consistency. Asylum seekers' access to counsel has arisen in recent years. Many maintain that few can adequately represent themselves. Charity and pro bono legal projects cannot afford to serve all asylum seekers, many say. Some offer that providing legal counsel is an option for addressing the disparities in outcome, they say. Many cite the GAO study, which found that many can't afford to represent themselves and need legal counsel to get a fair hearing. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. The Refugee Protection Act of 2011 would make significant revisions to asylum policy. The bill would eliminate the time limits on seeking asylum in cases of changed circumstances. It would also proscribe conditions under which an asylum seeker who was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded. The Senate Committee on the Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy and House Committee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren introduced the companion bills on June 15, 2011. The companion bills are S. 1202 / H.R. 2185. a country where there are "substantial grounds" for believing that he or she would be in danger of being tortured. An applicant for non-removal under Article 3 has the burden of proving that it is more likely than not that he would be tortured if removed to the proposed country. If a diplomatic assurance (deemed sufficiently reliable by the Attorney General or Secretary of State) that the alien will not be tortured is obtained from the government of the country to which the alien would be repatriated, the alien's claim for repatriation can be considered. by the U.S. Border Patrol or the ICE agents when they are apprehended. When aliens formally request asylum, they are sent to the nearest USCIS-authorized fingerprint site. They have all 10 fingers scanned and are subject to a full background check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Distinct from asylum law and policy, aliens claiming relief from removal due to torture may be treated separately under regulations implementing the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (hereafter, Torture Convention) In 2003, the Attorney General ruled that illegal mass migration by sea threatened national security because it diverts the U.S. Coast Guard and other resources from their homeland security duties. The case involved a Haitian who had had expedited removal proceedings and detained (subject to humanitarian parole) The Attorney General expanded on this rationale in his April 17, 2003, ruling that instructs EOIR immigration judges to consider "national security interests implicated by the encouragement of further unlawful mass migrations ..." in making bond determinations. come ashore in Biscayne Bay, FL, on October 29, 2002, and had been released on bond by an immigration judge. The BIA had upheld his release, but the Attorney General vacated the BIA decision. All foreign nationals seeking asylum are subject to multiple background checks in the terrorist, immigration, and law enforcement databases. Those who enter the country legally on nonimmigrant visas are screened by the consular officers at the Department of State when they apply for a visa, and all foreign nationals are inspected by CBP officers at ports of entry. misrepresentation are placed in expedited removal. If they express a fear of persecution, they receive a "credible fear" hearing with a USCIS asylum officer. If found credible, they are referred to an EOIR immigration judge for a hearing. The Attorney General and Secretary of Homeland Security can exercise discretion in the granting of asylum. Foreign nationals who participated in the persecution of other people are excluded from receiving asylum. The law states other conditions for mandatory denials of asylum claims, including when the alien has been convicted of a serious crime. if returned home, they will be persecuted based upon one of five characteristics: race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Foreign nationals arriving or present in the U.S. may apply for asylum with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) in the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) after arrival into the country. They may seek asylum before a Department of Justice Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) immigration judge during removal proceedings. procedures, CBP inspectors, as well as other DHS immigration officers, are required to ask each individual who may be subject to expedited removal the following series of "protection questions" to identify anyone who is afraid of return. Why did you leave your home country or country of last residence? Do you have any fear or concern about being returned to your homecountry or being removed from the United States? Would you be harmed if you were returned toyour home country? DoYou have any questions or is there anything else you would like to ask? religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. The intent of the persecutor is subjective and may stem from mixed or multiple motives. The courts have ruled that the persecution may have more than one motive, and so long as one motive is one of the statutorily enumerated grounds, the requirements have been satisfied. A 1997 Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) decision concluded "an applicant for asylum need not show conclusively why persecution occurred in the past or is likely to occur in the future" asylum seekers, including that the applicant's race, religion, nationality, social group, or political opinion was or will be one of the central motives for his or her persecution. Because "fear" is a subjective state of mind, assessing the merits of an asylum case rests in large part on the credibility of the claim and the likelihood that persecution would occur if the alien is returned home. A third dimension that overlays these concepts is the matter of "mixed motives" for persecuting the alien. The credible fear concept also functions as a pre-screening standard that is broader and easier to meet. The standards for "well-founded fear" have evolved over the years and been guided by judicial decisions, including a notable U.S. Supreme Court case. The regulations specify that an asylum seeker has a well-foundedFear of Persecution if (A) The applicant has a fear of persecution in his or her country of nationality or, if stateless, in his/her country of origin. The regulations state that the asylum officer or immigration judge shall not require the alien to provide evidence that there is a reasonable possibility he or she would be individually singled out for persecution. In the group identity instance, if the asylum seeker. establishes that there was a pattern or practice in his or her home country of persecution of. a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, identity may form the basis of the asylum claim. The asylum seeker is unable or unwilling to return to, or avail himself or herself of the protection of, that country because of such fear. last habitual residence, on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. There is a reasonable possibility of suffering such persecution if he or she were to return to that country. He or she is unable or unwilling to return because of such fear. The regulations also state that an asylum seeker "does not have a well-founded fear of persecution if the applicant could avoid persecution by relocating to another part of the applicant's country.... " In evaluating whether to grant asylum, a judge must consider a number of factors. unique fluctuations over time. Country conditions lie at the core of the principle that the U.S. will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. As discussed more fully above, individualized persecution or persecution resulting from group persecution is more likely to cause asylum seekers to seek refuge in the United States. This data analysis suggests that conditions in the major source countries—whether economic, environmental, political, religious or social—were likely the driving force behind asylum seekers. denial rates of Salvadoran asylum seekers were the highest, spanning 90% to 98%. Some argue that given the religious, ethnic, and political violence in various countries around the world, it has become more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors. Some express concern that U.S. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the current political uprisings in the Middle East, northern Europe, and South America are being misconstrued by the media and the public. Some cite the seemingly inexplicable disparities in asylum approvals rates. attracts asylum seekers who have weak or bogus claims. Some have warned of "the ongoing separation of asylum from any grounding in the national interest" Others have maintained that migration "push" factors, such as rapid population growth, poverty, and political instability in the sending countries of asylum seekers, are factors over which the U.S. has little control. "The asylum system has become the hole in the fence for millions of dubious claimants—and a major immigration magnet in itself," one critic has concluded. Some have long been concerned that terrorists would seek asylum in the United States. Critics point to asylum seekers from countries of "special concern" as potential national security risks. Supporters of current law say it sends a clear signal of deterrence to aliens who consider using asylum claims as a mechanism to enter illegally. Some argue further that because asylum is a discretionary form of asylum, it should not be treated as a law enforcement tool.down wayward asylum seekers. The U.S. is home to hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases. Some argue that the U.S. should re-calibrate asylum policy to provide more protections for asylum seekers. Others argue that security risks resulted more from the limits of intelligence data on terrorists in the past rather than the expansiveness of asylum policy. Some further assert that asylees from other countries should not be treated the same as asylum seekers from the United States. The debate over asylum policy should be debated for years to come, says David Rothkopf of the Migration Policy Institute. Africa, and South Asia could inadvertently facilitate the entry of terrorists. Others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations or gender-based abuses. Some assert that asylum has become an alternative pathway for immigration rather than humanitarian protection provided in extraordinary cases. At the crux of the issue is the extent to which an asylum policy forged during the Cold War is adapting to the competing priorities and turbulence of the 21 st century. Some of these issues are highlighted below. immigration policy, asylum issues are less about the number of foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the policies and the efficacy of the procedures. Asylum is an adjudication of a person based upon facts, evidence, beliefs, and circumstances that might be clear at some times yet nebulous at other times. The policy tensions of asylum often pit the promotion of our humanitarian values against the prevention of fraudulent abuses. The protection of the persecuted against the security of our borders; and the obligations of our moral responsibilities internationally against the commitments of our social priorities domestically. Some argue that the law should be amended to provide an exception for people who have been forced by terrorists to provide support. Opponents of limiting the judicial review of asylum cases contend that it would erode two traditional values of U.S. polity. The law states that an alien who commits an act that is of "special concern" may be eligible for asylum. The right to due process and freedom from repression and persecution are protected by the Constitution. It is illegal to deny asylum to someone who has committed an act of violence against the United States. balance of these competing concerns may be shaken by a crisis in a neighboring nation or by larger world events. The U.S. Congress plays the key role in considering when and whether revision or re-calibration of asylum law and policies is warranted, says John Avlon, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says Congress should consider whether a change in asylum law or policies is in the best interests of the country as a whole, rather than just the asylum seekers. as a terrorist; provide alternatives to detention of asylum seekers; modify certain elements necessary for the asylum seeker to meet the conditions for the granting of asylum; and, allow aliens interdicted at sea the opportunity to have an asylum interview. The United States has long held to the principle that it will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened. This principle is embodied in several provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), most notably in provisions defining refugees and asylees. In 1974, the former Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) issued its first asylum regulations. The Refugee Act of 1980 codified the U.N. Refugee Protocols definition of a refugee in the INA and included provisions for asylum in INA 208. The law defined asylees as aliens in the United States or at a U.S. or Canadian consulate or embassy. The INA does not provide for the right to stay or stay for a period of time. It does provide for a right to apply for asylum if a person is considered a refugee. danger to the community; the alien has been firmly resettled in another country; or there are reasonable grounds for regarding the alien as a danger to national security. The INA, moreover, has specific grounds for exclusion of all aliens that include criminal and terrorist grounds. This report opens with an overview of current policy, discussing the threshold of what constitutes asylum and the procedures for obtaining it. The second portion of the report identifies the top sending countries and includes a time series analysis of six selected source countries for asylum seekers. In 1968, the U.S. became party to the 1967 United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees. Nonrefoulement means that an alien will not be returned to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened. The U.N. Refugee Protocol does not require that a signatory accept refugees, but it does ensure that signatory accepts them.approvals by country of origin. The report rounds out with a discussion of selected legislative policy issues, including immigration reform. he "knows, or reasonably should know, affords material support" to a terrorist organization is inadmissible. It makes no exception for instances where the alien has been coerced into providing support. Over the past decade, the United States has admitted or adjusted about 1 million foreign nationals to legal permanent resident (LPR) status each year. Overall, asylee adjustments comprised only 4% (411,972) of the 10.3 million LPRs admitted oradjusted from FY2000 through FY2009. A study of 290 asylum officers who decided at least 100 affirmative cases from the PRC from FY1999 through FY2005 found that the approval rate of PRC claimants spanned from zero to over 90%. In one regional asylum office, the grant rates for affirmative applications from thePRC varied fromzero to 68%. Sixty percent of the officers in that regional office deviated from their office's average PRC asylum approval rates by more than 50%. Nationwide, immigration judges granted asylum to 47% percent of defensive cases ofPRC claimants from January 1, 2000, through August. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) analyzed the disparity in asylum decisions as well and found that "significant variation existed" GAO performed multivariate statistical analyses on asylum cases from 19 immigration courts. The average national grant rate for Colombian asylum seekers is 36%. Figure 14 presents the data for the asylee producing countries in the high-volume immigration courts from which these conclusions are drawn.national average.... Colombian asylum seeker also faced major disparities. Those who appeared before the Orlando Immigration Court had a 63% grant rate. Those heard by the Atlanta Immigration Court faced a grant rate of 19%. GAO found that the grant rate for affirmative cases was lower than 10% for asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico. In terms of defensive cases, about 50% of asylum seeker from Iran and Ethiopia were granted asylum and almost 60% of such cases from Somalia. However, this outcome occurred for 13% or less of the defensive asylum cases from Honduras, Indonesia, and El Salvador. GAO also offered the following important caveat: Because data were not available on the facts, evidence, and with Nepal) to be among the top 10 in FY2009. Several top sending countries were also among the decade's top 20 approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases. Colombia, Haiti, Guatemala, and, of course, the PRC. For year-by-year data on the top 20 source countries for approved asylum cases, see the Appendix . Research studies of the approval rates of cases filed by asylum seekers consistently reveal disparities by USCIS regional asylum offices and EOIR immigration courts. reporting on the arbitrary and inconsistent administration of the federal system that grants political asylum. In 2006, researchers at Syracuse University's Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse found "a surprising lack of consistency" among similarly situated asylum cases considered by EOIR. The Stanford Law Review published "Refugee Roulette: Disparities in Asylum Adjudication" in 2007. The example of asylum seekers from the PRC offers striking differences in the percentage of cases approved across regions and jurisdictions. The size of the disparities in asylum grant rates creates a perception of unfairness in the asylum adjudication process within the immigration court system. Researchers at Syracuse University's TRAC have been conducting analyses of the immigration courts for several years and were among the earliest to identify wide variations in asylum outcomes that were dependent on the immigration judge. The denial rates of Iraq asylum seekers were the lowest, spanning from zero to 4%, and their variation was also the lowest at 4%. In contrast, the asylum seeker's country of origin, the PRC, had denial rates ranging from 4% to 74%. half denied less—was 65% . There were, however, eight judges who denied asylum to nine out of ten of the applicants who came before them. In the New York immigration court, for example, one judge denied only 6% in one case. TRAC's latest study of the FY2008-FY2010 period found that judge-to-judge disparities in asylum decisions have moderated since their earlier studies, but it concluded that the disparities remained substantial. The latest study was conducted by the Center for Immigration Studies. The immigration court in Atlanta approved 7% of defensive PRC cases; however, the court in Orlando, FL, approved 76% of defense cases. The disparity continued if the applicant lost at the Board of Immigration Appeals and petitioned for review in the U.S. Court of Appeals. From FY2003 to FY2005, the Fourth Circuit did not remand a single case from the PRC (i.e., the court never decided in favor of the applicant), while the Ninth Circuit never remanded a case. that handled almost 90% of the cases from October 1994 through April 2007. GAO identified nine factors that affected these outcomes: (1) filed affirmatively (originally with DHS at his/her own initiative) or defensively (with DOJ, if in removal proceedings); (2) applicant's nationality; (3) time period of the asylum decision; (4) representation; (5) applied within 1 year of entry to the United States; (6) claimed dependents on the application; (7) had ever been detained (defensive cases only) "Credible fear" typically comes up when an alien arrives without proper documentation and is put into expedited removal proceedings. Those deemed to have a credible fear proceed to a defensive asylum hearing with EOIR. PRC asylum cases peaked in FY2002 for both affirmative and defensive claims—10,522 and 11,499. Affirmative claims rose by 268.4% from 2,377 to 10,522 in FY2009. The ebbs and flows of asylum seekers over the 13-year period, however, exhibit different patterns depending on the asylum gateway. fear" claims that USCIS has considered has steadily increased from 4,712 in FY2005 to 5,454 in FY2009. Consistent time series data on "credible fear" claims are not available before FY2005. On November 13, 2002, the former INS published a notice clarifying that certain aliens arriving by sea who are not admitted or paroled into the United States are to be placed on a waiting list. On that day, the U.S. placed more than 1,000 aliens on the list. Defensive asylum claims are down by 53.2% for Salvadorans, despite peaking at 9,955 in FY2007. The number of "credible fear" claims during expedited removal has risen sharply from 73 in FY2005 to 945 in FY2009. Many Haitians who flee Haiti are interdicted by the U.S. Coast Guard and do not appear among those who claim asylum in the United States. Affirmative claims hit 4,938 in FY2001 and surpassed the number of defensive claims that year. Asylum seekers from Mexico reached a 13-year high point in the late 1990s. Affirmative asylum claims from El Salvador have steadily declined by 90.4%. The "credible fear" claims have dipped by 54.6%, from 185 in FY2005 to 84 in FY2009. The overall trends of Colombian asylum seekers from FY1997 through FY2009 are up by 48.2% and 53.6% respectively, according to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. a port of entry who meet the definition of a refugee. As Figure 1 illustrates, asylum claims spiked immediately after passage of the Refugee Act in 1980. In the 1980s, political violence and civil wars in Central America prompted mass migration of asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. Asylum cases filed with the INS surpassed 100,000 for the first time in 1988. The Tiananmen Square massacre of Chinese soldiers in 1989 prompted a surge in asylum claims in 1989. In 1990, over 120,000 Cubans and about 25,000 Haitians set sail for Florida, known as the Mariel Boatlift. Protesters in 1989 symbolized events that triggered asylum seekers from China. The December 1991 military coup d'etat deposing Haiti's first democratically elected president, Jean Bertrand Aristide, led thousands of Haitians to flee by boat to the United States in FY1992. The following year, 285 Chinese came ashore in New York on the "Golden Venture" and a total of 683 Chinese come ashore in three different ocean-going vessels along the coast of California in the summer of 1993. asylum claims, with 4,209 new cases. Five of the top 10 source countries of asylum seekers were Western Hemisphere nations in FY2009. The PRC remained the leading source country throughout the 2000s. Middle Eastern and South Asian nations do appear in the top 20 source countries over the past decade for approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases.. Iran, Iraq, Indonesia, and Pakistan were top 20 sources countries for those who received asylum from FY2000 through FY2009, as were Indonesia, India, and Burma. The U.S. Coast Guard interdiction of Haitians has undoubtedly suppressed the number of asylum seekers from that nation. Although the continent of Africa was not home to many of the asylum seekers discussed above, the African nations of Cameroon and Eritrea, as well as Ethiopia, appear in the top 10 source countries for asylum cases approved by USCIS and EOIR in FY2009 ( Figure 13). The emergence of the African countries in theTop 10 source nations for approved asylum cases is revealed in Table 1. of a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion; then the fear of persecution is deemed reasonable. The PRC led in the number of asylum cases approved by USCIS and EOIR in FY2009 ( Figure 13 ). abuse of human rights in the PRC has been a principal area of concern in the United States for many years. Presumably, PRC asylum seekers are also benefiting from the provision enabling aliens to claim asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. By the end of FY1995, there were 457,670 asylum cases in the backlog, as the INS asylum corps was unable to keep pace. Almost half of those cases, however, resulted from the 1990 settlement of the American Baptist Church (ABC) case. The Illegal Immigrant Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA, P.L. 104-208 ) of 1996 made substantial changes to the asylum process, most notably by establishing summary exclusion provisions (now known as summary exclusion clauses) protection will not be considered further and the alien may be removed. For many years, most foreign nationals who sought asylum in the United States were from the Western Hemisphere. In FY1999, the People's Republic of China (PRC) moved to the top of the source countries for affirmative asylum applications. The U.S. now has more asylum cases filed from China than from any other country in the world, according to the U.N. refugee agency's most recent report on the number of asylum cases.