To look at coordination of physician placements, we cross-tabulated the agency data on waiver requests received by the agencies between 1994 and 1995 by state. We obtained the number of physicians who were NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment recipients who were practicing in each state as of December 31, 1995. This is a conservative number of NHSC physicians; however, it doesn't include physicians who are NHSC state loan repayment recipient practicing in shortage areas. We used data from the requesting agencies and states on theNumber of waiver applications sent to USIA from 1994 to 1995. primarily by awarding scholarships to students who agree to serve in a shortage area after their health professions training is complete. On December 31, 1995, 848 NHSC physicians and 685 other NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment were practicing in underserved areas of the country. In addition to NHSC, HHS has other programs to address medical underservice. For example, HHS provides federal grant funding to community health centers that are required to accept all patients regardless of gender. We obtained data from HHS’ Health Resources and Services Administration. We compared waivers with the number of NHSC physicians practicing in underserved areas on September 30, 1995. We also compared waivers to those who did not have NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment obligations. We estimated the number who completed graduate medical education and training in 1995 who would be subject to the 2-year foreign residence. We used this data to estimate the number. of physicians who completed Graduate Medical Education and Training (GME) in 1995. who were willing to practice there. She said it would be a “travesty’ to health care in rural areas if these waiver physicians were not available. Other reasons cited for hiring these physicians are their superior foreign language skills and cultural familiarity with a facility’s patient population. For example, several physicians received waivers to practice at a migrant health center in Eastern Washington. These physicians were recruited, in part, because they are native Spanish speakers, which enables them to effectively treat the center's Spanish-speaking patients. by professional recruiters or immigration attorneys regarding the availability of a physician to meet their facility’s needs. Some facility officials and physicians reported paying up to $25,000 in immigration attorney or recruiter fees for assistance in matching a physician with a facility and processing the waiver. During our site visits to facilities where physicians who had received waivers were practicing, physicians cited several reasons why they wanted waivers, including that they would not be able to apply the medical skills they had learned in the United States in their home countries. the requesting agencies’ and states’ policies do not all require that a waiver physician in such an area accept Medicaid, have a sliding fee scale, or accept anyone for services regardless of his or her ability to pay. In one area where the identified need was care for migrant farm workers, a waiver. physician was in a group practice a block away from a federally funded migrant health. center. A senior official at the migrant health center said that the waiver physician did not impact the center’s patient load because they both served different patient populations. practicing in nonprofit community or migrant health centers and about one-fourth are in a private or group practice. The rest are practicing in hospitals, for-profit health centers, or other settings (see fig. 3). See appendix VI for more detailed information on the results of our survey of facilities. Using our survey results, we estimate that almost all physicians practicing on January 1, 1996, whose waivers were processed through federal agencies were practicing in primary care specialties. Overall, more than half of them were practiced in internal medicine. with state and other health officials, visited 14 sites where waiver physicians were practicing, and interviewed health care facility officials and 20 physicians who received waivers. We conducted our work between November 1995 and September 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing. We selected the sites in order to visit physicians in a variety of practice settings, including federally funded community and migrant health centers, and a capitated-rate program for the Medicare- and Medicaid-eligible elderly, and private and group practices affiliated with both public and for-profit hospitals. practice. The most prevalent subspecialty was nephrology (medicine concerned with kidney disease), which was reported for about 7 percent of the primary care physicians. Requesting facilities and state officials had mixed views on the usefulness of subspecialties for meeting their needs. Officials from some states said that physicians with sub Specialties are not as desirable because they may not remain in the area to practice primary care. In fact, several states have policies to not request waivers for specialties. with the number of full-time-equivalent physicians needed to remove primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in that state as of December 31, 1995. We used the shortage area dedesignation level because it is the primary measurement used by HHS and the requesting agencies to establish the need for physicians. We identified instances where physicians did not comply with the terms of the waiver received NHSC scholarships or federal loan repayment who were practicing in the state. Although physicians with waivers may also practice in designated Medically Underserved Areas, HHS does not remove this designation. from NHSC at the time of our review. As shown in table VII.1, the degree to which the identified physician shortage can be offset by the waiver physicians practicing in a state varied between the states. When combined with the NHSC physicians practicing there, the number exceeded the number of physicians needed to remove some states’ primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations. OtherStates’ identified physician needs were not met by these two physician sources. In addition to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions. could not identify the number of physicians in practice at any given point in time. Instead, we used the dates that the agencies and states submitted their requests for waivers to USIA. We assumed that those physicians whose waivers were requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the facility listed in agency data on December 31, 1995, or had their waivers in process to begin practicing shortly thereafter. Table VI.2: Practice Settings of Waiver Physicians Practicing on January 1, 1996 DOT (n=2) ARC ( n=38) HUD (n =29) USDA (n--81) number of physicians identified by HHS as needed to remove the shortage area designations in a state. In five states (Alabama, Kansas, Kentucky, North Dakota, and West Virginia), the number of physicians for whom waivers were processed equaled more than 75 percent. In other states, such as California, such physicians equal less than 10 percent of the identified need. Waivers for physicians also are not well-coordinated with other programs addressing underservice, like those operated by HHS and NHSC. The number of waivers being processed for physicians to practice in underserved areas each year has grown from 70 in 1990, to 1,374 in 1995. Indications are that in 1995, about half of the foreign physicians that were supposed to return home were granted waivers of this requirement. In 1996, waiver physicians were practicing in 49 states and the District of Columbia—every state except Alaska. However, the degree to which they are relied on to relieve physician shortages varies greatly from state to state. three agencies that provided formal written comments also expressed their support for the need for better coordination between the participating agencies, states, and other programs. One agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available funding to operate its program effectively. USDA suggested that an alternative to funding the program from appropriated research funds would be to initiate a fee-for-service type application fee to offset operational costs. We concur that any entity involved in managing waiver requests for physicians should commit adequate resources for oversight and operational support. HHS has started to collect information on the number of physicians practicing under waivers. Lack of information could result in more physicians practicing in an area than are needed. There is a lack of coordination with state efforts to address physicians shortages. The Community Health Center program is not well-coordinated with HHS programs such as NHSC or the Community Health Centre program. It means that federal managing the waivers nor require the waivers to be coordinated with HHS Programs such as the NHSC and the community health center. HHS endorses the philosophy that exchange visitors return home after completing their training to make their new knowledge and skills available to their home countries. HHS does not support waivers for physicians to remain in the United States to practice in underserved areas. Instead, HHS administers other federal programs, such as NHSC, to address physician shortages in the U.S. NHSC supplies physicians and other health professionals to underserved area.favorable recommendation. HHS is the federal agency responsible for addressing physician shortages it does not use waivers to do so. agencies and states may not know of problems identified by HHS when considering requests from community health centers. For example, waivers were requested through HUD for several physicians to practice at a health center that had its HHS funding discontinued due to financial management problems. When requesting the waivers for these physicians, HUD officials did not know that HHS had identified problems with the health center. As a result, they could not take those problems into consideration when deciding whether the waivers were in the public’s interest. underservice in the United States. Many health care facilities and states cite examples of the utility of these waivers in providing a qualified physician for an underserved area. Federal efforts to address physician shortages are not coordinated among the federal agencies or with the states. The rapid growth in waivers for physicians makes this an opportune time for the Congress to reassess what it wants the waiver provision to accomplish, the authors say. The running disagreement between HHS and other federal agencies about the role of waivers in addressing physician shortages in underserved areas needs to be resolved. as eligible practice locations and state involvement and the consequences of the physician’s failure to complete the agreed-upon length of service. For example, ARC restricts physicians to practice locations in federally designated Health Professional Shortage Areas. The physicians who received waivers through USDA and HUD have been allowed to practice in other areas, including designated Medically Underserved Areas. ARC officials said that they excluded the MedicallyUnderserved Area designations because this designation is not an accurate measure of physician shortage. Under existing procedures, locating a waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee that the needs of the underserved will be addressed. HUD officials also said that their monitoring efforts were limited by the availability of staff resources. An area’s underserved may be only a specific part of the population (such as migrant workers or low-income people), and not all federal agencies’ and states’ policies contain requirements or monitoring to ensure that a physician's practice includes such groups. The use of waivers to address physician shortages is not authorized or funded as a program. It is unclear whether agencies would devote sufficient resources to effectively monitor compliance. USDA, for example, relies on employers to enforce the employment contracts, citing a lack of staff resources to conduct its own monitoring. However, as we and ARC’s Inspector General found, many of the examples of physicians who failed to comply with agency policies resulted from actions taken by the employers. and regulations do not require waivers to be used only as a last resort. practices or in locations not designated as shortage areas. Agency controls to help ensure that physicians comply with waiver agreements vary among the federal agencies and states. ARC requires the facilities to verify and the waiver physicians to certify that they are complying with ARC policies. HUD and USDA officials said that they had started or planned to start requiring periodic reports. USIA has proposed regulations to make the waiver requests easier to obtain. The growth in the number of waiver physicians has not gone unnoticed by federal agency officials and legislators. coordinated with other federal programs. Designating leadership responsibility for managing the program. Establishing penalties against facilities that fail to comply with requirements of the waiver. Directing the entity(ies) managing program to implement procedures and criteria for the selection and placement of physicians and for monitoring compliance with waiver requirements. For example, requiring the state to clearly support the use of the physician for the purposes of this waiver. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/health-care/healthcare-reform-wavier/index.html. virtually all waiver requests. USIA officials said that while they check for required documentation, they almost always rely on the interested government agencies’ assertions that the waivers are in the public interest. INS officials say that refusal of the waiver is extremely rare if USIA has given a favorable recommendation. “when the application demonstrates that the exchange visitor is needed merely to provide services for a limited geographical geographical area,” USIA says. INS says it is not in a position to second-guess USIA or theinterested government agency as to whether public interest would be served if the waiver was granted. USIA, INS, HHS, and the requesting federal agencies have been meeting since late 1995 to discuss the use of waivers to address physician shortages. The officials formed an informal interagency group that has discussed revising regulations addressing waiver requests. USIA, in working with the other agencies, has been working to make waiver requests more consistent. The new regulations, if finalized, and 1996 amendments could address many of the coordination and compliance problems, but not all of them, says USIA's director of medical services. published a proposed regulation in the Federal Register on September 5, 1996. In the preamble to the proposed regulation, USIA noted that with the entry of USDA and HUD into the waiver process, inconsistency in the administration of waiver requests among the different agencies has created some confusion. For a request by a U.S. government agency, the regulation would condition approval on the physician’s commitment to practice primary care for at least 3 years in a designated Health Professional Shortage Area or a Medically Underserved Area. The number of waivers also increased because the authority for states to request waivers was passed in 1994. 23 states requested waivers in calendar year 1995. HUD officials have recently decided to reassess the department’s waiver policy and stopped accepting requests after August 30, 1996, to conduct a review. For the physicians in our sample and in the states we visited, several reasons they were not practicing at the location for which the waiver was requested had to do with changes made by the facility. We found cases in which a facility made the request and then determined that the physician was no longer needed. to practice in one rural area where the U.S. Coast Guard operates. The rapid growth in waivers began in late 1993 and 1994, when the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) began requesting them for physicians to serve their rural and urban constituents. Agency officials said that they would like to limit the number of waivers processed by their agencies, but have not yet done so. They said they initially responded to a constituent request to support a specific physician; however, their offices were subsequently flooded with requests for waivers for other physicians. USIA and INS officials said they recommended or approved virtually all the physician waiver requests made by the interested U.S. government agencies. Because the agencies requesting waivers do not consistently track the practice dates of the physicians, we requested waivers between 1990 and 1992. We selected a random sample of 211 of 1,994 physicians for whom ARC, DOT, HUD, and USDA received waiver requests in 1994 and 1995. We sent a questionnaire to the contact person at the facility that had requested the waivers, using the information provided by the federal agencies. United States Information Agency, the Federal Co-Chairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission, and the Attorney General. We also will make copies available to others on request. Please contact me on (202) 512-7119 if you or your staff have any questions. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix XI. To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed (1) federal agency officials responsible for requesting the waivers at ARC, HUD, USDA, and DOT; (2) HHS officials in the department’s Office of International Affairs and the Health Resources and Services Administration; and (3) officials at USIA and INS. any location in Appalachia. There is no mechanism for each federal agency to know how many waivers the other has requested to address the physician shortage in an area. State health officials do not always know where physicians receiving waivers through federal agencies are practicing and, therefore, they cannot coordinate these placements with state programs to address medical underservice. While ARC requires that facilities’ requests for waivers come through the states, other agencies do not. This leads to situations where the states are unaware of the level of placements. Not all the agencies processing the waiver requests have expertise in addressing health care issues. USDA and HUD officials said that their offices lacked expertise in health issues. In an effort to ensure that the employers have a true need for a physician, ARC, USDA, and HUD policies, as well as proposed USIA regulations, require the facilities to provide some documentation of past recruitment efforts. This procedure, however, does not ensure the use of waivers for physicians is the option of last resort for areas with physician shortages. addressing unmet need and to show that it has sought other options for fulfilling this need. We provided a draft copy of this report to seven agencies that are involved with waivers for physicians to practice in underserved areas. ARC, USDA, and USIA provided formal written comments (see apps. VIII, IX, and X) These comments indicate general agreement with our conclusions and matters for congressional consideration. HUD and Justice chose not to provide formal comments. However, we discussed our findings with HUD and INS officials, and they raised no objections to our findings or matters. through (1) discussions with the ARC Inspector General and a review of reports from that office. We also reviewed case files at the requesting agencies and USIA. If a facility indicated that the physician never worked there, we contacted the facility, INS, or both to obtain information on the reason the physiciannever worked there and to confirm that a waiver had been granted. If the physician was supposed to be practicing, we made site visits to facilities where the physicians were supposed to have been practicing, and we also contacted USIA and other agency officials. that he had heard that the physician was pursuing additional graduate medical education in the United States. In the second instance, the facility reported the physician’s firing directly to INS, which revoked his nonimmigrant work status. Six of eight reviews conducted by the Inspector General from 1994 to 1995 found that some physicians were not practicing primary care at least 40 hours per week in a Health Professional Shortage Area. Instead, employers were using the physicians in subspecialty areas, according to the reviews. received the waiver. A clinic in Illinois said that the physicians were needed to help meet an urgent primary care delivery crises. Six months after one of the physicians began working there, she was terminated because the clinic had determined that it was overstaffed. She is now practicing in another city in Illinois that has an identified shortage of physicians who serve Medicaid patients. The second physician was transferred from the rural community to a city that has a shortage of doctors who serve the state's Medicaid patients, the USDA said. A medical group asked HUD to request waivers for three physicians to work at a practice purchased from a retiring physician outside of Atlanta. When we called the practice site, we were told that only one of the three physicians was working there. The third physician was practicing only part-time at the practice sites for which the waiver was requested. He said that because there were not enough patients in that location, he spends about half his time working at the main clinic in Champaign, Illinois. The location on the waiver request to another location that is not in a federally designated shortage area. One physician never worked at the site, one physician worked a brief period and then went to practice at a prison in Michigan. One physician remained to work for the new employer after the practice was sold. HUD officials were unaware that the facility had been sold and that two physicians were practicing there. INS officials said that waivers had been approved for all three physicians, including the one who was never employed there. The practice no longer had enough patients to support these physicians, an official from the medical group said. of the physicians were not practicing there. We also found instances in which the reason for not meeting the requirements of an agreement resulted from the physician’s actions. For example, in two separate cases, physicians were fired when they refused to complete the requirement for working 40 hours a week at the requesting facility. In one instance, the fired physician notified USDA that he was going to practice at another hospital and when USDA officials told him he could not because the hospital was not in a shortage area, the physician broke off contact with them. a 95-percent confidence level, the rate of compliance among the 1990 to 1992 requests is at least 80 percent. We counted those physicians who were working on January 1, 1996, for the facility listed in agency data as in compliance. We also used the survey results of the 1994 to 1995 samples to estimate the practice specialties and practice settings of physicians who are still practicing on that date. The estimates at the 95- percent confidence intervals are shown in tables VI.2 and VI.3. in many cases for less than 1 year. We estimate that 90 percent completed the minimum employment period required by ARC. On January 1, 1996, over one-fourth (28 percent) were still practicing at the same facility that requested the waiver. We counted those physicians who worked for at least 1.75 years as meeting the ARC minimum contract period at that time, which was 2 years. For example, none of (38 of 40 ARC physicians, 2 of 2 DOT physicians, 49 of 49 HUD physicians, and 111 of 120 USDA physicians) How many J-1 visa waivers did your state receive from employers between October 1, 1995 and March 31, 1996? (enter 0 if no applications were received during that time) 112 (total) applications please continue on next page--> ) 5. Based on your current situation, how. adequate is the annual limit of 20 state J- 1 visa waivers to meet your state’s needs for. physicians under this program? (check one) 6. We require periodic reports by the 6% less than adequate 0% much less thanadequate 50% if any, does your state consider in deciding whether to request state J-1 visa waivers? (check all that apply) 15% We rely on other federal or state 38% We act in response to reports from other federal and state agencies 32% other (please specify) 97% Whether the practice location is in a health professional shortage area (HPSA) Please continue on next page to read the rest of the survey. If you have any comments on the J- 1 visa waiver program, such as the reasons for participation or nonparticipation, please enter them in the space below. We are sending this questionnaire to all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands of the United States. Please complete the questionnaire and return it, along with a copy of your state’s policies on J-1 visa waivers for physicians, if any, within ONE WEEK of receipt. You can use the enclosed pre-addressed envelope or send it via FAX on (206) 287-4872. The questionnaire should take about 15 minutes to complete. By 1995, four U.S. government agencies and 23 states were requesting waivers of J-1 visa requirements for physicians. Before 1993, the only agency requesting waivers for a number of physicians to practice in underserved areas was ARC. ARC requested around 200 or fewer waivers per year, peaking at 266 waivers in 1993. Health care facility officials, as well as state and federal health officials, said they have been inundated with inquiries from physicians who would like to obtain a waiver by working in a shortage area. residence requirement. Congress should consider requiring that the use of such waivers be managed as a program. Clarifying how use of waivers for these physicians fits into the overall federal strategy to address medical underservice. This should include determining the size of the waiver program and establishing how it should be. The amendments neither designate an agency as responsible for resolution, and better coordination and management of the overall effort are needed if it is to be continued, the authors say. The changes (1) make the waiver conditions much more consistent, which may help to alleviate the confusion cited by agency officials, they say. facility for failing to comply with agency policies. The new regulations and the 1996 amendments do not establish any penalties for employers who fail to comply. The use of waivers for physicians with J-1 visa requirements has become so extensive that this exception policy now resembles a full-fledged program for addressing medical issues. The ARC Inspector General noted that the most significant programmatic issue that surfaced during that office’s review was the limited accountability of employers and the lack of potential actions against employers who did not use physicians with waivers. HHS did not submit formal comments by the end of our 30-day comment period. DOT has had limited involvement in waivers for physicians with J-1 visas and did not have comments on the draft report. The Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs (who also chairs the department's Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board) said that HHS favored the option of delegating responsibility for the waivers to the states. For congressional consideration, he said, HHS favors delegating the waivers. for physicians who have subspecialties. Requests for waivers for physicians with J-1 visas are not coordinated effectively. No single entity is responsible for coordinating practice locations of waiver physicians. The use of waivers is now a ready means for acquiring physicians, some of whom are being actively marketed by the physicians themselves or placement specialists such as recruiters. “The Department does not view waivers as a mechanism to help resolve the problems of shortage areas,” the agency says in a statement. The U.S. General Accounting Office is conducting a review of J-1 visa waivers for physicians to practice in medically underserved communities. We sent the questionnaire to the facilities for 211 physicians who had their waivers requested through ARC, DOT, HUD, and USDA from 1994 to 1995. 33 states provided written policies. When our study is complete, we will send you a copy of our report. This appendix contains the responses to questions we asked facilities that requested waivers of the J- 1 visa foreign residence requirement for physicians. The number of physicians receiving waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement for J-1 exchange visitors has grown more than tenfold in the past 5 years. Waiver physicians are practicing in virtually every state; most are primary care physicians. weak controls mean there is little to deter physicians or their employers from failing to comply if they choose to break these terms. For example, we found instances in which a physician never practiced at the intended facility, unbeknownst to the agency processing the request. Journal of Medicine, Vol. 333, No. 7 (1995), pp. 454-56. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. The U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts) GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Orders may also be placed by calling (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. General Accounting Office. Health Care Shortage Areas: Designations Not a Useful Tool for Directing Resources to the Underserved. National Health Service Corps: Opportunities to Stretch Scarce Dollars and Improve Provider Placement. U.S. Information Agency: Inappropriate Uses of Educational and Cultural Exchange Visas. The New England Journal of Medicine: “Correcting the Oversupply of Specialists by Limiting Residencies for Graduates of Foreign Medical Schools.” “ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1988. Council on Graduate Medical Education. Sixth Report: Managed Health Care: Implications for the Physician Workforce and Medical. Education. Washington, D.C.: U.S.-based Council. First Report of the Council, Vols. I and II, 1988; Fourth Report, Vol. I, 1989; Fifth Report, vol. II, 1989. Third Report, v. III, 1991; Fourth, viv. IV, 1991. Services, 1995. Institute of Medicine. The Nation’s Physician Workforce: Options for Balancing Supply and. Requirements. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1996. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Health. Professions for the Twenty-First Century. San Francisco: University of California San Francisco Center for the HealthProfessions, 1995, p. 1521-27. The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 334, No. 25 (1996), pp. 1679-83. the contact person to tell us if the physician worked or planned to work at the facility. The physician’s medical specialty, subspecialty, and practice setting were also asked. We received responses for 39 of the 40 physicians in our 1990 to 1992 ARC sample and for 200 of 211 physicians in 1994 to 1995 samples. We also asked for the date the physician left the facility and whether the physician obtained permanent residency during his or her employment. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/features/healthcare/employee-benefits/employees-benefiting-from-pension-reimbursement.html. For physicians that did not work at or left the facilities, we tried to locate the physician through AMA data. Exchange visitors are only a portion of physicians in graduate medical education programs. As shown in table II.1, about 1 in 10 physicians in programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August 1995. Of those who were international medical graduates,physicians who did not exchange were more likely to be noncompliant or to have left the facility or been fired for noncompliance. U.S. officials were required to issue an annual report to the Congress on participants who had submitted affidavits. The House Committee on the Judiciary “notes the flagrant abuse of the exchange program during the past decade.” It said that the affidavits were to ensure that the physicians comply with the terms of their agreement. The legislation seeks to alleviate possible ‘brain drain’ from various countries, the committee said in a letter to the Senate Judiciary Committee. The bill was passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives. J-1 visas allow foreign nationals to participate as exchange visitors in cultural and educational programs in the United States. ECFMG is the designated sponsor for exchange visitors participating in graduate medical education. After completing this program, it is expected that participants will return to their home countries and impart what they have learned and experienced. In 1995, over 9,000 foreign physicians with J-1 visa were in the U.S. for graduate medicaleducation or training. These exchange visitors constituted about one-tenth of all individuals receiving medical education (see app. II). requirement, we subtracted the number of exchange visitor physicians who were continuing applicants in the 1995-96 academic year from the number. physicians sponsored by ECFMG in the prior academic year. While this number is not exact because it may include a small number of physicians. who were involved in research and some physicians who did not complete their training, it does represent a reasonable estimate of the number with J-1 visas who completed graduate medical education or training who would be required to return home without a waiver. not graduate from U.S. or Canadian medical schools. About 1 in 3 was an exchange visitor. Only these exchange visitor physicians are subject to the J-visa 2-year foreign residence requirement. Medical school type was not indicated for 454 residents (0.5 percent of all residents). Under the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961, the Exchange visitor (J-visA) Nonimmigrant (H-visas) does not include graduates of Canadian medical school. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Congress has imposed restrictions on J-1 visa holders, including physicians in graduate medical education. These physicians are required to return to their home country (or to their country of last legal residence) for at least 2 years after completion of training. However, they may obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the United States. For most physicians, the waivers are requested on including INS service centers, officials from the Department of Labor and the State Department, and the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates. Section 212(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act requires that certain J-1 visa program participants, including participants in graduate medical education, reside at least 2 years in the countries of their nationalities or last residences after leaving the United States. They must meet this requirement before they are eligible to apply for nonimmigrant visas (H and L) as temporary workers, for permanent residencies in the US, or as immigrants. There was no 2-year foreign residence requirement or waiver provision in the exchange visitor program authorized with the passage of the U.S. legislation in 1994. an interested U.S. government agency showing the waiver to be in the public interest. “To make available the services of exchangees who possess talents desired by our universities, foundations and other institutions, the language of the House bill was modified to permit the waiver of the foreign residence requirement on the request of an interested government agency,” the bill says. An amendment to the foreign residency provision in 1970 removed the blanket application of theforeign residence requirement for exchange visitors and imposed it only on participants whose participation was financed in some way by the United States. countries or (2) whose home countries clearly needed their services. Participants could no longer meet the 2-year foreign residence requirement by residing in other foreign countries but had to reside in the countries of their nationalities or their last foreign residences before coming to the United States. The 1970 act also established two additional bases for waivers: persecution because of race, religion, or political opinion and statements by the participant’s home countries that they had no objections to the waivers. These bases still apply except the statement of no-objection waiver is no longer available. The 2-year foreign residence requirement and its related waiver provision evolved through a number of legislative changes after the exchange visitor program was authorized in 1948. “The exchange program is not an immigration program and should not be used to circumvent the operation of the immigration laws,” a 1956 amendment to the act said. The act required participants to depart the United States after completing their programs. The 1956 amendment also provided for a waiver of the foreign residence requirements on the basis of a request from a foreign national. In 1981, USIA asked the Congress to extend the limit up to 7 years for medical doctors to encourage them to study in the United States. The House Committee on the Judiciary questioned USIA officials regarding the likelihood that physicians would be willing to return home after 7 years. The Congress increased the usual permissible duration of stay to7 years, but it imposed additional requirements. Graduate medical education or training participants were required, as a continuing reminder, to furnish annual affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries. The Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997, included amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act. The amendments subject physicians seeking waivers through interested U.S. government agencies to some of the same requirements as those sponsored by state agencies. They also extend authorization for waivers for aliens entering the United States with a J-visa or acquiring such status through May 31, 2002. For example, the amendments require such physicians to (1) agree to work for at least 3 years for the health facility named in the application, and (2) work in an area designated by the Secretary of State. Federal agencies and states generally request waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement so that the physicians can practice for several years in underserved areas. No single agency has management responsibility for use of the waivers to address physician shortages. Because of the lack of coordination, the number of waivers processed for physicians to practice in some states has been more than the amount needed to alleviate the identified physician shortage in that state. USIA reviews the program, policy, and foreign relations aspects of the case and forwards its recommendations to the INS Commissioner. maintaining a nonimmigrant work status (H-1B visa) The alien physician must agree to practice medicine for at least 3 years in a geographic area or areas designated by the Secretary of HHS as having a shortage of health care professionals. If the alien physician is otherwise contractually obligated to return to a foreign country, that country’s government must furnish a statement to the Director of USIA that it has no objection to a waiver. if the physician fails to fulfill the contract, he or she may be deported.