Since Congress passed TSCA nearly 33 years ago, EPA has issued regulations under the act to ban or limit or restrict the production or use of only five existing chemicals or chemical classes. In 1991, EPA’s 1989 regulation broadly banning asbestos was largely vacated by a federal appeals court decision. In contrast to the United States, the European Union, as well as a number of other countries, has banned all, or almost all, asbestos and asbestos-containing products. that it had no known safe exposure level. the court concluded that EPA did not present sufficient evidence to justify the ban on asbestos because it did not consider all necessary evidence. EPA had not calculated the risk levels for intermediate levels of regulation because it believed there was no asbestos exposure level for which the risk of injury or death was zero. As articulated by the court, the proper course of action for EPA, after an initial showing of product danger, would have been to regulate the product at a lower level of exposure than the current level of regulation. Asbestos is a known human carcinogen that can cause lung cancer and other diseases if inhaled. Asbestos has been used widely in products such as fireproofing, thermal insulation, and friction products, including brake linings. EPA invested 10 years in exploring the need for the asbestos ban and in developing the regulation. Based on its review of over 100 studies of the health risks of asbestos as well as public comments on the proposed rule, EPA determined that asbestos is a potential carcinogen at all levels of exposure. required under the act to protect trade secrets and privileged or confidential commercial or financial information against unauthorized disclosures. EPA has not performed any recent studies of the appropriateness of confidentiality claims, but a 1992 EPA study indicated that problems with inappropriate claims were extensive. While EPA may suspect that some chemical companies’ confidentiality claims are unwarranted, the agency does not have data on the number of inappropriate claims, EPA says. The agency also says it doesn't have the resources that would be needed to investigate and challenge claims. EPA focuses on investigating claims that it believes may be both inappropriate and among the most potentially important. EPA challenges about 14 such claims each year and that the chemical companies withdraw nearly all of the claims challenged. Officials who have various responsibilities for protecting public health and the environment from the dangers posed by chemicals believe that having such a list helps.determine the number of claims that are inappropriate, the EPA says. The EPA says it will investigate claims relating to health and safety studies performed by chemical companies involving chemicals. on chemicals in certain circumstances or provide other data, such as production volumes, on existing chemicals. If EPA finds that a chemical’s risks are unreasonable, it can prohibit or limit its production, processing, distribution, use, and disposal. Chemical companies may claim some of the information they provide to EPA under TSCA as confidential business information. EPA is access to confidential T SCA information would allow them to examine information on chemical properties and processes that they currently do not possess and could enable them to better control the risks of potentially harmful chemicals. information will be published on the chemical agency’s Web site. REACH also includes a provision under which confidential information can generally be shared with government authorities of other countries or international organizations. In previous reports, we recommended that the Congress consider providing EPA additional authorities under TSCA to improve its ability to make more chemical information publicly available. For example, in our June 2005 report, we suggested amending TSCa to authorize EPA to share with the states and foreign governments the confidential business information. and REACH have provisions to protect information claimed by chemical companies as confidential. While REACH requires greater public disclosure of certain information, such as basic chemical properties. REACH places greater restrictions on the kinds of information chemical companies may claim as confidential, including brief profiles of hazardous properties and authorized uses. The European Union’s approach to public's access to information combines a variety of ways that the interests of the public's right to know is balanced with the need to keep certain information confidential. As such, nonconfidential information is not considered confidential. that chemical companies provide to EPA, subject to regulations to be established by EPA in consultation with the chemical industry and other interested parties. In our September 1994 report, we recommended that the Congress consider limiting the length of time for which information may be claimed as confidential without resubstantiation of the need for confidentiality. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of Congress may have about this issue. I am happy to answer them. In Canada and the European Union, testing requirements for low-volume chemicals are less extensive and complex than for high- volume chemicals. Congress could give EPA, in addition to its current authorities under section 4 of TSCA, the authority to require chemical substance manufacturers and processors to develop test data. Another option would be to provide EPA with greater authority to requirement testing targeted to those areas in which EPA’s analysis models don't work well, the authors say. The authors conclude that providing EPA with more authority to obtain test data from companies would enhance the effectiveness of T SCA. TSCA requires EPA to find that current data is insufficient; testing is necessary; and that the chemical may present an unreasonable risk. Once EPA has made the required findings, the agency can issue a proposed rule for public approval. TSCA can take months or years to develop, EPA officials say, because the specific chemicals used in commerce are constantly changing, as are their production volumes. The agency must first make certain findings before it can require testing, they say. The process is time-consuming, costly, and inefficient. TSCA generally requires chemical companies to notify EPA of their intent to manufacture or import new chemicals. EPA estimates that most premanufacture notices do not include test data of any type. Chemical companies do not have an incentive to conduct these tests because they may take over a year to complete, and some tests may cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. The cost of initial testing could be reduced by amending TSCA to require EPA to review new chemicals before they are marketed, EPA says. EPA officials told us that finalizing rules can take from 2 to 10 years and require the expenditure of substantial resources. Given the time and resources required, the agency has issued rules requiring testing for only about 200 chemicals. Because EPA has used authority to issue rules to require testing so sparingly, it has not continued to maintain information on the cost of implementing these rules. However, in our October 1994 report on TSCA, we noted that EPA officials said that issuing such a rule would take such a long time. chemical companies are not required to develop and submit toxicity information to EPA on existing chemicals. There are currently over 200 high-production- volume chemicals for which chemical companies have not voluntarily agreed to provide the minimal test data that EPA believes are needed. EPA officials told us that in cases where chemical companies do not voluntarily provide test data and health and safety studies in a complete and timely manner, requiring the testing of existing chemicals of concern is the only practical way to ensure that the agency obtains the needed information. TSCA places the burden on EPA to demonstrate a need for data on a chemical’s toxicity. As a result, EPA does not routinely assess the risks of the roughly 80,000 industrial chemicals in use. TSCA could be amended to require individual chemical companies or the industry as a whole to compile and submit chemical data, such as that included in the High Production Volume (HPV) Challenge Program. It could also be required as a condition of manufacture or import above some specified volume. Key contributors to this testimony were David Bennett, Antoinette Capaccio, Nancy Crothers, Christine Fishkin, Richard Johnson, and Ed Kratzer. For further information about this testimony, please contact John Stephenson at (202) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov. The Subcommittee may have. questions or concerns that you may have about the report. The report is available online at: http://www.GAO.gov/chemicals. This work is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. Because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. certain toys and child care articles after January 1, 2009, if the products contain concentrations of phthalates exceeding 0.1 percent. In 2008, Congress took similar action. California has also enacted limits on formaldehyde in pressed wood. EPA recently issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking suggesting several regulatory options the agency could pursue under its TSCA section 6 authority to limit exposure to formaldehyde. However, because of the legal hurdles the agency would face in regulating formaldehyde under T SCA, some stakeholders are concerned. have recommended that EPA pursue legislation to control formaldehyde. In our previous reports on TSCA, we identified a number of options that could strengthen EPA’s ability to regulate harmful chemicals. Potential changes to T SCA include reducing the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet to take regulatory action under the act, and amending the standard for judicial review that currently requires a court to hold a TSC a rule unlawful and unlawful. We are happy to discuss these options with the EPA. legal threshold that has proven to be difficult for EPA. In order to regulate an existing chemical under section 6 of TSCA, EPA must find that there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical presents or will present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. EPA officials believe that demonstrating anreasonable risk is a more stringent requirement than demonstrating, for example, a significant risk. The EPA Administrator must consider and publish a distribution in commerce, or disposal or use, or require warning labels on the chemicals. the rule is not supported by substantial evidence in the rulemaking record. As several courts have noted, the substantial evidence standard is more rigorous than the arbitrary and capricious standard normally applied to rulemaking. Further, according to EPA officials, the economic costs of regulating a chemical are usually more easily documented than the risks of the chemical. It is difficult to show substantial evidence that EPA is promulgating the least burdensome requirement. EPA has had difficulty demonstrating that harmful chemicals pose an unreasonable risk. been to consider each regulatory option listed in TSCA, beginning with the least burdensome, and the costs and benefits of each option. The court further criticized EPA’s ban of products for which no substitutes were currently available stating that, in such cases, EPA “bears a tough burden” to demonstrate that a ban is the less burdensome alternative. In addition, the court stated that in evaluating what risks are unreasonable, EPA must consider the costs of any proposed actions. be claimed as confidential business information by chemical manufacturers and processors. EPA generally must protect such information against public disclosure unless such disclosure is necessary to protect against an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. We have previously recommended that the Congress amend TSCA to reduce the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet. Alternatively, the European Union’s recently enacted chemical control legislation, REACH, represents a regulatory model that differs from the T SCA framework in key ways, we say. Under REACH, authority exists to establish restrictions for any chemical that poses unacceptable risks. These restrictions could include banning uses in certain products, banning uses by consumers, or even completely banning the chemical. Authorization will be granted if a manufacturer can demonstrate that the risks from a use of the chemical can be adequately controlled or that the socioeconomic benefits outweigh the risks. In addition, a key aspect of REACH is that it places the burden on the manufacturer to prove that there are no suitable alternatives to be used. when EPA began reviewing chemicals in 1979. Since then, over 21,000 new chemicals were added to the inventory and are now in use as existing chemicals. TSCA generally requires the industry to notify EPA at least 90 days before producing or importing a new chemical. The anticipated production volume, uses, exposure levels, and release estimates outlined in premanufacture notices generally do not have to be amended once manufacturing begins, the authors say. However, the potential risk of injury to human health or the environment may increase when chemical companies increase production levels or expand the uses of a chemical. REACH generally requires that chemical companies provide information on chemicals’ effects on human health and the environment. TSCA generally requires EPA to demonstrate that chemicals pose risks to human health or the environment prior to controlling risks related to their production, distribution, or use. Under REACH, chemical companies must obtain authorization to continue to use a chemical of very high concern, such as a chemical for which there is scientific evidence of probable serious health or environmental effects. Generally, to obtain such authorization, the chemical company must demonstrate that it can adequately control risks posed by the chemical. statement regarding the effects of the chemical on human health and the magnitude of human exposure to the chemical. The benefits of a chemical for various uses and the availability of substitutes for those uses. The reasonably ascertainable economic consequences of the rule, after consideration of the effect on the national economy, small business, technological innovation, the environment, and public health. TSCA offers EPA a range of control options when regulating existing chemicals—ban or restrict a chemical’s production, processing, and use. The Toxic Substances Control Act was enacted in 1976. TSCA authorizes EPA to review chemicals already in commerce (existing chemicals) and chemicals yet to enter commerce (new chemicals) Of the over 83,000 chemicals currently in the T SCA inventory, about 62,000 were already inCommerce. EPA lists chemicals in commerce in theTSCA inventory. EPA has the authority, upon making certain determinations, to collect information about the hazards posed by chemical substances and to take action to control unreasonable risks. on manufacturers, importers, and downstream users to ensure that they manufacture, place on the market, or use such substances that do not adversely affect human health or the environment. While TSCA authorizes EPA to review existing chemicals, it generally provides no specific requirement, time frame, or methodology for doing so. Significantly, the precautionary principle means that where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures.