Legislation and VA regulations have expanded benefit entitlement and added to the volume of claims. VA cautions that ongoing hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the Global War on Terrorism in general, may increase the workload beyond current levels. VA has also noted that claims have increased in part because older veterans are filing disability claims for the first time. For example, some veterans are citing more disabilities in their claims than in the past. Because each disability needs to be evaluated separately, these claims can take longer to process. Fiscal year 2008 request would fund 8,320 full-time equivalent employees working on compensation and pension. VA identified an increase in claims processing staff as essential to reducing the pending claims inventory and improving timeliness. According to VA, with a workforce that is sufficiently large and correctly balanced, it can successfully meet the veterans’ needs while ensuring good stewardship of taxpayer funds. The budget justification would represent an increase of about 6 percent over fiscal year 2006. In addition to the budget justification, the VA would also seek to increase the number of contractors. cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, such as using retired VA employees to provide training. VA expects a temporary decline in productivity as new staff are trained and become more experienced, but expects productivity to increase in the longer term. VA’s budget justification provides information on actual and planned productivity, in terms of claims decided per full-time equivalent employee. Also, VA has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. For example, the use of overtime is being increased. determinations. Board of Veterans’ Appeals had taken actions to strengthen its system for reviewing the quality of its decisions. VA still lacked a systematic method for ensuring the consistency of decision making within VA as a whole. VA has recently taken several steps to improve service delivery, but their potential to lead to significant improvements may be limited by several factors. These steps include requesting funding for additional staff, initiatives to reduce appeal remands, and initiatives to assess and monitor decision consistency. However, limitations on potential improvements include increases in claims. VA reports that it has improved the productivity of the Board’s judges. The Board attributes this improvement to training and mentoring programs. To improve decision consistency, VA has contracted for a study of the major influences. The board expects productivity to improve to 752 decisions in fiscal year 2008. It expects to reduce the percentage of decisions remanded from about 57 percent in fiscalyear 2004 to about 32 percent in Fiscal Year 2006. It also expects to decrease the number of appeals decided from 604 appeals decided in fiscal 2003 to 698 in fiscal 2006. VA’s inventory of pending claims and their average time pending have increased significantly in the last 3 years. Questions remain about consistency of VA”s decisions across regional offices and at the Board of Veterans’ Appeals. The increase is due in part to increased filing of claims, including those filed by veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts. Meanwhile, the time required to resolve appeals remains too long. The average time to resolve an appeal rose from 529 days in 2004 to 657 days in fiscal year 2006.  rating-related claims increased steadily from about 579,000 in fiscal year 2000. VA acknowledges that regional office decision accuracy needs further improvement. VA reports that it has improved the accuracy of decisions on rating related compensation claims from 80 percent in 2002 to 88 percent in 2006. The average time pending is due in part to an increase in claims receipts, according to the VA. The VA says it is working to reduce the number of claims that are still pending by 20 percent by the end of the year. VA attributes some of the increase in the number of claims pending and the average days pending to a September 2003 court decision that required over 62,000 claims to be processed. Since 1999, several court decisions and laws related to VA’s responsibilities to assist veterans in developing their benefit claims have significantly affected VA's ability to process claims in a timely manner. The VA is currently working on a plan to reduce the number and complexity of claims that need to be adjudicated. The plan is expected to be completed by the end of the year. GAO: VA can improve its Procedures for Obtaining Military Service Records. VA Benefits: Other Programs May Provide Lessons for Improving Individual Unemployability Assessments. VA Disability Benefits: Board of Veterans’ Appeals Has Made Improvements in Quality Assurance, but Challenges Remain for VA in Assuring Consistency. GAO: Despite Recent Improvements, Meeting Claims Processing Goals Will Be Challenging. GAo: Better Collection and Analysis of Attrition Data Needed to Enhance Workforce Planning. VA notes that they are receiving more disability claims, such as those related to mental health issues including post-traumatic stress disorder. Claims processing timeliness and decisional accuracy can be hampered if VA cannot obtain the evidence it needs in a timely manner. For example, to obtain information needed to fully develop some post- traumatic stress disorder claims, VBA must obtain records from the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC) This can significantly increase the time it takes to develop a claim. rely on a VBA unit at the National Personnel Records Center to do thorough and reliable searches and analyses of records. Incomplete and inaccurate reports could affect decisional accuracy. VA is taking actions to address its claims processing challenges, but there are opportunities for more fundamental reform that could dramatically improve decision making and processing. These include reexamining program design, as well as the structure and division of labor. For more information, visit the VA's website or go to www.va.gov. the time it takes to decide a claim. In December 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records. VBA agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource prior to sending some requests to the JSRRC. We also reported that while VBA quality reviewers found few decision errors due to failure to obtain military service records, VBA does not know the extent to which the information that is provided to regional offices is reliable and accurate. After more than a decade of research, we have determined that federal disability programs are in urgent need of attention and transformation. Research showed that the disability programs administered by VA and the Social Security Administration lagged behind the scientific advances and economic and social changes that have redefined the relationship between impairments and work. The nature of work has changed in recent decades as the national economy has moved away from manufacturing-based jobs to service- and knowledge-based employment. Yet VA’s and SSA’S disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past. option could have a number of benefits for VA as well as veterans. The lump sum option could reduce the number of claims submitted and allow VA to process claims more quickly. In December 2000, we reported that about one-third of newly compensated veterans could be interested in a lump-sum option. In addition to program design, VA’s regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations. VBA and VBA are part of the Government Accountability Office, which publishes The Federalist. Consolidating claims processing into fewer regional offices could help improve claims processing efficiency, save overhead costs, and improve decisional accuracy and consistency. VA consolidated some of its pension income and eligibility verifications at three regional offices. However, VA has not changed its basic field structure for disability compensation claims. It has consolidated decision making on Benefits Delivery at Discharge claims at the Salt Lake City and Winston-Salem regional offices, but not on original claims for disability Compensation. The VA has also made piecemeal changes to its claims processing field structure. processing compensation and pension claims at 57 regional offices, which experience large performance variations and questions about decision consistency. Unless more comprehensive and strategic changes are made to its field structure, VBA is likely to miss opportunities to substantially improve productivity, accuracy, and consistency, especially in the face of future workload increases. We have recommended that the VA undertake a comprehensive review of itsField structure. While reexamining claims processing challenges may be daunting, there are mechanisms for undertaking such an effort, including the congressionally chartered commission studying veterans’ disability benefits. Claims Adjudication Commission noted that most disability compensation claims are repeat claims. About 65 percent of veterans who began receiving disability compensation in fiscal year 2003 had disabilities rated 30 percent or less. The commission asked Congress to consider paying less severely disabled veterans compensation in a lump sum. According to the commission, the lump sum would be less than $1 million per veteran. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. VA also continues to face questions about its ability to ensure that veterans receive consistent decisions across regional offices. We have identified the need for VA to systematically address this issue to achieve acceptable levels of variation. VA’s Inspector General has studied one indicator of possible inconsistency, the wide variations in average payments per veteran from state to state. In May 2005, the Inspector General reported that compensation payments are affected by many factors and that some disabilities are inherently more susceptible to variations in rating. VA remains well short of its strategic goal of 98 percent. on compensation payments, to develop baseline data for monitoring and managing decision variances. VA is in the process of testing templates for compensation and pension medical examinations for specific types of disabilities. Further, VA formed a workgroup to study variances in the rates of benefit grants and denials, and in assigned disability evaluations. Despite these efforts, VA may be limited in its ability to make and sustain significant claims processing performance improvements, according to the report. The report was published by the RAND Corporation. medical examinations, and treatment records from VA medical facilities and private medical service providers. Once a claim has all the necessary evidence, a rating specialist evaluates the claim and determines whether the claimant is eligible for benefits. A veteran who disagrees with the regional office’s decision can appeal to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals and then to U.S. federal courts. If the Board finds that a case needs additional work such as obtaining additional evidence or contains procedural errors, it can appeal the decision. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. VA continues to experience significant service delivery challenges. While VA made progress in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 reducing the size and age of its pending claims inventory, it has lost ground since then. The commission held its first public hearing in May 2005 and in October 2005, established 31 research questions for study. These questions address such issues as how well disability benefits meet the congressional intent, and the appropriate standard or standards for determining whether a veteran should be compensated. VA pays monthly disability compensation benefits to veterans with service-connected disabilities. VA also pays compensation to some spouses, children, and parents of deceased veterans and service members. VA’s pension program pays monthly benefits based on financial need to certain wartime veterans or their survivors. When a veteran submits a claim to any of the Veterans Benefits Administration's 57 regional offices, a veterans service representative is responsible for obtaining the relevant evidence to evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records. process. VA study and report to the Congress on the effects that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on its disability programs’ eligibility criteria and benefits package. Study would include estimates of the effects on the size, cost, and management of VA’s disability programs and other relevant VA programs and would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes. Another area of program design that could be examined is the option of providing a lump sum payment in lieu of monthly disability compensation. VA plans to pilot paperless Benefits Delivery at Discharge, where service members’ disability claim applications, service medical records, and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge. VA expects that this new process will reduce the time needed to obtain the evidence needed to decide claims. To resolve appeals faster, VA has been working to reduce the number of appeals sent back by the Board of Veterans’ Appeals for further work such as obtaining additional evidence and correcting procedural errors. VA has established joint training and information sharing between field staff and the Board. because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army in the region of the country where you live on the continent of Africa.