The Tenth Circuit has a relatively routine caseload when compared to some of its sister circuits. More than forty percent of the cases that the Tenth Circuit hears are criminal law matters or petitions from the federal government. The lack of a robust record for Judge Gorsuch on environmental law matters may not be surprising. The Tenth Circuit does not hear many environmental law cases because many major environmental statutes require parties challenging nationally applicable federal laws or administrative agency actions to file a petition in the D.C. Circuit. federal or state prisoners, a number in line with the national average for the regional federal courts of appeals. The Tenth Circuit also hears a number of private civil litigation disputes, such as cases on labor, insurance, contract, and tort law. On the other hand, some seven percent of the Tenth Circuit's docket is devoted to administrative agency appeals, a percentage far below that of the D.C. Circuit, where over half the docket consists of administrative matters. Similarly, the Ninth Circuit rarely has the The Supreme Court enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases. Unlike the Supreme Court, the federal courts of appeals are required to hear many cases as a matter of law. As a result, the appellate courts consider "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted" Perhaps indicative of the nature of federal appellate work, the vast majority of cases decided by three-judge panels of federal courts are decided by federal courts. The Supreme Court is bound by Supreme Court and circuit precedent and is not normally in a position to espouse freely their views. Administrative law cases at the Supreme Court are often contentious, resulting in divided decisions on legal issues of national import. The Tenth Circuit's docket does not include as many administrative law cases as other federal courts. In the few cases that have come before the court, the justices have been split 4-4 in favor of the government. On statutory interpretation, the views of the justice he would replace would largely appear to align with those of the Justice he'd replace. On the issue of the scope of an agency's discretion to issue guidance documents to set regulatory policy, the Justice would likely side with the agency in this case. to the degree to which he will defer to the purported interests suggested by claimants seeking to rely upon such laws. The Supreme Court has issued a number of notable opinions over the past decade respecting the First Amendment and freedom of speech. Many of the Court's recent First Amendment rulings have been closely divided, and the eight-member Court split evenly during the October 2015 term on a notable case regarding the First amendment and free speech. Some legal scholars and practitioners have described the Roberts Court as the "strongest First Amendment Supreme Court in our history" A vote to rehear a case en banc could signal disagreement with the legal reasoning of the panel decision. En banc review is extraordinary, and is generally reserved for conflicting precedent within the circuit. A vote for or against rehearing a case does not necessarily equate to an endorsement or repudiation of a particular legal position. Despite having served on the federal appellate bench for a decade, I have never been a member of a rehearing panel. Most of us vote against most such petitions and suggestions even when we think thePanel decision is mistaken. concurring or dissenting opinions are filed, it still may be difficult to determine the preferences of the nominated judge. The act of joining an opinion authored by another judge does not necessarily reflect full agreement with the underlying opinion. For example, in an effort to promote consensus on a court, some judges will decline to dissent unless the underlying issue is particularly contentious. As one commentator notes, "[T]he fact that a judge joins in a majority opinion may not be taken as indicating complete agreement. Rather, silent acquiescence" Use caution when interpreting a judge's vote isolated from a written opinion. For example, a vote to grant an extension of time for a party to submit a filing generally does not signal agreement with the substantive legal position proffered by that party. And while some observers have highlighted votes by Judge Gorsuch in favor of the Supreme Court, it may be understood to mean something more like 'I accept the outcome in this case, and I accept that the reasoning in the majority opinion reflects what a majority of my colleagues has agreed on' deciding a weighty question of first impression and recognizing a previously unrecognized constitutional right. In a 2009 concurrence, the nominee wrote that "[j]udicial restraint usually means answering the questions we must, not those we can" In a number of opinions the nominee expressly limited the scope of the majority opinions he authored. He has also frequently concurred or dissented to take issue with majority opinions that, in his view, reached issues that were unnecessary to the court's ultimate holding. The nominee is not wholly opposed to scrutinizing a state's imposition of the death penalty. In line with his general views on judicial restraint, he generally accords a large degree of deference to decisions by state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials. One issue over which the Court has remained divided concerns the manner in which states carry out executions. The nominee's votes and opinions suggest that, while the nominee is not wholly opposed to scrutinizing a state's imposition of the death penalty, he is generally deferential to its decisions. certification is appropriate, which he then relied upon in several subsequent cases. "While we apply judgment and restraint before certifying, . . . we will nonetheless employ the device in circumstances where the question before us (1) may be determinative of the case at hand," he said. In articulating these principles, the nominee emphasized that "[i]n making the assessment whether to certify, we also seek to give meaning and respect to the federal character of our judicial system," he added. Under the McDonnell Douglas test, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination, and then the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the plaintiff can still prevail by offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual. In Paup v. Gear Products, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch joined a per curiam opinion that, while acknowledging McDonnell Douglas was "binding on us" in the case at hand, noted criticism that its multipart, burden shifting test is unfair. Douglas test "has proven of limited value even in its native waters," with the Tenth Circuit finding it inapplicable outside of motions for summary judgment in cases relying on circumstantial evidence. While it is unclear whether the elimination of the McDonnell Douglas test would necessarily favor a particular side in employment litigation, legal commentators have noted that because the test is "bedrock employment law doctrine" any limits Judge Gorsuch might impose on the use of this test could cause a "significant change in how employment discrimination lawsuits are prosecuted and prosecuted" Gorsuch's most pointed critique of McDonnell Douglas came in a 2016 First Amendment retaliation case, Walton v. Powell. Rejecting the defendant's argument that the test should be applied in a free association case, the nominee noted that the "special and idiosyncratic" McDonnell Douglas test is not "helpful enough to justify the costs and burdens associated with its administration" In Barrett v. Salt Lake County , the nominee highlighted criticism by two colleagues that the Test is "not helpful enough" to justify its administration. to be arbitrary, capricious, [or] an abuse of discretion." The nominee has joined or written several unanimous decisions upholding agency actions. However, the nominee has sometimes departed from his colleagues and written separately to find agency actions arbitrary and capricous. The majority panel upheld the Board's decision to "exclude interim earnings from backpay calculations when the employer has wrongfully reduced employee wages" in National Labor Relations Board v. Community Health Services. The nominee doubted that the parties received fair notice of applicable rules and regulations. The agency had considerable discretion under the National Labor Relations Act to determine how back pay should be calculated. Judge Gorsuch dissented, claiming that the agency's decision failed to explain why it treated similarly situated entities differently. His opinion faulted the agency for essentially announcing a new rule without justification, and arbitrarily distinguishing between situations where terminated employees worked reduced hours, but not terminated employment. The majority noted that while the decision was inconsistent with prior determinations, the agency had plenty of discretion to make the decision.  Secsys is unusual in that the plaintiff corporation alleged that state officials had deprived it of equal protection by requiring it to award a subcontract under a state contract to a specific individual. Judge Gorsuch rejected this claim, in part, on the grounds that the state officials would have required a similar subcontracting agreement from any other contractor, making Secsys' claim moot. The ruling also explains what types of government action may be subject to heightened scrutiny, and explains what type of government actions may be under heightened scrutiny. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in the case. A majority of the High Court voted to affirm the Tenth Circuit's decision in Dolan. Justice Scalia joined a dissenting opinion authored by Chief Justice Roberts that viewed the "clear statutory text" to preclude the court from granting restitution more than 90 days after sentencing. It could suggest certain differences between his textualist approach and that of Justice Scalia, writes Julian Zelizer. "This difference between the Tenth Court's textualist interpretation ... seems to have been shaped primarily by the different emphases that Justice Scalia had," Zelizer says. the Tenth Circuit and the Chief Justice gave to different words in the statute. The Tenth Circuit focused on the "notwithstanding" clause, viewing it as mandating restitution in every case. The dissenters on the High Court, in contrast, relied, at least in part, on the phrase "n notwithstanding any other provision of law," which they say requires restitution even if it is not made at sentencing or within 90 days thereof. The Supreme Court's ruling is expected to be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. At issue was language in the Mandatory Victims Restoration Act stating that the "court shall set a date for the final determination of the victim's losses, not to exceed 90 days after sentencing" The defendant argued that the language was jurisdictional, which would have meant that the court lacked the authority to enter any restitution order after the 90 days had passed. A unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit in United States v. Dolan ruled in favor of the defendant in the case. The case was decided on a unanimous vote. Gorsuch wrote that the 90-day rule was a claims processing rule intended to promote speed and unconnected to the court's authority. In so doing, the nominee noted various factors, including the "statute's language and structure," as well as an interpretative canon calling for courts to construe statutes as "directory," rather than jurisdictional. Although Dolan was written relatively early in Judge Gorsuch's tenure, it was written early in the judge's tenure as a federal judge. the Ninth Circuit—where he was sitting by designation—in Kastl v. Maricopa County Community College District. In both cases, unanimous panels purported to rely on direct precedent in reaching their conclusions. For example, in Druley , the panel noted Tenth Circuit precedent holding that transsexuals are not members of a class for which heightened heightened protection is required. In Druley, the court held that a transsexual instructor whose contract was not renewed after she had been banned from using the women's restroom "until she could prove completion of sex reassignment surgery" Government with endorsement. Contending that "like cases should be treated alike," Judge Gorsuch's dissent further argued that the county's "inclusive display" of the Ten Commandments was indistinguishable from the display at issue in Van Orden v. Perry. In that case, the Supreme Court had upheld a display of the decalogue among other monuments and historic markers on the grounds of the Texas state capitol. Given these perceived parallels, the nominee's dissent concluded by noting the "long" custom of displaying the Ten commandments in public places. In United States v. Manatau, Judge Gorsuch relied on the plain language of sentencing guidelines to reach a more lenient interpretation of the mens rea requirement. The court also noted the longstanding tradition in American criminal law of restricting liability to "cases where an intentional choice to do wrong is present" A more stringent approach to mens. rea requirements is often associated with concerns about overcriminalization, something that Judge. Gorsuch has criticized in much the same way Justice Scalia did. to determine how to apply the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA) to those whose offenses occurred prior to its enactment, had foisted too much of its authority on the executive branch. He explained his view that: By separating the lawmaking and law enforcement functions, the framers sought to thwart the ability of an individual or group to exercise arbitrary or absolute power. And by restricting lawmaking to one branch and forcing any legislation to endure bicameralism and presentment, they sought to make the task of lawmaking more arduous still. reflected by their dictionary definitions. In his 2015 opinion for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz, Judge Gorsuch diagrammed a segment of a sentence in a criminal statute. The specific interpretative question in Rentz was whether multiple charges could be brought against the same person at the same time. In Figure 1 below, the nominee shows how he diagrammed the sentence to help address the underlying interpretativequestion in the Rentz case. For more information, visit the U.S. Supreme Court's website. including his 2015 opinion for the majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz . Like Games-Perez , the Rentz case was concerned with how to interpret a federal criminal statute related to firearms. Judge Gorsuch's opinion, which primarily centered on a text-based interpretation of the statute, also suggested that his interpretation was consistent with constitutional requirements. Specifically, the statutory provision in question could not be reasonably construed, the judge said in his opinion. He also said that the statute was not a violation of the U.S. Constitution. The nominee relied primarily on the "plain text" of the statute. The majority construed that plaintiffs attempting to bring civil actions under other federal laws "seeking the same relief IDEA supplies" must exhaust certain procedures set forth in the IDEA "'to the same extent' as you must to bring a civil action under IDEA itself" The dissenting judge argued that the majority had "misread" the statute in question by viewing Section 1415( l ) of Title 20 of the United States Code as unambiguously imposing certain requirements. in support of a primarily text based interpretation, asserting that "[t]o the extent any ambiguity remains, we don't default to the most severe possible interpretation of the statute" The nominee opined that invoking the rule when construing ambiguous criminal statutes helps to ensure that individuals have "fair warning" when lawmakers want to impose criminal consequences to certain conduct. He also noted that the rule promotes separation-of-powers principles by ensuring that the legislature, and the public, have fair warning. may be brought under Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the United States Code against a defendant who fired a single shot that hit two separate victims. The total number of charges lodged against a criminal defendant under the statute should never "exceed the number of uses, carries, or possessions" Just as you can't throw more touchdowns during the fourth quarter than the total amount of times you have thrown a touchdown, you cannot use a gun to kill two people at the same time. filed a putative class action in state court alleging unlawful trade practices involving allegedly misleading website disclosures. When the defendant sought to remove the case to federal court pursuant to the federal Class Action Fairness Act, the district court refused to exercise jurisdiction. The district court found the defendant failed to meet its burden of showing that over $5 million was "in controversy," as required by the statute. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion based on a detailed construction of the statutory term " in controversy" "mass action" under the Class Action Fairness Act. The district court denied this request. In a unanimous opinion analyzing whether the Tenth Circuit had jurisdiction to hear an interlocutory appeal under the Act, Judge Gorsuch's analysis hinged largely on the plain language of the statute. "When we interpret a statute we begin, of course, with its plain terms," he said. "And here, as we've mentioned, the text of [the relevant provision of the Act] provides that a court of appeals 'may accept an appeal' from an order of remand" of appeals not [more] than 7 days after entry of the order.'" Noting that "[t]he statute doesn't place any other conditions on our discretion," the nominee allowed the interlocutory appeal. In Shook v. Board of County Commissioners of the County of El Paso, the district court denied the motion for class certification of county jail inmates with mental health needs. The district court concluded that the proposed class would be unmanageable, chiefly because of the difficulty of managing it. of fashioning relief that would be applicable to the class as a whole. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch affirmed this conclusion in a unanimous opinion based on a close examination of the "two independent but related requirements" of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23. The nominee concluded that the rule "demands a certain cohesiveness among class members with respect to their injuries, the absence of which can preclude certification," as he found the rule did in Shook. Although he has few judicial opinions on the matter, Judge Scalia has also expressed clear opinions. action and provide for procedural devices, such as class action suits, broad enforcement of arbitration clauses, or other means. In Hammond v. Stamps.com, Inc. , for example, the plaintiff claimed it was a class action. In civil liability cases, Judge Gorsuch has shown a tendency to examine closely the federal statute or rule in question, especially in cases involving determinations of eligibility for class action status. But these views appear to be more nuanced when applied to the facts of particular cases. presided" on the Senate Judiciary Committee's "Questionnaire for Nominee to the Supreme Court" Two of the ten cases Judge Gorsuch selected were opinions that affirmed the dismissal of civil claims by the district court. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for example, the nominee lamented: It took a titanic fifteen years for the case to go to trial. The nominee lamented that the case took 15 years to get to the court because of the nature of the case. displaces state causes of action, such as tort claims. In determining whether federal law preempts common law tort claims, the nominee's approach is centrally grounded in the words of the federal statute at issue. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for instance, property owners filed a class action against the company. The judge's approach has resulted in judgments both in favor of and against civil defendants, as well as against the defendants in the case in question. sue businesses that may have harmed them. In other cases, Justice Scalia cast important votes in cases that more narrowly interpreted the scope of federal law to limit corporate defendants' potential civil liability. Given Justice Scalia's decisions, commentators have considered how Judge Gorsuch might affect the Roberts Court's perceived "warmth" toward businesses on civil liability matters if the nominee were to be confirmed to the Court. Should he be elevated to the High Court, Judge Gorsuch could also be influential in the area of enforcement of arbitration provisions. some commentators suggest that Judge Gorsuch would limit the exposure of civil defendants. Through his judicial and nonjudicial writings, Judge Gorsuch has expressed an interest in issues related to civil liability. This interest is evident in several pointed critiques that he has authored on what he perceives as the misuses or excesses of litigation. In addition, when asked to identify "the 10 most significant cases over which you have an opinion," Judge Gorsuch said he would like to see the case settled in a civil trial. elevated to the Supreme Court, involves the procedural and substantive limits that federal law imposes on the exposure of defendants to monetary liability in civil cases. This is because Justice Scalia, whom Judge Gorsuch could succeed on the Court, cast critical votes in several closely contested cases that read federal law relatively expansively to restrict the ability of plaintiffs to use class action litigation to facilitate civil recoveries. The case involves lawsuits resulting from allegedly faulty products, discriminatory practices, or fraudulent activities. The judge could succeed if he is confirmed. In 2005, the nominee, then in private practice, coauthored two articles critical of securities fraud class actions. While acknowledging "some of the social benefits" of class action lawsuits, Judge Gorsuch also described the "vast social costs" resulting from these types of suits. "Economic incentives unique to securities litigation encourage class action lawyers to bring meritless claims," he wrote. "These same incentives operate to encourage significant attorneys' fee awards even in cases where class members receive little meaningful compensation," he added. to habeas petitions lodged by state prisoners. Such themes are evident in his dissent from a denial of a request for a rehearing en banc in Williams v. Jones. In that case, the majority declined to review a panel opinion that required a district court to craft a remedy for what the panel determined to have been ineffective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations in a criminal case. In his dissent, Judge Gorsuch asserted that the panel's "holding represents a significant new federal intrusion into state judicial functions" conflicts with the decisions of a number of other courts, including the Utah Supreme Court. In another habeas case, Wood v. Milyard , while the nominee's unanimous opinion held that a state procedural default did not bar federal ha beas review, he noted that federal courts must respect state court rules when appropriate. "As a matter of comity and federalism, . . . we will usually hold our tongues about any potential federal law violation lurking in the background," he said. prudential standing in a challenge brought against a local government entity under the Supremacy Clause. In Kerr v. Hickenlooper, a suit brought by state legislators claiming that a voter initiative violated the Constitution's Guarantee Clause, the original three-judge panel rejected arguments that the court lacked jurisdiction over the case. Judge Gorsuch dissented from a subsequent denial of rehearing en banc, arguing that the case presented a nonjusticiable political question. He concluded that the Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction in the first place. Judge Neil Gorsuch has expressed a preference for state courts to decide novel matters of state law. In Pino v. United States, he laid out certain principles to guide the determination of when a state law question should be decided. "We are equally aware of our obligation to defend the law's promise of finality," he said. "I am keenly sensitive to our duty to provide appropriate respect for and deference to state proceedings," he added. "It is my hope that the American people will see this as a good thing," the judge said. should be decided when possible by state, not federal, courts. Judge Gorsuch's preference for leaving novel questions of state law to the state courts also informed a dissent he authored in a habeas case. In Wilson v. Workman , the nominee faulted the majority for "ventur[ing] a guess about the meaning ofState law" He asserted that "[a]sking the [state court] to interpret its own rule . . . would have had the benefit . . ." of 'help[ing to build a cooperative federalism' were unlawfully trying to displace tribal authority through such prosecutions. Judge Gorsuch acknowledged that the federal Anti-Injunction Act "usually precludes federal courts from enjoining ongoing state court proceedings" "Out of respect for comity and federalism," he relied upon "an important exception" He said federal courts can enjoin state proceedings when it's necessary "to protect or effectuate" a previous federal judgment. In reaching this conclusion, he emphasized comity, federalism and cooperative federalism. Gorsuch: Certification's useful role in promoting a cooperative federalism. A related aspect of federalism is the doctrine of state sovereign immunity. In Hill v. Kemp, he wrote a unanimous opinion reversing a district court's dismissal of certain counts against a state official. The Supreme Court has recognized underlies the Eleventh Amendment, and is a fundamental aspect of sovereignty retained by the states under the federal system established by the Constitution. It is a part of the reason for sending questions of state law to the state. raised in appropriate future cases, I believe we would do well to consider closely its invitation to restore the balance between state and federal courts. The nominee's respect for state court decisions and interpretations appears to be grounded in his support for the broader concept of a cooperative federalism. For we should be able to expect both that justice will be done in cases like this one and that it'll be done while exhibiting the sort of cooperative federalist that has traditionally defined our law, the nominee says in a statement. only appropriate, but also vital to a system of cooperative federalism. He has also recognized limits to such deference, particularly when the actions of a state or its subdivisions are in clear conflict with federal court judgments. For example, in Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah & Ouray Reservation v. Utah , the nominee wrote a unanimous opinion that granted an injunction preventing state and county officials from prosecuting Indian tribe members for crimes committed on tribal land. In that case, the tribe had prevailed in federal court four decades earlier on its claims that Utah and several local governments were in conflict. on Eleventh Amendment grounds. In reaching this outcome, the nominee reviewed extensively the Supreme Court's eleventh Amendment jurisprudence. Judge Gorsuch concluded that the case fell "within the scope of Ex parte Young and was not barred by the Eleventh amendment" He also noted that "the Supreme Court has in recent years added a new gloss on Young "s gloss on Hans "'s gloss on the Ele11 Amendment" He found the case could be decided on the sole question of whether the relief was prospective in nature. Gorsuch does not appear to have significantly addressed the merits of a takings claim in a judicial opinion. This is unsurprising, as the Tenth Circuit does not hear many takings claims. The Tucker Act vests the U.S. Court of Federal Claims (CFC) with jurisdiction over such claims when the plaintiff seeks more than $10,000 in compensation from the federal government. With limited exceptions, the CFC's jurisdiction overSuch claims is exclusive, with limited exceptions. and appeals from the CFC are heard by the Federal Circuit, not the Tenth Circuit. If Judge Gorsuch is elevated, he could very well hear takings issues on the Court's docket. However, there is currently an insufficient basis to evaluate his views regarding the scope of the Takings Clause, the judge said in a letter to the Senate Judiciary Committee. The letter was written by Judge Neil M. Altschuler, the former chief judge of the Federal Court of Appeals for the Tenth and Eleventh Circuits. The Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) might be read as favoring arbitration over litigation. In Howard v. Ferrellgas, Judge Gorsuch read the FAA to require a remand to the district court to determine whether the parties had opted for arbitration. In Ragab v. Howard, the nominee disagreed with the panel majority's conclusion that a collection of conflicting arbitration provisions in the parties' contracts was unenforceable. Like arbitration, preemption—the circumstance in which federal law preempts state laws that single out arbitration clauses for disfavored treatment—is possible. BP sought to remove the case to federal court as a state case. Judge found "federal jurisdiction here beyond doubt," thereby allowing the class action to proceed in federal court. BP Am erica , Inc. v. Oklahoma ex rel. Edmondson was a suit brought in state court alleging manipulations of propane gas prices in violation of state law. The case was settled out of court in 2010. The judge ruled that the case was a federal matter. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court. under the federal Price-Anderson Act and state tort law against operators of a nuclear weapons manufacturing plant to recover for damages caused by releases of plutonium and other hazardous substances. After the federal claims failed, the district court disallowed the case to proceed on the state law claims, holding that they were preempted by federal law. Judge Gorsuch disagreed, saying: "Where does any of this language—expressly—preempt and preclude all state law tort recoveries for plaintiffs who plead but do not prove nuclear incidents? We just don't see it" Cosmetics Act (FDCA). This provision, however, has a complex history of statutory interpretation by the Supreme Court. Judge Gorsuch noted that one such case articulated the following test for preemption, stating: "[T]ort suits do not impose new 'requirements' on manufacturers and are not preempted so long as the duties they seek to impose 'parallel' duties found in the FDCA" But, Judge Gorsuch stated, "the Court's answer only invited the next question: when exactly does a state law duty 'par parallel' a federal law duty enough to evade preemption?" Amendment, noting that "gun possession is often lawful and sometimes even protected as a matter of constitutional right" Judge Gorsuch's opinions could, in part, be seen to reflect or even expand on the precedent of the Supreme Court's decision in Heller. In a few cases, such as Pope , the opinions cite to other judges who have taken a different view of Heller 's dictum, at least in particular contexts. But these citations may be intended to signal awareness of these judges' arguments, rather than agreement with them. in his judicial writings to date. Judge Gorsuch has touched upon the Second Amendment and the constitutionality of firearms regulations briefly in his written opinions while on the Tenth Circuit. However, none of these cases purported to explore the scope of the 2nd Amendment's protections or the Supreme Court's decisions in District of Columbia v. Heller and McDonald v. City of Chicago. These writings suggest that Judge Gorsuch views the2nd Amendment as generally protecting an individual right to bear arms, a position that could be seen as consistent with the originalist approach often ascribed to him. The longstanding Tenth Circuit precedent is that the government need only prove knowing possession of a firearm. In his dissent in Games-Perez, Judge Gorsuch opined that reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute as "leapfrogging over the first statutorily specified element and touching down only at the second listed element" "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic," among other or whether the government needs to prove only that the defendant knowingly possessed a firearm, he said. firearm during and in relation to crimes of violence more than the total number of times you have used a firearm. Previously, in dissenting from the denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez , Judge Gorsuch had expressed similar concerns about reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute. According to Judge Gorsuch, such a reading "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic," he says. The judge's textualist approach is sometimes said to have led to "defendant-friendly" results. to firearms restrictions in which Justice Scalia notably participated during his time on the High Court. The most notable of these was arguably Judge Gorsuch's dissent from the Tenth Circuit's denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez. At issue in that case was whether federal statutes penalizing the possession of firearms by felons require the government to prove that a defendant knew of both his own status as a felon and his possession of a firearm. The case was decided in favor of the defendant. opinion rejecting a necessity defense to a federal gun charge as a matter of law. In another case, he joined a unanimous opinion authored by another judge concluding that law enforcement did not violate the Fourth Amendment rights of a defendant carrying a concealed handgun. The law of the state in question exempted persons with valid licenses to carry concealed weapons, among others, from its general prohibition upon carrying loaded firearms in public. However, in the Tenth Circuit's view, the existence of this exemption did not negate it. law enforcement's reasonable suspicion, at the time when the defendant was detained, that the defendant's possession of the firearm was unlawful. With respect to Separation of Powers, the Tenth Circuit docket does not appear to have afforded Judge Gorsuch an opportunity to evaluate any rifts between the President and Congress involving the allocation of war powers or executive claims of exclusivity in the law. The Tenth Circuit does not seem to have given Judge Gorsuch a chance to evaluate the President's claim of exclusive war powers. Gorsuch wrote a notable dissent in United States v. Nicholson. The issue in Nicholson was whether a police officer, who mistakenly thought the defendant had violated a local traffic ordinance, could seize evidence from the defendant's car. A year and a half after the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Nicholson , the Supreme Court effectively sided with Judge Gorsuch's more flexible view of the exclusionary rule. The Supreme Court held in a different case that a mistake of law can "give rise to the reasonable suspicion necessary to uphold" a traffic stop under the Fourth Amendment. Gorsuch helped shape jurisprudence in ways that could be seen to favor criminal defendants. He participated in notable decisions regarding searches and seizures, the exclusionary rule, ineffective assistance of counsel, and various statutory criminal law matters. His views on the Confrontation Clause and the scope of self-incrimination rights under the Fifth Amendment are less clear because he has not written on them to a significant extent. On the whole, though, his opinions are seemingly shaped by his views regarding how legal texts, particularly the Constitution and statutes, are to be construed. The nominee has taken an originalist approach to construing the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures. In several opinions, Judge Gorsuch voiced sentiments similar to those of Justice Scalia about the need for the "rule of law" to be "a law of rules" The courts are exclusively responsible for defining the playing field on which criminal suspects and the government interact, he has said. He has described the "constant competition between constable and quarry" in his opinions. The nominee is expected to be confirmed to the Supreme Court later this year. the ordinance relied on by the police officer did not provide a legal basis for the stop. The majority decision held that a failure to understand the law by the "very person charged with enforcing it" was objectively unreasonable and warranted suppression of the evidence seized. Judge Gorsuch in dissent rejected the view that an officer's mistake of law " always violates the Fourth Amendment" Instead, he argued that, when the law at issue is "deeply ambiguous," the law should be treated as a reasonableness inquiry. Judge Gorsuch dissented from the majority's holding that federal agents did not abridge the defendant's Fourth Amendment rights when they approached the house where he was staying. In so doing, he noted that, at the time when the Fourth Amendment was drafted, "the common law permitted government agents to enter a home or its curtilage only with the owner's permission" He also observed that at common law, homeowners could generally revoke licenses to enter their property at their pleasure, and "state officials no less than private visitors could be liable for trespass" The government had obtained one of the defendant's messages from an Internet service provider and opened the message and its accompanying attachments. The government argued, among other things, that this search was permissible pursuant to the "private search doctrine" Judge Gorsuch wrote on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel in holding that a government entity had conducted an impermissible search in United States v. Ackerman. In the second case involving the scope of the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures, Judge Scalia wrote for the unanimous panel. a person's effects that had previously been searched by a private third party. However, in his opinion, the nominee rejected this argument because the third party in Ackerman had not opened the email to view its contents. In so doing, the court noted that the "Fourth Amendment was no less protective of persons and property against governmental invasions than the common law was at the time of founding" Another area implicating the Fourth Amendment's protections against government invasions is the right to a private attorney. The nominee's dissent in a case on another often litigated issue in constitutional criminal law did not ultimately become the prevailing view at the High Court. In Williams v. Jones , Judge Gorsuch served on a panel reviewing the ineffective assistance claim of a criminal defendant. Three years after Williams , the Supreme Court, in a pair of 5-4 decisions for which Justice Scalia wrote dissenting opinions, held that the Sixth Amendment right to adequate assistance of counsel extends to the negotiation and consideration of plea bargains. Gorsuch's views on capital punishment may be particularly important insofar as he would, if confirmed, be replacing Justice Scalia, who believed the death penalty was fully consistent with the Eighth Amendment. With two Justices currently on the Court who have argued openly that the practice is unconstitutional in all its forms, Judge Gorsuch could be influential. Although the nominee has not written extensively onCapital punishment, he has authored or accessory liability. He appears willing to scrutinize state court decisions that appear to contravene existing constitutional protections for capital defendants if those protections are clearly articulated in Supreme Court decisions. jurors because of their alleged bias in favor of capital punishment. All three judges on the panel agreed that the prisoner's convictions should be affirmed. Judge Gorsuch disagreed with the other two judges on a panel on the question of whether the state court of appeals had neglected to apply controlling Supreme Court precedent properly in assessing the petitioner's claim of juror bias during sentencing. He argued that the court should defer to the state appeals court's statements in its opinion, which indicated that the state trial court had applied the correct standard. Judge Gorsuch authored a dissent arguing that a state court's decision to exclude evidence in accordance with state evidentiary rules amounted to an adjudication on the merits. A further example of his tendency to defer to the states on capital punishment issues is his opinion in Eizember v. Trammel, in which the court reviewed the convictions and death sentence of a man who had murdered a married couple and committed various other crimes. The prisoner argued that the state trial court should have excluded evidence in the case. death pursuant to a judgment of a state court may challenge their convictions and sentences in federal court. Such prisoners may file a petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) requires federal courts to accord a large degree of deference to state court decisions when reviewing a prisoner's conviction or sentence. This deferential standard of review, which is, generally, a judicial determination as to whether the prisoner should receive a new trial, new sentence, or be released. Gorsuch has authored or joined majority opinions denying such relief in a number of cases. In a few cases, the judge has dissented from majority opinions granting such relief, arguing that the court should have accorded more deference to the state court's decision to reject the inmate's challenges to the death penalty.is designed to avoid friction between the federal government and the states, typically makes it difficult for an inmate to prevail in a federal habeas case. Like Justice Scalia, he rarely voted to grant petitioners' applications for federal ha beas relief in death penalty cases. In Wilson v. Workman, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals rejected two death row inmates' claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. The Tenth Circuit, sitting en banc, held that the deferential standard of review of state court decisions under AEDPA does not apply when the state court fails to consider material evidence. The state court has not adjudicated the claim "on the merits" under AedPA. His sentence or conviction. He was sentenced to death by lethal injection. He is currently on death row. In December 2016, the Supreme Court split 4-4 over whether to stay (i.e., suspend pending further review) the execution of an Alabama man who had challenged the state's method of administering the death penalty. The tie vote resulted in the denial of the inmate's application for a stay and left in place a decision by the Eleventh Circuit that had rejected as untimely and unmeritorious the prisoner's Eighth Amendment challenge to the drug protocol that the State of Alabama uses. of Lockett v. Fallin , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion affirming the dismissal of an Eighth Amendment claim brought by an executed prisoner's estate. The court, relying on recent guidance from the Supreme Court, held that an accidental and "isolated mishap" that occurs during an execution does not violate the Eighth Amendment even if it causes some pain. The nominee's views on the death penalty may also find expression in opinions he has authored or joined reviewing federal district court decisions on habeas corpus petitions. Alabama used in its lethal injections. Judge Gorsuch's votes in support of two Tenth Circuit opinions rejecting similar challenges to the method in which a state carried out executions suggests that, if confirmed, he might provide a fifth vote against such challenges. In Warner v. Gross , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion holding that the use of the drug midazolam in executions by lethal injection was unlikely to violate the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. The Supreme Court later affirmed that decision by a vote of 5-4. Trammel , Judge Gorsuch agreed that the court should deny the petitioner's claim for relief. But he expressed concerns with the state court's apparent willingness to impose capital punishment on an accomplice. The judge wrote that the Eighth Amendment phrase "cruel and unusual punishment" would likely bar such a concept of punishment. He wrote that such a punishment would likely be illegal under the First Amendment's Eighth Amendment clause, which protects the right to a fair trial and the presumption of innocence in a criminal case. Gorsuch's writings on fundamental rights and substantive due process are found not in his court opinions, but in his outside work. He wrote a book in 2006 entitled The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia. In assessing the philosophical arguments related to assisted suicide and euthanasia, the nominee addressed key legal doctrines implicating the right to die. The book raises more questions about the underlying legal issues than it attempts to resolve definitively, writes Julian Zelizer, a former Supreme Court justice. better than that" and "the law demands more than that." In fact, much of the book has little to do with the law. At its heart, the book explores the various ethical arguments regarding assisted suicide and euthanasia. Judge Gorsuch argues that "the intentional taking of a human life by private persons is always wrong" The book does not address "publicly authorized forms of killing like capital punishment and war," nor does it address assisted suicide or euthanasia as a medical procedure. It ultimately lodging an argument against their legalization "based on secular moral theory" v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill, that collectively upheld state laws that outlawed assisted suicide against substantive due process and equal protection challenges. Judge Gorsuch devotes a chapter to questions related to determining whether a right to assisted suicide can be justified by looking at past historical practices. He notes that the test is the subject of "considerable methodological disputes," including "what 'level' of historical abstraction" is needed, "whose history" should be evaluated and "how far back" in history the test should look. judgment" approach whereby "moral reasoning" and "critical discourse"dictate what constitutes a fundamental right. In recent years, a divided Court appears to have moved toward such an approach. Judge Gorsuch neither endorses nor rejects the reasoned judgment approach, opting instead to ask open questions that "one might" ask about the efficacy of such a method of interpretation. Nonetheless, the book does question the reach of Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey , which could be seen to be based on the "reasoned judgment" approach. Wade 's central holding respecting the right to an abortion, grounded the decision partly on the moral argument that "choices central to personal dignity and autonomy" "are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment" The Casey plurality also concluded that the doctrine of stare decisis—or respect for long settled law, required upholding Roe. Relying on this second holding to respond to autonomy based arguments for a right to assisted suicide, Judge Gorsuch contended that Casey should be viewed as based on its "narrowest rationale" In Michael H. v. Gerald D. , Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion, joined by Justice Kennedy, had rejected the conclusion in Justice Scalia's plurality opinion that courts should look to the "most specific" level at which a relevant tradition protecting, or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified. Noting the distinction between the history of the law on assisted suicide and the laws on suicide more generally, Judge Gorsuch questioned "whether Justices O’Connor and Kennedy meant to suggest in Michael. H. V. that a court actually may disregard" the history. Atheists expressed skepticism regarding interpretations of the First Amendment that discourage accommodation for religious views. He appears to favor an approach that is more restrained in using the power of judicial review in Establishment Clause cases. In two cases subsequently reviewed by the Supreme Court, the nominee authored or joined opinions involving challenges under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) He did discuss the substantive claims in broader terms than the majority opinion, suggesting that the nominee may have a clear preference for accommodation in free exercise disputes. If confirmed to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the jurisprudence regarding freedom of religion. In recent years, the Court has taken up a number of religious freedom cases. In contrast to other areas of law, where Judge Gorsuch's views remain uncertain, freedom of Religion is a subject on which the nominee has expressed fairly clear views, writes Julian Zelizer. The Supreme Court has, at times, read the First Amendment to bar certain government actions that endorse religion. subterfuge to avoid laws they'd prefer to ignore. Judge Gorsuch is apt to interpret statutory free exercise laws, much like the Establishment Clause, to embrace the role of religion in society. But there are limits to how far free exercise can go, he says. The Supreme Court should be careful not to over-interpret RFRA, he writes. The court should also be wary of the effect of RFRA on religious freedom, he adds. "There are limits" to free exercise, the court should be aware of. a sufficiently compelling interest in imposing a substantial burden on the religious exercise of an inmate who was an enrolled member of the Northern Arapaho Tribe. In so doing, the nominee articulated two relatively pro-plaintiff interpretations of free exercise law. Similarly, in Abdulhaseeb v. Calbone , Judge Gorsuch joined the court in determining a claimant's sincerity. He rejected a conception of the compelling interest inquiry that would allow the government to rely on abstract interests to satisfy its burden under RLUIPA. the majority opinion and authored a concurring opinion reinstating several RLUIPA claims based on an Oklahoma prison's denial of an Islamic prisoner's request for a halal certified diet. In his concurrence, the nominee emphasized that the inmate's charge was that he was denied "all means of accessing food [that] he can eat consistent with his . . . sincerely held religious beliefs" The claim that "lies at [the] heart" of a statutory free exercise claim, he said, is that the prison "effectively forcing him to choose between remaining pious or starving" Gorsuch has emphasized the importance of accommodating religious beliefs in other statutory free exercise challenges. For instance, in Yellowbear v. Lambert , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a three-judge panel, held that a Wyoming prison lacked a right to practice its religion. The close division of the current Court on free exercise matters may reflect the close division on the issue. The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case in the next few weeks. The case will be heard in the Supreme Court's San Francisco branch. Gorsuch's concurrence in Abdulhaseeb rejected the prisoner's other claims, including the claim that the prison had violated his rights under RLUIPA merely by placing "jell-o and pudding" on the cafeteria tray. For a plaintiff "to win" under the law "takes no small effort," he said. Such laws do "not offer refuge to canny operators who seek through through," he added. The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case in the coming weeks. causes the death of a human embryo." The majority of the Tenth Circuit concluded that the ACA contraceptive coverage requirement likely created a substantial burden on the organization's free exercise rights. The Tenth Circuit deferred to the plaintiff's conception of its religious beliefs, and, viewing the dilemma posed by the contraceptive policy as a "Hobson's choice" in which the corporations and its owners could pay substantial fines for violating the requirement or "compromise their religious beliefs," concluded the policy amounted to a burden. describing the majority approach as "dangerous . . . to religious liberty" because it is "not the job of the judiciary to tell people what their religious beliefs are" On appeal, the High Court agreed to hear multiple lower court decisions on this issue. In the consolidated case, Zubik v. Burwell , ordered the respective circuit courts to reconsider the cases after affording the parties time to reach a compromise that would provide contraceptive coverage without imposing the alleged burden on the challenging entities. "override other legal mandates, including its own statutes, if and when they encroach on religious liberty," he wrote. Two years later, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion in Little Sisters of the Poor v. Burwell that repeated many of the themes of his Hobby Lobby concurrence. The central issue was whether allowing religious entities that objected to the ACA requirement to fill out a form that would functionally require a third-party insurer to provide the coverage violates the free speech rights of religious groups. Judge Harris Hartz, joined by four other judges, dissented from the decision not to rehear a case dismissing a challenge to this government accommodation policy. Hartz's opinion criticized the panel's refusal "to acknowledge that [the plaintiff's] religious belief is that execution of the [accommodation] documents is sinful" In so doing, the dissent in Little Sisters of the Poor can be seen to have repeated many of the themes from Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence by Judge Hartz. Care Act (ACA) RFRA provides that federal laws that substantially burden a person's exercise of religion are permissible only if they are the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling governmental interest. In the 2013 en banc decision in Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the lead opinion of Judge Timothy Tymkovich and wrote a separate concurrence. In Hobby Lobby , two closely held corporations, whose owners chose to "run their business to reflect their religious values," challenged the contraceptive requirement. Gorsuch emphasized that it made little difference that the burden on the plaintiffs in Hobby Lobby did not stem from the government affirmatively requiring their use of a "particular drug or device" This was because the plaintiffs had argued that the government imposed a religious burden by requiring their "personal involvement in facilitating . . . [the destruction of] a fertilized human egg that their religious faith holds impermissible," he said. As a result, Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence viewed RFRA as a "tie-breaker" that Congress designed to. Gorsuch joined the majority opinion that concluded that the "logic" of Citizens United v. FEC "compelled the conclusion that the First Amendment also protects a corporation's religious expressions" A lower court's reliance on Supreme Court precedent may not necessarily signal agreement with that precedent, as noted by one of the concurring opinions in Hobby Lobby , the judge said. The opinion was part of the dissent in Sebelius.v. Hobby Lobby, a case that the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Hobby Lobby. Judge Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a request for rehearing in a case where the panel had previously enjoined a display of the Ten Commandments on a courthouse lawn. In his dissent, the nominee criticized the Tenth Circuit's formulation of the reasonable observer test, describing the observer utilized by the panel decision as an " unreasonable one" who "gets things wrong" He noted a number of perceived errors made by the "unreasonable observer," which included confusing the donor's intent with the government's message. Patrol troopers violated the Establishment Clause. Judge Gorsuch again raised concerns about the Tenth Circuit's interpretation of Justice O'Connor's test. In particular, the dissent criticized what the nominee viewed as the observer's (1) "biased presumption that the Utah roadside crosses are unconstitutional"; (2) "internal bias" that disregarded "secularizing details" about the cross display; and (3) "selective and feeble eyesight," which resulted in misperceptions about the nature of theCross display. endorsement of religion, the Court has in the recent past adopted Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's "reasonable observer test" The test looks to whether an "objective observer," acquainted with the background of the challenged government action, would perceive it as a government endorsement of religion. Judge Gorsuch has, in two dissents, criticized what he viewed as overly expansive interpretations of the reasonable observer test on the grounds that these interpretations needlessly eliminate certain religious symbols and traditions from the public sphere. Gorsuch's dissent in American Atheists criticized the concept of the reasonable observer. He said it could be used to strike down laws and policies a conjured observer could mistakenly think respect an establishment of religion. He also said the test differs from other formulations the Court has used in the Establishment Clause context in that it can be used "to strike down law and policies ... a reasonably biased, impaired, and distracted viewer might confuse them for an endorsement of religion" The dissent was published in the online edition of American Atheist. whether the endorsement test even applies to the dispute. Judge Gorsuch's dissent is reminiscent of recent Supreme Court jurisprudence, where a majority of the Justices, including Justice Scalia, appeared to move to looking to historical practices and understandings to resolve Establishment Clause disputes. Nearly two years after Green , Judge Gorsuch similarly dissented from an order denying en banc rehearing in American Atheists, Inc. v. Davenport. In that case, the panel had relied on the reasonable observer test in holding that the display of twelve-foot high crosses on public lands to memorialize fallen Utah Highway was OK. Gorsuch's respect for the decisions, interpretations, and rules of state courts is evident in the majority and concurring opinions in Browder v. City of Albuquerque. This case involved a claim against an off-duty police officer who killed one person and injured another while speeding through a red light. Although Judge Gorsuch affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity for the police officer in his majority opinion, he wrote separately to explain his views on when federal courts should abstain, for reasons of federalism, from deciding cases. concluded that it was inappropriate to resolve the "complex" Fourteenth Amendment "questions surrounding medical records," especially in the context of a qualified immunity challenge. The second opinion—perhaps the most notable substantive due process opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch—is Browder v. City of Albuquerque. This 2015 opinion held that the plaintiffs' substantive due Process rights had been violated in thecontext of a lawsuit arising from a "terrible crash" that resulted when a police officer raced through the street. A three-judge panel upheld a district court order that declined to dismiss the substantive due process claims brought against the officer by the victims of the crash. In so holding, Judge Gorsuch broadly discussed the substantivedue process doctrine. Describing the doctrine as having a "paradoxical name" and being a "murky area" of law, he noted the view that the doctrine either misplaces the source of due process or misleads the public.city streets of Albuquerque in his police cruiser after finishing his shift. One of the victims died and the other suffered serious injuries. Justice Scalia's legacy previously appeared in several of Judge Gorsuch's opinions on the Tenth Circuit. Notably, in a number of cases, the nominee rejected more flexible approaches to interpreting the Constitution in favor of originalism. One such case is Cordova v. City of Albuquerque , wherein the Tenth circuit dismissed a lawsuit alleging that attorneys for the city of Albuquerque had maliciously prosecuted the plaintiff in violation of the Fourth Amendment. In this case, Judge Gorsuch concurred in the judgment, grounding his opinion in originalism and writing that the City of Albuquerque , Judge Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion. This opinion, much like Strickland , engaged in a "thorough review of the record" And Orr is not the only case in which Judge Gorsuch has ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in a statutory civil rights case. It could suggest that the ultimate outcomes of particular cases are driven by Judge Gorsuch's general judicial philosophy as well as his rulings in Orr and other similar cases. It is not clear whether the Supreme Court will take up the case. that the deputies were not entitled to qualified immunity because the law at the time of the incident clearly established that the conduct alleged was constitutionally excessive. In reaching this conclusion, the nominee proceeded through an analysis of each of the Graham factors. Similarly, but resulting in a contrary outcome, Judge Gorsuch authored the majority opinion in Wilson v. City of Lafayette , finding qualified immunity protected an officer who used a taser on an individual fleeing arrest, resulting in the suspect's death. In doing so, the nominees recited and analyzed each of those factors. Gorsuch: "No one questions that the use of a taser, especially if one probe hits the head, amounts to a significant physical intrusion requiring a correspondingly significant justification" The nominee found the "physical intrusion" in Wilson was not clearly established to be excessive in light of the other Graham factors, including the arrestee actively resisting arrest. In Fisher v. City of Las Cruces, the majority found that a material factual dispute existed as to whether the plaintiff's injuries, which the plaintiff claimed, were excessive. Supreme Court precedent appears to be the exclusive focus in his excessive force opinions. In such cases, the nominee has relied on what he views as the "relatively exacting 'objective reasonableness standard' articulated in Graham v. Connor" The standard involves an examination of "three, non-exclusive factors: '[1] the severity of the crime at issue, [2] whether the suspect poses a threat, and [3] the level of force used to make the arrest" an immediate threat to the safety of the officers or others, and [3] whether he is actively resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest by flight.'" Application of this test has led Judge Gorsuch to find both excessive force and no excessive force, depending upon his analysis of the facts of individual cases. For instance, in Herrera v. Bernalillo County Board of County Commissioners , a case where three sheriff's deputies tackled a plaintiff who was not resisting arrest, resulting in injuries to his knee, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion affirming the district court's holding. he sustained while being handcuffed after he had shot himself, were sufficient for an excessive force claim. Judge Gorsuch concurred with the majority's use of the Graham factors and its conclusion that the factors suggested the officers may not have acted reasonably. But he faulted the majority for "tak[ing] a detour, asking whether, in addition to satisfying all three Graham factors, Mr. Fisher has also shown that he suffered a 'non- de minimis injury'" Such an inquiry had previously been found to be required only in. noted that the "act of contributing to political campaigns implicates a 'basic constitutional freedom," one lying "at the foundation of a free society" The nominee then observed that despite the First Amendment interests in campaign contributions, the Supreme Court "has yet to apply strict scrutiny to contribution limit challenges" While Judge Gorsuch's concurrence in Riddle does not go so far as to argue explicitly for subjecting contribution limits to strict scrutiny, it does cite to Justices who have made such an argument. disagreement between the members of the Court in Citizens United was more complex than whether the First Amendment protects a corporation's speech. In other words, Judge Gorsuch's vote in the 2013 en banc case may have limited significance with respect to his broader views on the constitutionality of campaign finance laws. Riddle v. Hickenlooper, a 2014 case that invalidated a Colorado law, may offer more insights as to his views on First Amendment and campaign finance regulation. The case involved whether the "asserted inclinations and advantages of corporations in corrupting officeholders" justified restricting corporate campaign expenditures. allowing major party candidates to accept twice as much in contributions per individual as independent and minor party candidates. Judge Gorsuch agreed with the majority that the Colorado law violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. He attempted to allay fears that the ruling "imperiled" any attempts to regulate campaign contributions, citing federal law as a nondiscriminatory model available to the State of Colorado. In so concluding, however, the concurrence broadly concluded that the law was unconstitutional. Judge says a prisoner who "merely conspired with" the Aryan Brotherhood could not sustain a defamation lawsuit. The First Amendment requires a plaintiff pursuing a defamation claim to prove the underlying falsehood of the statement at issue, he says. Judge Gorsuch joined a panel opinion in Cory v. Allstate Insurance , which dismissed a defamation suit against the insurance company. The decision held that the plaintiff had failed to show the History Channel's statement had a significant impact on his reputation, the judge says. Gorsuch's opinions have recognized limits to the First Amendment's speech protections. He joined opinions that dismissed privacy tort claims on First Amendment grounds. The nominee should not be viewed as a free speech absolutist, writes Julian Zelizer. He says the underlying reported events involved protected speech on matters of public concern. For more information, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstl and @julian Zelizer on Facebook. Judge Neil Gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that view the First Amendment as an important restriction on government activity. In Van Deelan v. Johnson, he reversed a district court's dismissal of a claim that several county officials had violated the plaintiff's First Amendment rights. In Bustos v. A&E Television, he has promoted the rights of the press at the expense of plaintiffs in certain state tort actions. The decision and his reluctance to distinguish between types of speech protected by the Constitution may align him with the majority of the Roberts Court. , Judge Gorsuch wrote broadly about the underlying dangers of suppression of speech by government officials. When public officials feel free to wield the powers of their office as weapons against those who question their decisions, they do damage not merely to the citizen in their sights but also to the First Amendment liberties and the promise of equal treatment essential to the continuity of our democratic enterprise, he wrote. With this backdrop, the nominee rejected the county's argument that the plaintiff's tax assessment challenges did not amount to "constitutionally protected activity" the First Amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody, even when involving a private figure on a matter of private concern. In the context of public employee speech, the nominee has authored several opinions limiting or dismissing First Amendment lawsuits brought by government employees against their employers. The speech occurred pursuant to the employees' official duties and, therefore, could be regulated by the government. With regard to challenges to zoning ordinances, he authored a concurring opinion that raised the question of whether constitutionalizing the protections for such parodies was necessary or wise. Gorsuch's work on the Tenth Circuit has broached the issue of campaign finance regulation and the First Amendment. The nominee has authored or joined a handful of opinions touching on free speech issues. Given this, if confirmed by the Senate, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the future direction of free speech law. The Supreme Court has invalidated a number of federal and state election laws at the margins. For example, in the en banc ruling in Hobby Lobby, the court invalidated the law. Justice Scalia was a vocal critic of the substantive due process doctrine. While serving on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined a few opinions. The writings of a nominee to the Supreme Court—especially those authored before the nominee became a judge—may not fully represent the nominee's current views, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings on substantive due due process suggest that the nominee is unlikely to interpret the substantive component of the Due Process Clause expansively. fundamental rights in the Due Process Clause or has no basis whatsoever in the Constitution. However, acknowledging that the Supreme Court has established the Dueprocess Clause as the "home" for certain fundamental unenumerated rights, the Browder majority continued by explaining that the "doctrine should be applied and expanded sparingly" In addition to noting these limits on the doctrine in the majority opinion, Judge Gorsuch authored a separate opinion in Browder to discuss an argument forfeited by the defendant that would further limit substantive due process claims in federal court. Judge Gorsuch appears to be somewhat skeptical of more expansive views of the historical test to determine what constitutes a fundamental right. Viewing the central case cited by Justice O'Connor's Michael H. concurrence, Eisenstadt v. Baird, as "an equal protection decision," rather than a due process one. In addition to examining thehistorical test for determining which liberty interests are protected by the Due Process Clause, Judge Gorsuch's book also examines what he calls the "reasoned" test. New rights based on broad libertarian concepts like individual autonomy could "prove too much," he says. In this sense, paralleling Chief Justice Roberts's reasoning with regard to the scope of substantive due process protections, the views may question broader conceptions of the Due Process Clause. There are, however, limits on what can be gleaned from Judge Gorsuch's book with respect to his broader views on unenumerated, he writes. The views in his 2006 book are based on abstract notions of morality. noting the dangers of '"unchecked disregard of the restrictions' imposed by the Constitution." Judge Gorsuch's Gutierrez-Brizuela concurrence may suggest that if he is elevated to the High Court, he may embrace a more formalist approach to separation-of-powers questions. The Supreme Court has been divided in recent years in cases involving the substantive component of the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. The source for various unenumerated rights that have been recognized by the Court as constitutionally protected. case to reach a jury. No doubt a testament to contemporary civil litigation practices that ensure before any trial is held every stone will be overturned in discovery. Somehow, though, this case managed to survive the usually lethal gauntlet of pretrial proceedings and stagger its way to trial. From this sentiment, it might be surmised that Judge Gorsuch may be particularly receptive to curtailing the costly litigation process through strict readings of statutes that create private rights of private property. The case is still pending. rights adequately: To entertain cases like this in federal court as a matter of routine risks inviting precisely the sort of regime the Supreme Court has long warned against. "Make of the Fourteenth Amendment a font of tort law" needlessly superimposed on perfectly adequate existing state tort law systems, he says. "When the issue is not properly raised by the parties in Browder , Judge Gorsuch opined in his concurrence that "when the issue was not raised, the court should have ruled" in a non-Article III bankruptcy court without the consent of the parties. Judge Gorsuch described the purpose of Article III of the Constitution as crafted by the Framers to be "the cure for their complaint [against the crown]." The nominee also exhibited some doubt regarding the continued viability of the longstanding distinction between public rights and private rights as a distinction between private rights and public rights in a bankruptcy case. "The federal government will never be allowed to take the people's lives, liberties, or property without a decision maker insulated from the pressures other branches may try to bring to bear," he said. an independent right of the people essential to the preservation of all other rights later enumerated in the Constitution and its amendments. According to Judge Gorsuch, the combination of legislative and judicial functions poses a grave threat to liberty, fair notice, and equal protection. [O]ur whole legal system is predicated on the notion that good borders make for good government, that dividing government into separate pieces bounded both in their powers and geographic reach is of irreplaceable value when it comes to securing the liberty of thepeople. the decisions on statutory civil rights in which the nominee participated involved unanimous rulings to dismiss a particular case. In 2009 in Strickland v. United Parcel Service, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch agreed with two colleagues that the plaintiff should be able to proceed to trial on a FMLA retaliation claim, but differed from his colleagues as to the plaintiff's Title VII claim. In addition, litigation involving statutory civil civil rights claims often turns on the facts of a specific case, as opposed to differences in opinions about the law. case based on the factual record before the court. While the other two judges voted to reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment to the defendant on the Title VII claim, Judge Gorsuch would have affirmed the lower court's decision. In particular, he construed two key depositions relied on by the plaintiff as simply showing that the plaintiff's supervisor "harassed male employees in very much the same manner he harassed Ms. Strickland" In another fact-intensive civil rights case resulting in a different outcome—a ruling for the plaintiffs— Orr v. Orr. Judge Gorsuch also looked to the "larger statutory structure" and the statute's legislative history to buttress his conclusion. Caplinger v. Medtronic, Inc. affirmed the district court's dismissal of the complaint as preempted by federal law based on a reading of an express preemption clause within the Medical Device Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Medical Devices Act of 1998. The case involved a lawsuit alleging the defendant had promoted an "off label" use of a medical device that resulted in the plaintiff's injuries. to judicial exposition." Furthermore, he observed, "the Supreme Court has twice revisited and cut back the scope of its initial decision." Left to reconcile competing statutory interpretations by the High Court, Judge Gorsuch asked: "How are we supposed to apply all these competing instructions? It's no easy task" Ultimately, the court held that the state law claims were preempted because the plaintiff failed to identify a parallel federal requirement based on off-label promotion of a medical device. The nominee applied these principles while referring back to the statute's plain text throughout his analysis. In 2011 case, Kerns v. Bader, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the substantive due process claims brought by a plaintiff. Noting that the government's "mere collection of information" without any further public dissemination of it is a violation of due process. Judge has never squarely ruled on the right to an abortion or to marry, but his opinions do provide some insights into his views on substantive due Process rights. He has written on behalf of a divided panel in the case, in which a county sheriff had violated the plaintiff's rights to informational privacy. that information does not implicate rights to informational privacy, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the claim on qualified immunity grounds. The dissent, however, called the majority's conclusion on the privacy issue "dismaying" The dissent argued that it was "patently clear" that "individuals have a constitutional right to have their medical records kept private from law enforcement officers pursuing general investigative ends and acting in the absence of any authority to breach that privacy" Nonetheless, while acknowledging the dissent's eloquence, Judge Scalia said, "I don't think there's any reason to think that this case would go the other way" Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a petition for en banc rehearing. In so doing, he contended that the underlying panel decision interpreted the First Amendment too broadly. In a case raising issues similar to those in a case presently before the Court, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion holding that a Utah law requiring registered sex workers to register was unconstitutional. He said it made it harder to regulate the secondary effects of adult businesses. The case is Doe v. Shurtleff, which is now before the Supreme Court. In United States v. Baldwin , he spent a portion of his majority opinion criticizing the proliferation of criminal prohibitions in the Code of Federal Regulations. After a panel of judges affirmed a conviction for failure to register as a sex offender, he dissented from the denial of a rehearing en banc based on his view that Congress, in delegating to the Attorney General the authority to define sex offenders, was overstepping its authority. He said Congress should not have delegated the authority.to the executive branch to define. sex offenders. Gorsuch has authored or otherwise participated in relatively few opinions addressing claims that a government enactment, policy, or practice has deprived persons of equal protection of the law. There is one opinion, Secsys LLC v. Vigil, authored by Judge Gorsuch for a unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit. This opinion characterizes equal protection as "the law's keystone" and explores the differences between intentional and non-intentional discrimination. It could suggest that Judge Gorsuch believes that the Constitution's equal protection principles play a crucial role in prohibiting certain government discrimination based on race, gender and disability. on race or sex, but may be more skeptical of interpreting the Equal Protection Clause expansively to shield against previously unrecognized forms of discrimination. Judge Gorsuch also joined the unanimous decision by a panel of the Tenth Circuit in 2015 in Druley v. Patton. In 2009, in 2009, Judge Gorsuch joined a unanimous decision  in a case involving a transgendered prisoner in an all-male facility. In that case, the court ruled that the prisoner was not entitled to wear female undergarments because she was housed in a male facility. more federal civil rights statutes. Such statutes include Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended. It appears that his jurisprudence is largely a product of his preferences for textualism and rules based adjudication, as opposed to a preference to rule for a particular side. However, it should be noted that some commentators have criticized certain rulings by Judge Neil Neil Gorsuch in the Supreme Court case "Gorsuch v. United States" The case is expected to be heard in the fall. to which we may ascribe whatever meaning springs to mind," Judge Gorsuch wrote. He looked to the "language of the Act itself," the Act's structure, and key canons of statutory construction. In another decision, he said a student who had previously settled a lawsuit involving alleged violations of the IDEA was barred from "seeking the same relief" under the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and 42 U.S.C. He wrote for the majority in holding that the student was not entitled to same relief. In Almond v. Unified School District #501, the nominee employed a textualist approach in one of the first opinions interpreting the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009. Rejecting the view that the phrase "discrimination in compensation" was used in the Act as "some Rorschach inkblot," he concluded that the Act's expanded accrual period for "discrimination" claims applied only to "unequal pay for equal work" claims, not to all claims of discriminatory compensation. also objected that the outcome under the majority's reading ran contrary to Congress's intent by "harm[ing] the interests of the children that IDEA was intended to protect" However, in perhaps a reflection on how his broader views on the role of the judge influence his civil rights jurisprudence, Judge Gorsuch's opinion took a different view of this argument. He opined that the court would be substituting its view of desirable social policy for that of Congress if it were to adopt the plaintiff's proposed interpretation. to a substantial burden. On appeal to the Supreme Court, a five-Justice majority (including Justice Scalia) largely agreed with the Tenth Circuit's assessment and affirmed the lower court. Judge Tymkovich's opinion concluded that the existence of a wide range of exemptions to the requirement undermined the government's justifications for the policy and demonstrated that the policy was not the least restrictive means of achieving these goals. Judge Gorsuch's concurring opinion in Hobby Lobby was centrally focused on procedural matters tangential to the case. write on the constitutional limits on affirmative action or the equal protection rights of sexual minorities. Most of the civil rights decisions in which the nominee has participated have centered upon statutory civil rights claims. The nominee's opinions in these cases to date have resulted in a variety of outcomes, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: Based on these decisions, an argument could be made that Judge Gorsuch's views on statutory civil Rights reflect his textualist approach to construing statutes, instead of a more results-driven judicial philosophy. Law in which Judge Gorsuch could be influential if he were to be elevated to the Supreme Court. Justice Scalia's views regarding the scope of constitutional and statutory civil rights protections were established in a number of judicial opinions. However, unlike Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's views on constitutional civil rights questions are less well known because he has had relatively few occasions to address such questions directly in cases before the Tenth Circuit. He has not, for example, had occasion to address affirmative action and issues related to sexual orientation. scrutiny is required under the Equal Protection Clause. Because of this, in the panel's view, the state officials' decisions were subject to the less stringent "rational basis review," which the decisions were able to withstand. Similarly, in Kastl , the panel noted, in a short three-page order, that the plaintiff had failed to "put forward sufficient evidence demonstrating that [the school's actions were] motivated by her gender" This, in their view, caused her claims to fail. During his tenure on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch has addressed issues of federalism and the scope of congressional power vis-à-vis the states only in a limited number of cases. He authored or joined a host of key opinions delineating the limits of federal power. In many key areas of the law related to issues ofFederalism, he has written or joined key opinions. He has called the division of power between the states and the national government "one of the Constitution's structural protections of liberty" governing principle for determining the types of claims Article I courts (like bankruptcy courts) can hear. Judge Gorsuch has repeatedly stressed that he believes that the division of legislative and judicial powers is not a mere "formality dictated by the Constitution" Rather, he views the separation of powers as essential to the preservation of liberty. To the founders, the legislative andjudicial powers were distinct by nature and their separation was among the most important liberty-protecting devices of the constitutional design, he says. conduct of foreign affairs, for example. But a review of his written opinions suggests misgivings when Congress assigns legislative or judicial responsibilities to be carried out by the executive branch. His writings indicate he is a proponent of reinvigorating the non-delegation doctrine to police overly broad statutory delegations of legislative functions to the other branches. Judge Gorsuch has emphasized the principle of individual liberty in applying his formalist approach to a number of cases implicating the separation of powers, especially challenges to criminal laws. Gorsuch: "I would have thought powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies would have warranted less deference from other branches, not more" He says courts should examine the law's meaning de novo, or without deference to the agency's view. "This allows regulated parties to rely on consistent agency interpretations while simultaneously allowing courts to operate properly within the Constitution's framework," he says. He says Scalia's views contrast with those of Justice Scalia, who, for much of his career, was critical of agency deference. If elevated to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could be expected to reject "functionalist" approaches that weigh the extent to which a challenged law or action upsets the equilibrium of powers the Framers hoped to achieve. His formalist approach seems to guide his views on both the limited and exclusive nature of judicial power, which are informed by the structure of the Constitution. For example, he wrote the panel opinion in Loveridge v. Hall overturning a district court decision allowing malpractice and breach of fiduciary duty claims to be resolved. Gorsuch: "Powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies . . . warrant less deference from other branches, not more" He cites to Justice Felix Frankfurter's concurrence in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer. He dismissed more functionalist arguments in favor of a "titanic administrative state," he says. "Maybe the time has come to face the behemoth," he adds. "It's time to face it" for the first time. judiciary to legislate: Not incidentally, vague laws also pose a danger to separation of powers. "If the legislature could set a net large enough to catch all possible offenders, and leave it to the courts to step inside and say who could be rightfully detained, and who should be set at large[, t]his would, to some extent, substitute the judicial for the legislative department of government," he writes. His writings from the bench suggest he prefers to apply what scholars frequently term a "formalist" approach. The rule of lenity "insists that courts side with the defendant "when the ordinary canons of statutory construction have revealed no satisfactory construction" Judge Gorsuch could serve as a critical vote on such matters if confirmed to the Court. The Supreme Court has been closely divided on various aspects of environmental law in recent years. If confirmed, Judge Gorsuch would join Justice Scalia on the Supreme Court's conservative wing. He would replace Justice Antonin Scalia, who died in 2013. The Senate is expected to vote on his confirmation in the coming weeks. time on the bench, was viewed by scholars as a defender of Chevron deference. The doctrine, for Justice Scalia, operated as a clear background rule from which Congress could legislate. Judge Gorsuch's opinions can be read to suggest that he might favor eliminating the doctrine, or at least cabining its application as he did in the majority opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela and in another case discussed below, De Niz Robles v. Lynch. As a result, if he were to succeed Justice Scalia,. the nominee's opinions in De Nz Robles and Gutierrez-brizuela could suggest thathe might favor a Chevron-free court. offenders to provide the government with their usernames and online identifiers for certain websites was a permissible content-neutral regulation of speech. Justice Scalia's written work and public speeches reflected distinct attitudes toward the use of contemporary foreign law and practice to inform understanding of the U.S. Constitution and federal statutes. In contrast, due in part to the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket, Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence offers comparatively little guidance as to his likely approach on such matters if appointed to the Supreme Court. The report highlights areas where Judge Gorsuch has expressed views on the law that may contrast with those of some of his colleagues. It is unclear to what degree the nominee's conclusions reflect his own approach to federalism questions, or what he perceives as adherence to Supreme Court precedent. The nominee has expressed clear views in support of abstention, the concept of a cooperative federalism, and the practice of federal courts certifying some questions of state laws to state courts. In general, however, in cases implicating federalism concerns, the nominee has exhibited respect for state court decisions. focuses on those areas of law where Justice Scalia can be seen to have influenced the Court's approach to particular issues or provided a fifth and deciding vote. The report begins by discussing the nominee's views on two cross-cutting issues—the role of the judiciary and statutory interpretation. It then addresses fourteen separate areas oflaw, arranged in alphabetical order, from "administrative law" to "takings" Within each section, the report reviews whether and how Judge Gorsuch has addressed particular issues in opinions he authored or joined. The report analyzes majority, concurring, and dissenting opinions, including decisions that Judge Gorsuch participated in while serving by designation on another federal court of appeals. The report also notes Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings, many of which address assisted suicide and euthanasia. While the report discusses numerous cases and votes involving Judge Gorsuch, it focuses particularly on cases in which the sitting panel was divided, as these cases arguably best showcase the judge's opinions. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/politics/judge-gorsuch-report-2013-01-30. panel of the Tenth Circuit in Lexington Insurance Co. v. Precision Drilling Co., L.P. Judge Gorsuch contrasted canons that he viewed as "finely honed and consistent with the judicial function" with the so called "absurdity canon" This canon is generally said to allow judges to "override even unambiguous statutory texts . . . in order to avoid putatively absurd consequences in their application" Judge Gorsuch expressed concern that broad application of this canon could be dangerous. enable judges to disregard clear statutory text in favor of the jurists' perceived view of Congress's purpose in enacting the statute. Judge Gorsuch's Lexington Insurance opinion can be seen to reflect broader concerns about interpretations of statutory text based on extrinsic evidence of congressional purpose. However, the nominee's discussion of these concerns in Lexington Insurance is arguably notable for its relative length, particularly given that the sole legal authority cited by Judge Gorsuch as supporting purpose-based applications of the absurdity doctrine is an 1892 Supreme Court decision. with the Court in more recent years. The two other judges on the panel would not have reached the questions regarding the absurdity doctrine, concluding instead that the plaintiff had waived the argument. Unlike Justice Scalia, who generally viewed the use of legislative history materials as illegitimate even in support of text-based arguments, Judge Gorsuch has cited them in certain cases. Such citations may be based, in part, on his view that Supreme Court precedent directed lower court judges to consider legislative history. materials in those instances. He has elsewhere expressed concerns about theUse of legislative. history materials similar to those voiced by Justice Scalia. in that such materials are not subject to the same bicameralism and presentment requirements as statutes because they are not passed by both chambers of Congress and signed by the President. Judge Gorsuch has similarly expressed concerns, akin to those voiced by Justice Scalia, about invocations of alleged congressional or statutory purposes that are untethered from or contrary to the express statutory text. Some of these concerns are seemingly practical ones, grounded in the difficulty of determining which of various possible purposes that could be attributed to a particular statutory text embody the shared intent of a legislature. nominee once going so far as to diagram part of a sentence in a written opinion. Judge Gorsuch can be seen to resemble Justice Scalia in invoking the "rule of lenity" when construing language that is seen to be ambiguous in favor of criminal defendants. On the other hand, the nominee's recently expressed concerns about " Chevron deference" —judicial deference to the reasonable interpretations by executive branch agencies of ambiguous or silent statutes –distinguish him from Justice Scalia. These last two facets of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence are discussed in more detail later in this report. that Justice Scalia did. This approach—known as textualism —looks to the statutory text, context, and structure when construing laws. Textualism's focus on the wording of the statute is widely shared among contemporary jurists and commentators. But its rejection of extrinsic sources of meaning has been the subject of debate, as have textualist views about judges' proper role in establishing the meaning of statutory text. The nominee has also invoked a number of canons—or general principles—of statutory interpretation when constuing text that is seen to be ambiguous. and is less frequent than the rate at which Justice Scalia dissented when he served as an appellate judge on the D.C. Circuit. On the other hand, there may be limits to what can be gleaned from this data. The choice to write separately is one that stems from various factors, and may simply depend on the personality and preferences of an individual judge, or the nature of the dispute before the court. For instance, the fact that Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions garnered relatively few dissents may be a product of the cases. In contrast to Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's writings have generally espoused a more minimalist role for courts. While the nominee has not been immune from criticism that particular majority opinions he wrote swept too broadly. For example, he noted in a 2012 dissent that "[c]aution is always warranted when venturing down the road of judicial overreach" The Supreme Court is expected to vote on the nominee in the next few weeks. For more information, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. of appeals are decided without dissent. The overwhelming majority of opinions issued by the Tenth Circuit are unanimous. The bulk of the opinions that Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined may not be particularly insightful with regard to his views on specific areas of law. Even in closely contested cases where unanimity where possible, the majority tends to be right, the authors say. The relative infrequency with which fellow judges dissented or otherwise wrote separately from Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions may suggest the nominee places a high value on reaching consensus in the opinions he writes. of law, his opinions at times evidence concern about judges "reshap[ing] the law as they wish it to be" by failing to "attach power to precedent" Of the approximately 180 published majority opinions authored by the nominee, only one has been reviewed in a formal opinion by the Supreme Court. One opinion that Judge Gorsuch joined, Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl , was reversed by the Court in a substantive opinion. The Supreme Court in recent years has reversed the lower courts in roughly seventy percent of all cases it heard. Many commentators opined that Judge Gorsuch would, if confirmed, follow in Justice Scalia's footsteps as an originalist. On the other hand, during Judge Gorsuch's confirmation hearings for his seat on the Tenth Circuit in 2006, the nominee explicitly rejected the view that he had any particular "philosophy" toward judging. He noted that he "resist[ed]" being "pigeon-hole[d]" because "people do unexpected things and pigeon holes ignore gray areas in the law, of which there are many" Justice Scalia and Judge Gorsuch reject results-oriented judging. Both have emphasized that judges must render decisions that do not necessarily conform to their personal preferences. Scalia often pointed to his vote to strike down a law prohibiting flag burning as an example of how his judicial philosophy could yield results that did not align with his own inclinations. Similarly, in a 2016 dissent, Judge Gorsuch emphasized that the role of the judge is to "apply, not rewrite, the law enacted by the people's representatives," noting that a judge's role is to apply the law. Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging can be seen to differ in tone and tenor from that of Justice Scalia. The nominee may be more focused on collegiality and consensus-building than the Justice he could replace. During his career on the High Court, Justice Scalia frequently authored fairly broad and uncompromising opinions that did not garner the votes of a majority of the Court. In contrast, Judge Gorsuch's judicial record may reflect comments he made during his confirmation hearing for his Tenth Circuit appointment, wherein he noted the importance of "trying to reach consensus" Gorsuch has noted a wide range of jurists with varying judicial philosophies. He has openly praised Justice Scalia's general influence, calling the late Justice a "lion of the law" However, the nominee also noted the influence of "three significant but quite different judges" who "brought him up in the law," Judge David Sentelle and Justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy. This statement has prompted some commentators to compare the nominee to those jurists, as well. The judicial and judicial philosophy of the Supreme Court is very different. Judge Gorsuch's judicial opinions and scholarly writings suggest that he could be seen to share many of Justice Scalia's views toward judging. In a lecture delivered in April 2016 at Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Judge Gorsuch commended the late Justice's approach to judging. Rejecting the view of the judge as a "pragmatic social-welfare maximizer," Judge Gorsuch argued for a more limited role for judges in the American political system. The themes highlighted in his 2016 lecture on.nonjudicial writings of Judge Gorsuch may provide another—perhaps richer and more nuanced—basis for evaluating how his approach to Judging compares to that of Justice. Scalia. Judge Gorsuch has declared that the proper role of a court is to interpret the law and not to "substitute" the court's "views of optimal policy" for Congress's judgment. A number of the nominee's opinions have noted his personal sympathies for particular parties in the case, but distinguished these sympathies from what he viewed the law to require. As a result, if Judge Gorsuch were to serve on the Supreme Court, his views on the role of the judiciary would likely change. Many commentators have likened the nominee to Justice Scalia. During the nearly thirty years that Justice Scalia served on the Supreme Court, the late Justice was a well-known proponent of originalism, textualism, and the view that clear rules should guide the work of the lower courts. Accordingly, Justice Scalia vigorously dissented from opinions that, in his view, failed to construe legal texts in a clear and fair way. The Supreme Court has the.opportunity to address certain topics, such as international law and foreign. affairs, terrorism and national security. judging, the findings in Table 1 and Table 2 may be noteworthy. Professor Michael McConnell of Stanford University described Judge Gorsuch as "unfailingly cordial and collegial" Another former colleague, Robert Henry, now the President of Oklahoma City University, described Judge Neil Gorsuch's "judicial temperament" as "superb" Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging may also differ in substance from that of Justice Scalia. In contrast to the oft quoted "common ground," Judge Gorsuch aims to "find[] common ground" while being "scrupulously respectful" might be affected if he were to succeed Justice Scalia. For various reasons, it is difficult to predict accurately an individual's likely contributions to the Court based on their prior experience. A section of this report titled Predicting Nominees' Future Decisions on the Court provides a broad context and framework for evaluating how determinative a judge's prior record may be in predicting future votes on the Supreme Court. Because Judge Gorsuch would succeed Justice Antonin Scalia on the High Court, this report is focused on his potential impact on the court. President Donald J. Trump announced the nomination of Judge Neil M. Gorsuch of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (Tenth Circuit) to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court of the United States created by the 2016 death of Justice Antonin Scalia. Judge Gorsuch was appointed to the Tenth circuit by President George W. Bush in 2006. Immediately prior to his appointment to the bench, the nominee served as the Principal Deputy to the Associate Attorney General, the third-ranking official at the Department of Justice. Judge Gorsuch began his legal career clerking for federal judges. He first served as a law clerk to Judge David B. Sentelle of the D.C. Circuit. Later, he served two Supreme Court Justices, newly retired Justice Byron White and Justice Anthony Kennedy, during the October 1993 term. This report provides an overview of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence and discusses how the Supreme Court will rule on his nomination in the future. It also discusses how his nomination will affect the federal judiciary. decade of service on the Tenth Circuit. A separate report, CRS Report R44772, Majority, Concurring, and Dissenting Opinions by Judge Neil M. Gorsuch , lists and briefly describes each opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch during his tenure on the federal bench. Other CRS products discuss various issues related to the vacancy on the Court. For an overview of available products, see CRS Legal Sidebar WSLG1526, Supreme Court Nomination: CRS Products. work on the High Court is a task fraught with uncertainty. Justice Felix Frankfurter disappointed some early supporters by becoming a voice for judicial restraint and caution. Justice Harry Blackmun was originally considered by President Richard Nixon for the Supreme Court. He was later appointed to the Court by President Ronald Reagan in 1986. He served on the Eighth Circuit for a little over a decade prior to his appointment to the court in 1970. The Supreme Court is the highest court in the U.S. and has the power to overturn lower court decisions. Justice Blackmun authored the majority opinion in Roe v. Wade recognizing a constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy. He was generally considered one of the more liberal voices on the Court when he retired in 1994. The difficulty in attempting to predict how a nominee will approach the job of being a Justice remains even when the nominee has had a lengthy federal judicial career prior to nomination. He viewed the judge's role as interpreting the law, rather than making new law. He considered himself to be a "strict constructionist" In Energy and Environmental Legal Institute v. Epel , Judge Gorsuch reviewed a dormant Commerce Clause challenge to Colorado's renewable energy standard. Justices Scalia and Thomas had opposed the dormant commerce clause doctrine because they believed it lacked a firm basis in the text and structure of the Constitution. Judge Gorsuch ultimately upheld a state law that required electricity generators to ensure that twenty percent of electricity sold to state consumers comes from renewable sources. He acknowledged, however, that the Tenth Circuit was bound by Supreme Court precedent on judicial free trade policy. Justice Scalia viewed federalism as the legal of federal powers granted by the Constitution. In this area, the nominee's clear views appear to align closely with those of Justice Scalia. While Judge Gorsuch's distinct views on the dormant Commerce Clause seem clear, his limited cases make it difficult to conclude with certainty that he would be as receptive to federalism based arguments as was Scalia. What is apparent, however, is his clear interest in upholding the "essential principles of federal-state comity" in this area. The Commerce Clause is found in Article I of the Constitution. It grants Congress the authority to adopt laws regulating interstate commerce. In dormant commerce clause cases, Article III courts have satisfied dormant Commerce Clause concerns. In concurring, Judge Gorsuch summarized his views on the dormant Commerce clause in a statement reminiscent of those of Justice Scalia: At the center of this appeal is a claim about the power of precedent. In fact, the whole field in which we are asked to operate today—dormant commerce clause doctrine—might be said to be an artifact of judicial precedent. Supreme Court nominee describes dormant Commerce Clause jurisprudence. The doctrine is "a long and evolving history of almost common-law-like judicial decision making," he says. The Supreme Court has read the clause as embodying a sort of "common-law" rule, he adds. But the doctrine is more than that, the nominee says, and it can be used to challenge state laws. It's a "pocket of federal jurisPrudence characterized by a long and evolveable history," he writes. sold to state consumers came from renewable resources. This conclusion was based on a strict reading of one line of dormant Commerce Clause cases. The state law at issue "doesn't share any of the three essential characteristics that mark those cases," the judge said. It isn't a price control statute, it doesn't link prices paid in Colorado with those paid in the U.S., and it isn't linked to the cost of electricity in the state, he said. The case is still pending. out of state, and it does not discriminate against out-of-staters," he writes. Although it is difficult to divine broad conclusions from this one case, Judge Gorsuch's opinion suggests a skeptical reading of the dormant Commerce Clause and an interest in cabining the doctrine to the facts of previous cases. These views were also apparent in the concurring opinion Judge Gorsuch authored in Direct Marketing Association v. Brohl, which held that a state law imposing a notice and reporting obligation on out- of-state retailers did not discriminate. consistent with the circumstances surrounding the issuance of the order and the agency's subsequent conduct. Environmental cases may also implicate other constitutional issues, including the relationship between federal and state authorities. One question that may arise is whether the Constitution's Commerce Clause should render invalid certain state environmental laws. The Supreme Court, in a series of decisions, has held that the Commerce Clause represents not only a grant of authority to Congress, but also a prohibition on states "imposing excessive burdens on interstate commerce without congressional approval" was unclear, Judge Gorsuch appears to have cabined the circumstance in which these doctrines apply. In De Niz Robles , a precursor to the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela , Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous panel, rejected the retroactive application of an agency's adjudication that upset the affected party's reliance interests. In other words, at least in the Tenth circuit, De Nize Robles did not read Brand X to apply when an agency seeks to apply its interpretation retroactively. Gorsuch grounded his decision in principles of separation of powers, due process, and equal protection. He noted the presumptive prospective effect of legislation compared with the retroactive effect of a judicial decision. The more an agency's decision resembles that of a judge, the stronger the case for retroactive application of the decision. But the more the decision resembles legislation, the less likely such a decision should be granted retroactive force, he said. Given this guidepost, De Niz Robles concluded. judicial decisions where statutory ambiguity is identified. In De Niz Robles v. Lynch , Judge Gorsuch established for the majority that there is a presumption of prospectivity to agency exercises of delegated legislative authority unless Congress has clearly authorized retroactivity. In reaching this conclusion, Judge Gorsuch let it be known that, if not bound by Supreme Court precedent, the court would have thought it improbable that the Framers had envisioned that an executive branch agency could ever overrule a federal court in the first place. Gorsuch has taken a narrow view of the situations in which Chevron deference is due. The nominee has also raised "questions like whether and how people can be fairly expected to keep pace with and conform their conduct to all this churning and changing 'law" In perhaps the most discussed of Judge Gorsuch's opinions, Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, he wrote for a unanimous majority. The Supreme Court will vote on whether to confirm the nominee to the high court. that when an agency issues an interpretation of an ambiguous statutory provision under Chevron via an adjudication that displaces a contrary judicial decision, it is operating like legislators setting new policies. Per the 2015 ruling, such decisions should presumptively apply only prospectively. Beyond Judge Gorsuch's two major rulings in Gutierrez-Brizuela and De Niz Robles , he has tended to be more skeptical of deferring to agencies on legal questions. For example, in TransAm Trucking, Inc. v. Department of Labor , the panel majority upheld a determination by the Department ofLabor that a truck driver was terminated in violation of the law. question, the Board of Immigration Appeals again applied its own reinterpretation of the immigration statutes retroactively. Judge Gorsuch, writing for the majority in Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch , held the retroactive application invalid. He also penned a solo concurrence to take note of the "elephant in the room": [T]he fact is Chevron and Brand X permit executive bureaucracies to swallow huge amounts of core judicial and legislative power, he wrote. He wrote that to do otherwise would raise due process and equal protection concerns. Under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), a reviewing court must set aside agency action that is "not in accordance with law" Pursuant to the framework established by the Supreme Court in Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., a court will generally defer to an agency's interpretation of a statute that is seen to be silent or ambiguous on a particular issue. In National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services , the Supreme. Court ruled in favor of the cable company. narrowing of the scope of Chevron deference in future cases. Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in that case, objecting to the majority's decision on pragmatic and constitutional grounds. Judge Gorsuch's opposition to the doctrine of Brand X on separation-of-powers grounds, on the other hand, finds harmony with Justice Scalia's view on the matter. But Judge Gorsuch acknowledged that as a federal appeals court judge, he was not in a position to overrule cases like Chevron and Brand X. panel that declined to defer to an agency's determination under Chevron and Brand X , the nominee wrote a separate concurring opinion calling into the question the wisdom and constitutionality of the doctrines created by both cases. Emphasizing the concept of separated powers envisioned by the Founders, Judge Gorsuch's opinion distinguished between the elected legislature's task of setting policy prospectively and the judiciary's duty of neutrally interpreting the law in retroactively adjudicating disputes. For the nominee, the constitutional remedy when the political branches disagree with the judiciary’s interpretation of the law is legislation. Gorsuch has also taken exception to the executive branch engaging in activities he regards as judicial functions. In a pair of cases interpreting two statutory provisions, one permitting the Attorney General to grant relief from removal to aliens and the other prohibiting it, he applied—but objected to—the Supreme Court's precedent in Chevron and Brand X. These two cases, which are discussed in more detail above, generally permit agency decisions to override, he says. The Supreme Court has ruled that agency decisions can be overruled. of federal agencies, Chevron deference, in Judge Gorsuch's view, operates as an "abdication" of the courts' duty to say what the law is. His concurrence notes that this practice implicates Due Process and Equal Protection concerns with "the political branches intruding on judicial functions" Judge Gorsuch raised concerns that, under Chevron , regulated entities are not given fair notice as to what the Law requires. He also questioned the propriety of consolidating power in the hands of a single branch of government. Court interpreted Chevro n to extend to an agency's interpretation of a silent or ambiguous statute even if a court had previously interpreted the statute in question. As a statistical matter, under the Chevron doctrine, courts have often deferred to an agencies interpretation of its own statutory authority. In engaging in substantive review of agency actions, Judge Gorsuch has questioned the size and power of the modern administrative state. He has declared that the number of regulations issued by agencies has "grown so exuberantly it's hard to keep up" that, in contrast to the majority's reasoning, the absence of a statutory definition did not create ambiguity. Instead, Judge Gorsuch thought the statute was clear and unambiguous, and therefore would have ruled against the agency's interpretation at Chevron 's first step. Discretionary and Factual Review. In contrast to his views on the doctrine of judicial deference to agency statutory interpretations, Judge. Gorsuch does not appear to have expressed strong objections to the mechanics of discretionary or factual review, a second major area of substantive administrative law. Gorsuch joined a majority opinion determining that an environmental group had standing to challenge the Bureau of Land Management's interpretation of its own prior order. The majority opinion concluded that the environmental group would suffer injury from the company beginning mining operations in Utah's Lila Canyon. Judge Gorsuch has also authored or joined other majority opinions in a number of other cases touching upon environmental issues in which the . interpretative reversals" were deference to the agency's interpretation. The court, citing Tenth Circuit precedent, determined that it owed deference. Gorsuch's reluctance to defer to agency legal interpretations, if applied consistently, could also lead to a lack of deference to agency interpretations of environmental statutes. Applying binding precedent, Judge Gorsuch has shown somedeference to agencies' interpretations of their own environmental regulations. One commentator has suggested that judicial scrutiny of agency decisions that determine whether operation of a certain type of facility is subject to Clean Water Act requirements, would not necessarily result in a legal outcome that was less protective of the environment. as in 2015 when EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers promulgated a rule defining the scope of waters protected under the Clean Water Act. Judge Gorsuch has broadly expressed skepticism regarding the extent to which judges should defer to an administrative agency's reasonable interpretation of silent or ambiguous language in a statute it administers. If Judge Gorsuch's views on Chevron deference were to prevail at the Court, there is some debate on what impact this would have for environmental law. On one hand, some commentators have suggested that a judge's refusal to defer could have a significant impact on the law. dissent in Backcountry argued that the environmental groups should not have been allowed to intervene in the case. The opinion also implied that he might have voted in favor of the groups joining the litigation if the government had abandoned its efforts to enforce the law at issue. Once a plaintiff in an environmental case has satisfied any jurisdictional and procedural requirements to bringing a lawsuit, a court might review the substance of the federal agency action at Issue. Sometimes, an action by an environmental agency may be based on that agency's interpretation of a statute that it administers. The court upheld the reinterpretation, which subjected the wastes to more stringent management requirements. The court held that EPA was not required to provide notice and comment to change a "tentative" interpretation of its own rules. Although the decision upheld EPA's change in its interpretation, the court showed some skepticism toward "agency . . . rulemaking procedures" The court also said the agency's original interpretation of the regulations was not made in accordance with the APA's notice and commented procedures. him, Judge Gorsuch has articulated distinct views that may signal how he would approach administrative law matters if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. A central threshold issue in administrative law cases is whether a challenged agency action is suitable for judicial review in the first place, including whether a court has jurisdiction over the case. While this inquiry is often dependent on the facts of a given case, a few trends can arguably be discerned from the various cases raising justiciability issues in which Judge Gorsuch presided. challenge to a federal agency policy and outside of that context, the nominee sided with the majority of the appellate panel in most cases where access to judicial relief was litigated. In the few judicial access cases in which Judge Gorsuch wrote a separate opinion, he has tended to do so on the basis that the court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. For example, in Wilderness Society v. Kane County , a majority in the en banc panel held that the plaintiffs lacked jurisdiction in the case. He has not demonstrated a proclivity towards a notably expansive or restrictive view of jurisdictional issues. court determined that an environmental group or regulated business had standing to sue. The limited number of cases on standing in the environmental context makes it difficult to discern any broad tendencies of Judge Gorsuch on the subject. In 2013, he dissented from a majority opinion holding that environmental groups were entitled to intervene as of right. He wrote that "Judges owe the same obligation of fidelity to the record and the law in all cases and to all persons appearing before them—regardless of who the litigant is" The outcome of an environmental case often depends on the court's resolution of threshold procedural issues. To proceed to the merits, a plaintiff will need to establish standing, a procedural threshold that has, at times, impeded environmental litigation. Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined opinions in a few cases involving whether an environmental group or regulated business had the right to bring or join a lawsuit challenging federal agency action. But there is no discernible trend in his environmental standing jurisprudence, he says. Gorsuch's en banc opinion rejected the government's invitation to interpret the operative statutory language according to an older, multi-factor test. In Hydro Resources, Inc. v. EPA, he concluded that the EPA had incorrectly determined that certain property was "Indian land," requiring its owner to obtain a mining permit from the agency. In so holding, the nominee adopted what he characterized as a "simple and predictable" two-part test for determining what constitutes Indian land, he says. temporary U.S. Forest Service order that allowed motorcycles—but prohibited all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)—on certain forest trails. Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous court, determined that the appellants lacked a genuine stake in the outcome of the proceedings. In dismissing the case, the nominee wrote that a victory for the appellant "would seem to do nothing to help—and perhaps much to hurt—[their] cause," which was to reduce vehicles on forest trail. The majority reasoned that the groups had a right to intervene because the Forest Service might not adequately represent their interests if, for example, the agency shifted policy positions in favor of the industry group plaintiff during the litigation. Judge Gorsuch dissented, arguing that the environmental groups were already adequately represented by the government, and that a shift in Forest Service's position was "speculative" Although his dissent was significant, he was not the only member of the court to dissent in the case. The case involved a lawsuit challenging a Forest Service plan that allowed for limited off-highway vehicle use. of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act. At issue was whether the truck driver engaged in protected activity under the Act by "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" due to safety concerns. The court deferred under Chevron to the Department's determination that the driver's decision to drive his truck away from his trailer in freezing conditions qualified as protected activity. Judge Gorsuch wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that the statute's meaning was plain and that he rejected extending Chevron deference to the agency's interpretation.