an unmet health care need was much higher among children with no insurance than children with insurance. Shared decisionmaking between families of children with special health care needs is another goal for the MCH Services Block Grant. Multiple components determine whether a family is receiving family-centered care. These components include the amount of time spent with health care providers, their level of attentiveness, sensitivity to families' values and customs, and the relevance of information provided to families, according to the grant's website. and whether the family felt like a partner in their child's health care. The 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs found that families with insurance coverage were more likely to report family-centered coordinated care than families without insurance coverage. Another approach to ensuring family- centered, community-based care is the medical home. Medical homes provide patients access to primary care medical providers and a coordinated care team. They have been associated with improved care outcomes and outcomes for children with special health needs. injuries that require medical care. Accessing these additional services may create additional access and financial burdens on families. Children with special health care needs may qualify for Medicaid or CHIP, and they are more likely to have health insurance. In the 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs, access to preventive and health care services is measured by a series of questions on use of services and unmet needs. Overall, 76% of children did not have an unmet need for specific health care Services in the year prior to the survey. 47% of children with special health care needs had a medical home in 2011-2012. Access to care is often cited as a barrier to health services. State toll-free hotlines provide callers with state-specific Medicaid enrollment information. In 2012, state toll- free hotlines recorded 1.3 million calls regarding Medicaid enrollment. The Maternal and Child Health Services provides coverage for maternal and child health services in the U.S. It also provides care for the elderly and disabled. The proportion of children with health insurance coverage varies considerably by race, ethnicity, and poverty status. 81% of children living in households at or below the federal poverty level have health insurance. Children who were uninsured (54%) were less likely than those covered by public insurance (84%) to have received preventive health care in the past year. Children with special health care needs often need health, mental, and social services beyond preventive care. They also are more likely to have at least one preventive care visit in the prior year. Overall, 84% of children had one preventive health care visit in the year preceding the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. Non-Hispanic white children had the highest rate (86%) of preventive health Care visits in the preceding year, followed by non-Hispanic black children. There was slight variation among racial and ethnic groups; non- Hispanic black children had a higher rate of preventive Health Care Visits than Hispanic white children (87% vs. 85% in the previous year). Women who receive late or no prenatal care are more likely to experience complications of childbirth, including low birth weight. The rate of pregnant women entering prenatal care in the first trimester is generally higher among non-Medicaid populations than among women enrolled in Medicaid. Lack of insurance coverage and lack of access to a primary care provider may be reasons women do not receive prenatal care. These barriers tend to be higher among racial and ethnic minorities. Among Medicaid enrollees, researchers have identified limited availability of maternity care providers. In 2012, the infant mortality rate for women enrolled in Medicaid was 10.3 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, compared with 7.7 for those not in the Medicaid program. Prenatal care is recognized as an important factor in the health and well-being offamilies. For more information, visit the Human ResourcesSA website or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.HRSA.org/. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. HRSA differentiates between health "performance" measures and health "outcome" measures. Performance measures include data on breastfeeding, oral health care, the suicide rate, and the teenage birth rate. Outcome measures include the infant mortality rate and the child death rate. States are required to report data on these maternal and child health indicators by county, race, and ethnicity. The most recent data reported to HRSA by the states are shown in Figure D -1 , although current reporting years vary among the states. Of the 50 states, Mississippi had the highest IMR (9.97 per 1,000 live births) and New Hampshire had the lowest (3.95) IMR is generally higher in the South and Midwest, and lower in other regions. Risk factors for infant mortality, including higher rates of teenage births, prematurity, and inadequate prenatal care in the first trimester, disproportionately affect low-income people.single-year linked birth and death certificate information on IMR. Comparing data from both HRSA and CDC, the data show similar variability in rates by state and region. The MCH Services Block Grant is to fill gaps in public health services for low-income mothers and children. States are required to use at least 30% of their block grant allocations for preventive and primary care services for children. Projects funded by SPRANS include MCH workforce development, genetic services, and diagnostic and treatment services for hemophilia. CISS grants fund projects that support integrated maternal and child health services at the community level. The law provides that block grant funds are to be used by the states "to provide and to assure mothers and kids"  SPRANS has additional funding of $5 million to develop Family to Family Information Centers through FY2017. The CISS program is initiated whenever the MCH Services Block Grant appropriation exceeds $600 million. Of any amount appropriated over $600m, 12.75% is set aside for CISS. These funds are distributed on a competitive basis to public and private organizations. entities that propose activities focusing on areas with a high infant mortality rate are given preference. The MCH services block grant is part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CISS grants and contracts support development and expansion of integrated services at the community level. Public or private organizations or institutions are eligible for these grants. Strategies used include maternal and infant health home visiting; projects to increase participation of obstetricians and pediatricians in Title V and Medicaid; integrated maternal and child health service. CISS is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program that funds projects which seek to increase service delivery capacity at the local level and to promote community-based health systems.  SPRANS projects must support national needs and priorities or emerging issues. Projects must also have regional or national significance. 15% of MCH Services Block Grant funds are set aside for SPRANS programs. The FY2016 budget included appropriations language that provided SPRANS set-aside funds for oral health ($5.00 million); epilepsy ($3.64 million); sickle cell ($2.96 million); and fetal alcohol syndrome ($0.48 million). SPRANS may also be used for genetic disease testing, counseling, and information development and dissemination programs. has sometimes provided specific directives for certain programs, including set-asides for the programs listed above. In FY2016, these congressional directives comprised about 16% of SPRANS funding. In addition, the Family-to-Family Health Information Centers program funds family-staffed and family-run centers. The F2F HICs provide information, education, technical assistance, and peer support to families of children with special health care needs. They also assist in ensuring that families and health professionals are partners in decisionmaking at all levels of care. Most of the provisions created under the ACA included mandatory appropriations for FY2010 through FY2014. The Postpartum Depression program was authorized but has not been funded. This program provides funding to states for abstinence education. Abstinence from sexual activity outside of marriage must be the exclusive focus of the programs funded by these grants. The ACA appropriated $50 million for each of FY2010 and FY2014 for the abstinence education program. This appendix provides a summary of those provisions. The appendix also includes a list of provisions that were added or amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. through FY2014 for this program. P.L. 113-93 (the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014), which was enacted on April 1, 2014, extended the Title V Abstinence Education block grant ($50 million per year) through FY2015 (i.e., September 30, 2015). P. l. 114-10 , the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, increased the TitleV Abstinent Education blockGrant to $75 million peryear for FY2016 and FY2017. SSA ยง511, Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Programs. This program provides grants to states, territories, and tribes for the support of evidence-based early childhood home visiting programs. support in-home visits by health or social service professionals with at-risk families. The ACA appropriated a total of $1.5 billion for FY2010 through FY2014 for the home visitation grant program. P.L. 113-93 extended funding for the program through the first six months of FY2015 and also provided $400 million for FY2016 and $400million for FY2017. Of the amount appropriated for this program, 3% must be reserved for research and 2% for education. and ethnic diversity, and other related subjects; (3) financial literacy; (4) parent-child communication; and (5) educational and career success. The ACA appropriated $75 million annually for each of the five fiscal years FY2010 through FY2014. The Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 extended PREP ($75 million per year) through FY2015. P.L. 114-10 (the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015) extended PREp ($75million per year). evaluation, and 3% for making grants to tribal entities for home visitation services to Indian families. This program provides grants for epidemiologic research, improved screening and diagnosis, clinical research, and public education to expand understanding of the causes and treatments for postpartum depression and related conditions. The ACA authorized funding of $3 million for these grants for FY2010, and such sums as necessary for each of FY2011 and FY2012. The new early childhood home visitation grant program is collaboratively administered by the Administration for Children and Families and the Maternal and Child Health Bureau at HRSA. The MCH Services Block Grant is authorized to receive $850 million annually. The final appropriation for FY2016 was $638.2 million. Of the amount appropriated, an estimated $550.8 million was for block grants to states (86%) and $77.1 million for SPRANS (12%) Full-year appropriations for FY2017 have yet to be enacted. Figure 2 shows historical and current funding in total and for the three components of the MCH services block grant. The program also receives 15% of funds remaining above $600 million. The MCH Services Block Grant was appropriated $638.2 million in funding for FY2016. The majority of this funding is distributed to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau. Some of these funds are reserved for CISS grants, and others are devoted to research via the SPRANS grants. Title V of the Social Security Act established seven broad goals for the program. 12.75% of any amounts appropriated above $600 million must be reserved for CISS. The first $422 million is distributed to each state based on the amount the state received under the consolidated MCH programs in 1983. Any funds above that amount are distributed based upon the number of children in each state who are at or below 100% of the federal poverty level. The program is funded by a formula that takes into consideration the proportion of low-income children in a state compared to the total number ofLow Income Children in the United States. The MCH Services Block Grant provided services to over 34 million children in FY2013. Of those children, nearly 15 million had Medicaid or CHIP coverage. Changes to public and private insurance markets under the ACA may affect the number of pregnant women and children served by the block grant. One general concern with block grants may be that federal funds are being used to address state-specific issues and are not held accountable to national concerns. Congress should ensure that block grant funds can and should be redirected to meet other maternal and child health goals, and not decreased.  states may be best suited to use block grant funds in situations where there is wide variability in burden and cost. Filling in the gaps left by Medicaid and CHIP is one such area, due to variable enrollment eligibility among the states. As mentioned earlier, the indicators discussed in this report are referred to as outcome measures and performance indicators by HRSA. improvement in these measures is an objective of Title II of the MCH Services Block Grant Act of 2013. The report was compiled by the HRSA, CDC, and the Department of Health and Human Services. direct health care services for low-income mothers and children and children with special health care needs (63.3%), followed by enabling services (18.7%), population-based services (10.5%), and infrastructure (7.6%). Although the expenditures nationwide are inverse to their location in the MCH pyramid, the distribution of funds between service categories varies widely by state and depends on the needs of each.and preventive health care that are not otherwise available through other funding sources or providers. MCH Services Block Grant funding was $638.2 million in FY2016. Funding for MCH services is not determined solely by federal funding. States are required to provide $3 for every $4 of federal block grant funding. Other local, state, or federal funds may be used to support MCH activities, and certain MCH programs generate income through insurance payments and Medicaid reimbursements. Figure 3 shows national Title V block grant partnership funding by source of funding for FY2015. The MCH Services block grant has several reporting mechanisms required by the ACA. poverty level (FPL) as a proportion of the total number of children below 100% of the FPL nationally. Each state must contribute $3 for every $4 of federal funds awarded. States may use no more than 10% of their federal allocations for administrative costs. States are required to maintain at least the state's FY1989 level of funding for maternal and child health programs. Block grant funds are awarded each fiscal year in quarterly installments and remain available for expenditure for the current and subsequent fiscal year. In FY2014, 59 states and jurisdictions received MCH Services Block Grant Funding. These programs directly served 2.0 million pregnant women and 36.9 million children (aged 1 to 22), including 2.7 million children with special health care needs. Data on these measures as reported by the states and aggregated by HRSA can be found on the Title V Information System and Discretionary Grants Information System websites.reported to HRSA by theStates can be. found in Appendix E (see Table E-3 and TableE-4 ). Figure 4 shows the proportion of children, pregnant women, infants, children with special health care needs (CSHCN), and others served nationally by the MCH Services Block Grant. In FY2014, there were nearly 50.4 million persons served by Title V programs. The largest category of individuals served nationally are children aged 1 to 22, followed by women of childbearing age and infants, and pregnant women. Title V Programs serve women and children who are covered by private and public insurance. Maternal and child health services, research, training, demonstrations, and other activities funded by the block grant must be linked to one or more of these goals. The MCH Services Block Grant is not a single program, but rather a combination of block grants to states and two discretionary grant programs. This combination of approaches provides flexibility to states in achieving maternal and childhealth goals, while allowing both Congress and HRSA to maintain a degree of control in guiding national initiatives. The issues related to the MCH Service Block Grant span the intersection of clinical health services,. prevention, and public health. Title V of the Social Security Act (SSA) authorizes funding for services and projects that are intended to improve the health of mothers and children. This report focuses on the MCH Services Block Grant, which receives the largest single appropriation under Title V. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) administers the grant. The grant is administered by the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program. Title V was converted to the MCH Services Block Grant in 1981 by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) OBRA 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above into a single block grant. The consolidated block grant was intended to give the states more flexibility in determining how to use federal funds to address maternal and child health. Title V was also used to fund poisoning prevention programs, genetic disease programs, hemophilia treatment centers, adolescent pregnancy grants, and sudden infant death syndrome programs. The MCH Services Block Grant currently has three components: block grants to states, a set-aside for Special Projects of Regional and National Significance (SPRANS), and another set- aside for the Community-Integrated Block Grant. It required that each state receive, at a minimum, the combined funding of the programs that were consolidated under OBRA 1981. Additional changes were made to the block grant under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989. These changes increased the authorization of appropriations, called for greater accountability, and created stricter rules. The new performance measurement system has three tiers: NPMs, national outcome measures (NOMs), and evidence-based/informed strategy measures (ESMs) Beginning with the annual report for FY2016, each state Title V program selects 8 out of 15 N PMs for programmatic focus during the five-year reporting cycle. A comprehensive list of national performance measures is provided in Appendix E . In addition to state-reported measures, the Maternal and Child Health Bureau administers two surveys, the National Survey of Children's Health and the National survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) funds more than 700 projects each year through discretionary grants. The MCHB Discretionary Grant Information System (DGIS) electronically captures performance measures (see Table E-5 ), program, financial, and abstract data, and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the grantees. The data collected are used by M CHB project officers to monitor and assess grantee performance as well as assist in monitoring and evaluating MCHb's programs. collection, and the average number of performance measures each grantee will be required to report is reduced. Further, the structure of the data collection has been revised to better measure the various models of programs and the services each funded program provides. This revision will allow a more accurate and detailed picture of the full scope of services provided through grant programs administered by MCHB. It is hoped that this revision will give a better picture of what is available to the public in the form of grants and loans. performance measures (NPMs) for MCH were instituted in 1997. In 1998, HRSA introduced the Title V Information System (TVIS) to collect and publicly report state-level Title V data. This interactive, web-based system provides public access to Title V performance measures by state. Since 2011, all states have reported annually on their progress toward achieving the targets they set for 18 National Performance Measures. That will end with the FY2015 annual report (see Table E -1 ). Changing trends in MCH risk factors, outcomes, health services, data sources, and advances in scientific knowledge, in conjunction with budgetary constraints led the The notice pertaining to changes in the DGIS was published in the Federal Register on March 15, 2016. MCHB's purpose in revising the performance measures is to better measure progress toward program goals. The overall number of performance measures has been reduced from prior DGIS data. The revised measures will more accurately capture the scope of services provided through the Title V Block Grant. It is hoped that the measures will better align with and support the Block Grant, specifically population domains and National Performance Measures, where reasonable. Title V programs, including the Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant, serve women and children who are covered by public and private insurance. There is no federally prescribed means test coverage status was unknown for 27% of children receiving Title V-funded services. By law, at least 30% of federal block grant funds must be used for primary and preventive care for children with special health care needs. State matching funds and other sources of maternal and child health funding are not required to follow the allocation requirements of federal funds. Title V requires the state agency or agencies administering the Title V program to create an agreement coordinating block grant services with the state's Medicaid program. Beginning in 2015, the result of that Needs Assessment will be integrated into the Application/Annual Report for that reporting year, with updates to follow in the interim years. The primary purpose of this coordination effort is to make Medicaid services accessible, to enroll those who are eligible, and to provide services to those who need them. The goal is to improve access to health care for those in need. has been successful in targeted communities. Some have argued that the decentralized nature of block grants makes it difficult to measure program performance and accountability. The quality of services provided under block grant funding is not currently tracked. However, the existing data required by Title V may be used to determine whether states are efficiently funding their gap areas with block grant funds. In addition to the MCH Services Block Grant, Title V contains a Health and Human Services (HHS) Block Grant. The HHS Block Grant provides funding for health and human services. Access to quality health care for mothers and children is measured by several questions in the National Survey of Children's Health. Progress toward national health objectives, such as reduction of the infant mortality rate, has shown past improvement but has stagnated in recent years. Due to the flexibility of funding, varying circumstances in states, and other societal issues, it is impossible to globally track the direct impact of maternal and child health block funding. However, Title V funding is only one component affecting these measures. Other federal and state programs and policies, including Medicaid and WIC, as well as complex societal issues,. also affect the health and well-being of low-income children and their families. In FY2012, 33% of pregnant women who received Title V-funded services were covered by private health insurance. 56% were enrolled in Medicaid, 4% had no insurance coverage, and the insurance coverage status of 7% of Title V clients was unknown. Among children ages 1 to 22 years old, 34% were covered. by Medicaid. 4% werecovered by CHIP, 29% were. covered byprivate health insurance, and 6% hadNo insurance coverage.as well as those who have no insurance Coverage. and submit an annual report to the Secretary on all Title V activities. States must provide a list of activities and recipients of Title V funding, along with a description of progress toward meeting national and state health objectives. The reports must be presented in a standardized format. While the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states, they are not intended to replace state-by-state reporting. The measures are intended to provide a framework for state-to-state comparisons. They are not meant to replace individual state- to state reporting. through FY2017 (i.e., September 30, 2017) Appendix B. Source of Funding for Title V Block Grants to States, the District of Columbia, and Other Jurisdictions, by State, FY2015 Appendix C. MCH Services Block Grant Funding History Appendix D. Selected Maternal and Child Health Measures, by state Appendix E. National Title V Performance and Outcome Measures Table E -1 shows the national performance measures for Title. V for FY2011-FY2015. Table E-2 shows thenational performance measures. for FY2016 and later years. Title V was enacted by Congress in 1935 as part of the Social Security Act (SSA, P.L. 74-271) to promote and support the health of mothers and children. Two grant programs were established to enable states to improve maternal and child health services. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 replaced the term "crippled" with the term 'children with special needs' in the original Title V of the SSA. The term 'special needs' is now used to refer to children with disabilities.  Block grants to states provide funding for core public health services provided by maternal and child health agencies. These core services are often presented as a four-level pyramid. The four levels of services are infrastructure building, population-based, enabling, and direct health care. Infrastructure building services are foundation-building activities that provide for the development and maintenance of health services systems. These services increase a health system capacity by supporting training and other workforce development activities, as illustrated in Figure 1. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. coordinating health care systems and data system architecture, providing funding for applied research, and developing guidelines. Population-based services promote core public health functions such as universal screening, health promotion, and disease prevention campaigns. Direct health care services provided under Title V are intended to fill the gaps in primary care. Enabling services are services that facilitate access to care, such as case management, transportation, purchase of insurance, and coordination with other programs. These include newborn screening, lead screening, immunization, oral health, and injury prevention. for-profit entity. States must submit to the Secretary of HHS an application that includes a statewide needs assessment (to be conducted once every five years) and a plan for meeting the needs identified in the needs assessment. The needs assessment must identify statewide health status goals (consistent with national health objectives, such as Healthy People 2020); the need for preventive and primary care services for pregnant women, mothers, infants, and children; and services for children with special health care needs. The plan to address the needs Assessment must include a description of how the plan will be implemented. There is still variation among states in terms of capacity for collecting and reporting data. Priority needs that were frequently identified in states' FY2013 MCH Services Block Grant applications include family support services, oral health services and childhood obesity treatment and prevention. The statute requires states to provide the number of individuals served, either in the state or in the U.S. as a percentage of the total population. The state may annually adjust the strategic plans as their priorities change. The federal government provides funding for MCH services in the form of grants to states. with special health care needs (CSHCN), and 40% for services for either of these groups or for other appropriate maternal and child health activities. Services funded by the block grant may include prenatal care, well-child care, dental care, immunization, family planning, and vision and hearing screening services. Block grant funding is also used to support school-based health care services. They may also include inpatient services for children with special health needs, screening services for lead-based poisoning, and counseling services for parents of sudden infant death syndrome victims. States may not use the block grant funds to provide cash payments to recipients of health services, or for the purchase of land, facilities, or major medical equipment. Funds may not be used for inpatient services, other than for children with special health care needs, high-risk pregnant women, and infants (unless approved by the Secretary of HHS) Block grant funds cannot be used to satisfy any requirement for the expenditure of federal funds, and may not transfer block grant money to any other program. person or by phone, by the Title V block grant. States are also required to report expenditures by the four broad categories of service (direct health care services, enabling services, population-based services, and infrastructure-building services) Maternal and child health measures provide information on the overall health of mothers and children in each state. Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), when available, are also presented as a point of comparison. The numbers provided by states may be estimates if the actual numbers are not available. state's population. Distribution of funds depends on the needs of the states' populations. Direct health care services may cost more per person served than other services. Although the formula block grants to states are intended to fill gaps in a broad range of health services provided to women and children, certain uses of block grant funds are not included in the formula. The report provides data on state and national indicators and funding, and summarized in the program participation and reporting section of this report. The full report is available on the HRSA's website. grant funds on national health indicators such as IMR. Congress and the executive branch cannot direct states to specifically target one data point with block grant funding, but may use other approaches. Programs such as the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program and Strong Start have been promoted by policymakers as direct approaches to improving this particular health objective. Healthy Start, a national program that targets the infant mortality rate in selected communities, has been promoted as an alternative to block grant funds. Children with special health care needs (CSHCN) are defined by HRSA as "those who have or are at increased risk for a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition" CSHCN includes children with disabilities who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI, formerly ยง1615 [c] of the SSA); lead-based paint; and low-income women and children. Over time, additional programs targeting these children were added to the Public Health Service Act (PHSA) and SSA. The Personal Responsibility Education program is administered by the Administration for Children and Families. It is designed to educate adolescents on both abstinence and contraception for prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS. The adulthood preparation subjects are (1) healthy relationships, including marriage and family interactions; (2) adolescent development, including the development of healthy attitudes and values about adolescent growth and development; and (3) body image, racial and ethnic identity.Funds were not appropriated for this program. avoid duplication of effort among the programs. State block grant administrators must also coordinate with other related programs, including the Special Supplemental Program for Women, Infants, and Children. Most state MCH and Medicaid agencies have created interagency agreements that outline the expected areas and levels of coordination. Most states specify the services provided by each agency under the agreement. Commonly, the Title refers to the block grant program, not to the individual program or the program's funding source. The federal government provides block grants to states for health, developmental disability and family planning programs. V agency contracts with health providers to provide the services. Agency administering the state's Medicaid program assumes the responsibility for reimbursement of those services. States may also include coordination with other services, such as WIC, under the agreement. HRSA's 2008 analysis recommended specific components for interagency agreements and provided a model interagency agreement. Adoption of a model agreement could build upon the Title V effort to ensure coordination among the block grant, Medicaid, and other programs. The SPRANS program is a HRSA- administered discretionary grant program for research and training for maternal and child health and children. HRSA must report to Congress on the activities carried out under the SPRANS and CISS programs. HRSA has developed national performance measures in coordination with states and grantees. States have also developed and reported additional state-level measures. The first national audit of the program will be performed every two years. The second audit will be carried out every three years, and the third will be every five years, unless there is a change in the program's funding source or the program is terminated. HRSA must annually compile the information reported by states and present the data to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Senate Committee on Finance in a Report to Congress. This report must include a summary of information reported to the Secretary of HHS by the states, and a compilation of specified maternal and child health indicators, nationally and broken down by state. The Secretary must also provide a report on funded SPRANS and CISS projects to those committees. As noted above, a list of other maternal andChild health measures is included in the report. pediatric and family practice workforce data to HRSA. States report the number of obstetricians, family practitioners, certified family nurse practitioners, pediatricians, and certified pediatric nurse practitioners who were licensed in the state in that year. They are also required to report data on whether individuals who are eligible for programs such as Medicaid and SSI are receiving services, or whether pregnant women have access to adequate prenatal care. For example, states report theNumber of Medicaid-eligible individuals who received a service paid for by the Medicaid program.