the first plan that will become even more problematic in the future as the magnitude and complexity of the system acquisition increases. responsibility for implementing U.S. VISIT now resides in the Border and Transportation Security directorate. We are currently reviewing the fiscal year 2003 expenditure plan and will ascertain whether these problems were addressed. We designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors. First, the implementation and transformed of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take years to complete. the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, DOD, and the Department of Health and Human Services. Creating and maintaining a structure that can leverage partners and stakeholders will be necessary to effectively implement the national homeland security strategy. The new department is also being formed from components with a wide array of existing major management challenges and program risks. For instance, one DHS directorate’s responsibility includes the protection of critical information systems that we already consider a high risk. In fact, many of the major components merging into the new department include the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), FEMA, and DOD. will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. Failure to effectively carry out its mission would expose the nation to potentially very serious consequences. DHS, with an anticipated budget of almost $40 billion and an estimated 170,000 employees, will be the third largest government agency; not the first. In the aftermath of September 11, invigorating the nation’s homeland security missions has become one of the federal government’S most significant challenges, the report says. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is the nation's second-largest government agency. DOD was formed almost entirely from agencies whose principal mission was national defense. Effectively implementing and transforming DHS may be an even more daunting challenge. DHS will combine 22 agencies specializing in various disciplines: law enforcement, border security, biological research, among others. It will take many years to achieve, and even today, the department continues to face enduring management challenges and high- risk areas that are, in part, legacies of its unfinished integration. The Department of Defense was created more than 50 years ago. of this magnitude in the public and private sector carry significant risks, including lost productivity and inefficiencies. Successful transformations of large organizations, even those undertaking less strenuous reorganizations, can take from 5 to 7 years to achieve. Necessary management capacity and oversight mechanisms must be established. Critical aspects of DHS’s success will depend on well-functioning relationships with third parties that will take time to establish and maintain, says John Defterios, former director of the Department of Homeland Security. disaster mitigation, and computer security, for instance. DHS will oversee a number of non-homeland-security activities, such as the Coast Guard’s marine safety responsibilities. The magnitude of the responsibilities, combined with the challenge and complexity of the transformation, underscores the perseverance and dedication that will be required of all DHS’S leaders, employees, and stakeholders to achieve success. Further, it is well recognized that mergers are necessary to achieve the synergy that can help provide better security against terrorism. and programs risks could have serious consequences on our intergovernmental system, our citizens’ health and safety, and our economy. Overall, our designation of the implementation and transformation of DHS as a high-risk area stems from the importance of its mission and the nation’s reliance on its effectiveness. I would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other Members of the Subcommittee may have. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Richard M. Stana at (202) 512-8777. DHS is merging intelligence positions from the former Customs and INS. One of the most significant challenges facing DHS at ports of entry is the implementation of the U.S. VISIT system. This significant undertaking is intended to capture both entry and exit data on travelers. It will also have many implications for operations at U.K. ports and in the Middle East, according to a report by the Center for Security Policy and the RAND Corporation. The report was published by the RAND Corp. and is based on a joint report by RAND and the Government Accountability Office. TSA and the U.S. Coast Guard, face at least one major problem. TSA has had considerable challenges in meeting deadlines for screening baggage. The Coast Guard faces the challenges inherent in a massive fleet modernization. DHS’s national security mission is of such importance that the failure to address its management challenges is a failure to meet its mission, says the report. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. It was co-authored by David Frum and Peter Bergen. single interface between the trade community and the federal government for trade data. In April 2001, Customs awarded a 5-year contract, with options to extend the contract to not more than 15 years, to a system integrator. Successfully managing a project as large and complex as ACE is a challenging undertaking. To its credit, Customs has taken action to implement our recommendations, as follows: We recommended Customs incrementally justify the ACE investment. Customs defined and committed to implement process controls for justifying and making ACE investment decisions. The Automated Commercial Environment (ACE) is expected to cost about $1.7 billion and is to replace Customs’ antiquated system. Expected benefits from ACE include speeding the flow of legitimate commerce into and out of the United States, identifying and targeting high-risk commerce requiring greater scrutiny, and providing a greater level of scrutiny. To learn more about the ACE and other initiatives, visit the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's website at: http://www.dhs.gov/. We recommended Customs develop rigorous and analytically verifiable cost estimating. We recommended Customs employ effective software acquisition processes. Customs developed and plans to implement a human capital management strategy for the Customs modernization office, which is responsible for managing the ACE acquisition. Customs continues to make progress and has plans to establisheffective software acquisition process controls, as embodied primarily in the second level of SEI’s Software Acquisition Capability Maturity. We recommend Customs develop and implement a cost- estimating program that employs the tenets of effective cost estimating as defined by the Software Engineering Institute. of entry, including expenditures, staffing, inspection procedures, and infrastructure. We reviewed INS’s fiscal year 2002 expenditure plan and associated system acquisition documentation and system plans. We found that the initial plan did not provide sufficient information about INS commitments for the system. We concluded that this lack of detail is a material limitation in our ability to evaluate the system and its value to the U.S. government. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In August 2001, the Border Patrol estimated it would need between 11,700 and 14,000 agents, additional support personnel, and hundreds of millions of dollars in additional technology and infrastructure to fully implement the Southwest border strategy. We reported that it would take at least 5 more years (until 2006) to reach the minimum number of agents. The Border Patrol has 567 agents deployed along the northern border. It has taken longer to implement the strategy than originally planned because of difficulties hiring agents and delays in obtaining approvals needed to deploy technology. The Border Patrol currently has about 9,500 agents deployed along the southwest border. That is nearly a 3-fold increase from the 3,400 agents the Border Patrol had along the Southwest border in 1994. It is still about 2,200 agents short of the minimum number needed to deter illegal entry along the northern border. The Border Patrol continues to face hiring challenges to meet its estimated needs, the agency said in a statement. The agency said it will continue to hire agents until the needs are met. efforts to communities because its initial failure to warn some communities about anticipated increases in illegal alien traffic caught community officials by surprise. Concerns have been raised over the environmental impact of current plans to build additional fencing along the border in Arizona. When apprehensions surged in communities into which the illegal alien Traffic was reportedly pushed, officials and residents in one community reported experiencing loss of business, destruction of private property, and environmental degradation. A recent news article described how some local residents were angered by the increased traffic. The Border Patrol has realized its goal of shifting illegal alien traffic away from urban areas into more remote areas. Many aliens have instead risked injury and death by trying to cross mountains, deserts, and rivers. This prompted the Border Patrol to implement a Border Safety Initiative consisting of, among other things, a media campaign to warn aliens about the dangers of crossing illegally, as well as establishing a hotline for reporting illegal crossings. The hotline can be reached at 1-800-273-8255 or by clicking here. search-and-rescue units. Since then apprehensions along the southwest border have declined to less than 1 million in fiscal year 2002. While there may be many reasons for the decline in apprehensions, in response to our recommendation, the Border Patrol has developed a plan designed to evaluate the impacts of its southwest border strategy. The Border Patrol will release a report on the impact of the southwest strategy on apprehensions in the coming months. The report will be published in a special edition of The New York Times, on sale now. activities, additional challenges remain, particularly in view of the new and heightened emphasis on terrorism. These challenges include (1) continuing to improve its evolving trade compliance program and (2) acquiring a new trade processing system. The volume of trade is expected to surpass $2 trillion in the year 2006. To speed the processing of imports and improve compliance with trade laws, specifically, the Customs Modernization and Informed Compliance program is being implemented. The program is intended to speed the Processing of Imports and improve Compliance with U.S. trade laws. Act of 1993 (also known as the ‘Mod Act’), BCBP’s predecessor, Customs, developed an “informed compliance strategy’ In 1999, we recommended that the Customs Service develop and implement an evaluation of the effectiveness of its informed compliance strategy. Customs agreed with our recommendation and completed its Trade Compliance Strategy Study on May 24, 2001. The study indicated that the strategy improves compliance, but the impact on overall compliance rates is small. For example, one initiative, the Company Enforced Compliance Process (CECP), was to address large importers’ noncompliance. to the study, Customs was to punish noncomplying companies by imposing “confirmed risk” designations, increasing examinations, removing privileges, and referring for penalties. However, the confirmed risk status was only used six times, and loss of privileges and referral for penalties were never used. The study concluded that CECP was not much of an enforced compliance process, and it was discontinued. On the other hand, the study found that the companies’ compliance rates increased after they participated in the other initiatives. BCBP's priority mission is to prevent terrorists and terrorist weapons from entering the United States. BCBP has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving security, including: Container Security Initiative, which stations BCBP personnel in key international ports. Non-Intrusive Inspection technology, which increases the ability to detect conventional explosives, nuclear weapons, radioactive components, and other weapons of mass destruction. Automated Targeting System, which is used by the National Targeting Center and field targeting units in the U.S. and overseas. For example, we reviewed Customs’ acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment. Experts we contacted did not view pagers as search instruments but rather as personal safety devices. In trying to achieve the commercial-security balance, BCBP is challenged to ensure that antiterrorism efforts do not slow the flow of legitimate international commerce and travel. According to BCBP, it says it is working on a plan to reduce the number of radiation pagers being used by the Customs service to a maximum of 1,000.  Customs has recognized that it needed to identify what is high risk and target its limited resources. We have work underway to review most of these initiatives and will make our results available to the Subcommittee as soon as the work is completed. Separating high-risk cargo from low- or no- risk cargo is extremely important to BCBP because searching each and every cargo and traveler that enters the U.S. would cripple the flow of legitimate trade and travel and would require a huge resource commitment. has worked with importers on concerns such as where their goods originated, the physical security and integrity of their overseas plants and those of their foreign suppliers. BCBP has reaffirmed to importers the importance of knowing their customers and has examined the security practices of their freight forwarders and the routes their shipments travel. AlthoughBCBP has made some progress in implementing initiatives that are designed to improve the efficiency of its regulation of commercial trade, there is still a long way to go, the agency says. BCBP has undertaken efforts to focus its enforcement on selecting and inspecting the highest-risk incoming cargo. It has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving its ability to identify potentially risky cargo for inspection. BCBP relies on the use of threat assessments and actionable intelligence, the ability of inspectors to quickly discover or sense an unlawful cargo, and the capability of nonintrusive inspection technology to detect potentially harmful contraband. Information is key to identifying high-risk cargo. Accurate information can help BCBP make reliable risk determinations. inspectors are challenged by the tight timeframes and pressures they work under to move legitimate cargo through the ports. relying on inspectors alone can increase the risk that contraband enters the country. The inspection of incoming foreign mail remains largely a manual process that relies primarily on physical examination. We found several challenges relating to this process, but BCBP’s determination that our results were law enforcement sensitive precludes our discussing them here. However, at the time our work was completed, one courier was working with the former Customs Service. to pilot test an advance manifest system. The database is intended to allow Customs to analyze incoming package information and make more informed decisions about what packages to inspect. Large-scale x-ray and gamma–ray imaging systems, portal radiation monitors, and portable and hand-held radiation detection devices can reduce the need for costly, intensive inspections and save inspection time and resources. As important as the use of technology is, there are certain limitations and challenges that need to be considered, according to the U.S. Customs Service. along the northern border, mitigating the negatives affects the strategy may have on communities that experience an increase in illegal alien traffic, and responding to continuing concerns over the safety of aliens who cross in remote and desolate areas. At our nation’s ports, BCBP faces an array of challenges, including improving inspectors’ ability to verify the identity of travelers and whether they can be admitted into the country, unifying and enhancing inspector training, and complying with the congressional mandate to implement a system to track the entry and exit of all aliens. Model. Customs has made progress in implementing some, but not all, of our recommendations. Customs is in the early stages of acquiring ACE, many challenging tasks remain before Customs will have implemented full ACE capability. To prevent illegal entry of individuals into the United States between the ports of entry, BCBP has deployed significant resources but estimates significantly more are needed. Continued implementation of the southwest border strategy faces a range of challenges, including meeting hiring goals and obtaining needed approvals to deploy fencing and technology to implement its strategy. entry will continue to be a challenge for BCBP. In previous work, we reported that the Border Patrol had estimated that significantly more resources would be needed to fully implement its border control strategy. The strategy postulated that as resources were applied in one area, the flow of illegal alien traffic would shift. The Border Patrol has been implementing a phased strategy to increase deterrence to illegal entry beginning, first, with the areas that had the largest influx of illegal aliens. In 1994, the strategy was put into effect. land, air, and sea ports of entry using fictitious names, and counterfeit driver’s licenses and birth certificates made using readily available software. INS and Customs Service inspectors never questioned the authenticity of the counterfeit documents, and our investigators encountered no difficulty in entering the country using them. BCBP will also face an array of challenges in ensuring that its border inspectors are adequately trained, including ensuring appropriate training is provided in the detection of fraudulent documents. For example, formerINS and Customs inspectors are still being trained at separate basic training academies using two different curricula. work at 15 land border ports, suggest that one training challenge for BCBP will be to ensure that both new and experienced border inspectors are capable of readily detecting fraudulent documents. The Bureau will also face challenges regarding the collection, analysis, and use of intelligence information in the field. In 1997, an INS-contracted study reported the lack of an intelligence capability at all INS locations, including districts and ports. More recent studies suggest needs in this area persist. The former INS recognized the need for more intelligence support in theField. sensitive, we are precluded from discussing specific aspects of this matter in this unclassified statement. However, our work to date shows that BCBP’s targeting efforts face a range of challenges relating to threat assessments, actionable intelligence, and nonintrusive inspection technology. Having sufficient numbers of well-trained and motivated staff is also key to identifying high-risk cargo. Inspectors and canine officers are trained to detect unusual or abnormal behaviors or circumstances that suggest a potential threat or unlawful activity. U.S. and certain Canadian citizens are exempt from having to present any document upon entry. According to immigration data, inspectors at land ports intercepted nearly 60,000 fraudulent documents in fiscal year 2002. More than 8,000 state and local offices issue birth certificates, driver’s licenses, and other documents, any of which could potentially be counterfeit. Clearly, others have successfully gained access to this country using counterfeit documents, we testified earlier this year on how our investigators entered the country from Canada, Mexico, and Jamaica. Inspectors must quickly make decisions about whether to admit a traveler into the United States. Two of the factors that challenge inspectors’ ability to verify the travelers’ identity and admissibility are that some travelers may enter the U.S. without having to present a travel document. Some travelers can present a variety of documents to gain entry into the US. Some of these documents can be easily counterfeited, according to the US VISIT system, which provides information on how to apply for entry. contributions to this testimony included Seto J. Bagdoyan, Michael P. Dino, Darryl W. Dutton, Barbara Guffy, E. Anne Laffoon, and Lori Weiss. This is a work of the U.S. government and not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.