number of samples that we might have drawn. Since each sample could have provided different estimates, we quantified the sampling error. We express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample’s results at a 95 percent confidence interval. This is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drew. Within each stratum and overall, the confidence intervals for survey results for percentages are generally within +/- 5 percentage points. The only estimates for which the confidence interval exceed 5 percentage point are certain results for the business methods stratum. In these instances, the confidence intervals are from 5 to 6 percentage points. The quality of survey data can also be affected by nonsampling error. For other estimates in the report, we have not provided the upper and lower bounds in the text or tables. Those details for all survey results are available in the e- supplement related to this report. In this report, our figures containing survey results show the upper & lower bounds for estimates at the 95 percent confidence interval. In the report’s e- Supplement, we show the results of our survey of more than 2,000 people. question 3 based on the midpoint. The 95 percent confidence intervals for these results are within +/- 10 percent of the estimates themselves. For some other survey questions, we also reviewed examiners’ open- ended responses on selected topics. We selected those topics based on our interviews with experts and USPTO officials as well as our analysis of closed-ended survey responses. The estimate for technology center 2100 (Computer Architecture, Software, and Information Security) has a95 percent confidence interval of within +/- 18 percent of its estimate itself. nonresponse errors, and data collection and processing errors. To minimize nonsampling error, we took several steps in developing the survey and in collecting and analyzing survey data. We worked with our survey professionals, among other things, to draft questions that were clear and unbiased. We pretested the survey in person with five USPTO staff: three examiners who are also representatives to the examiners’ union, a supervisory patent examiner, and a quality assurance specialist. We used these pretests to check that the questions wereclear and unambiguous, used correct terminology, requested information that could be feasibly To minimize nonresponse error, we made a variety of contacts with the sample of examiners during the survey. We used survey software in our analyses to produce appropriate estimates and confidence intervals. The programs we used to process and analyze the survey data were independently verified to ensure the accuracy of this work. In addition, from October 20 through 23, 2015, we attempted to follow up via telephone calls to all 1,102 examiners who had neither completed the survey nor told us that they were. obtained, and were comprehensive and unbiased. We also obtained comments on the survey from USPTO management and leadership from the examiners’ union. Using a web-based survey provided several advantages, including allowing examiners to enter their responses into an electronic instrument that created an automatic record for each respondent. This eliminated the potential for errors that could have resulted if we had used a manual process to enter respondents’ data from paper surveys. In addition, we obtained a quality review by a separate GAO survey methodologist. no longer examiners. To adjust the sampling weight for potential nonresponse bias, we used standard weighting class adjustments. The weighted response rate was also 80 percent. In this report and in the related e-supplement, we present the survey results using the nonresponse adjusted weights, which are generalizable to the eligible population of examiners and are based on USPTO years of experience at the agency. We also analyzed nonresponse biases to assess whether any factors were associated with examiners’ propensity to respond and (2) allow our analysis of respondents to properly reflect the sampling universe. prior art searches in the past quarter; we excluded those responses. Where possible, we coded responses to reflect a range of numbers by assigning a low and a high value. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of results overall, within strata, and within GS level categories. Results were not statistically different when using the low value, midpoint (average between low and high values), or high value of a range. As a result, we present results for which examiners’ responses most frequently included keywords we identified for each topic. An analyst conducted a keyword search of all responses to the selected open-ended questions and coded responses containing the keywords. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. Our report provides some examples or summaries of examiners' comments based on this review. Examiners' responses to open- ended questions are not generalizable to other examiners. In addition, because we did not conduct a systematic review of all open-ending responses to our survey, we do not report the exact number of examiner who provided responses on the topics we reviewed. All tests of association were carried out at the 5 percent level of significance. The testing was carried out in SUDAAN, which is statistical software appropriate for the analysis of survey data. The null hypothesis was that there is no association between the two tested variables. When the association between two variables, conditional on a third variable, is of interest, this is referred to as the stratum-adjusted test. The results of the study were independently verified to ensure their accuracy. The study was published in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. USPTO is taking steps to strengthen monitoring as well as helping examiners consider a wide array of nonpatent literature sources. But USPTO has not developed and documented a strategy to identify and assess the optimal means of incorporating new sources of art into these tools. Such a strategy would be consistent with federal standards for internal control and maintenance of information systems. Developing and periodically updating such a strategy could help USPto take full advantage of its new information technology tools to address some of the challenges examiners face in identifying relevant prior art. additional nonpatent literature sources to its new system because of its initial focus on developing parity with the existing system. USPTO had not established a documented strategy to identify and assess new sources in the future or the most optimal means of providing access to them. According to federal standards for internal control, control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. These activities are an integral part of an agency’s planning to achieve effective results and efficiently manage government resources. Federal standards for internal control specify that agencies should assess the risks the agency faces. An estimated 23 percent of examiners remained not at all confident to somewhat confident. In USPTO’s 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, the agency indicated its intent to evaluate changes to the its system for overtime. The agency is also looking at ways to improve the incentives for examiners to do their jobs better, the report says. The U.S. Office of Personnel Management is a private, nonprofit organization based in Washington. Patent examiners may move from one technology center or art unit to another during their careers. USPTO has reported that examiner attrition has increased over the past 5 years. As we found in 2007, attrition of less experienced examiners is a significant loss for the agency, in part because examiners require 4 to 6 years of on-the-job experience before they become fully proficient in conducting patent application reviews. When these staff leave, the agency loses as much as 5 years of training investment in them. of May 2015, approximately 39 percent of all examiners in the technology centers we reviewed had been at the agency for less than 5 years. As of September 2015, a majority of examiners did not have a degree beyond a bachelor’s degree when hired. USPTO officials told us that the agency has aimed to match new hires’ previous work experiences and educational backgrounds to technology centers. We found in 2005 that examiners were reluctant to attend voluntary training given the time demands involved. assess and measure each technology center’s progress toward closing any gaps in examiners’ technical knowledge and skills. Identifying critical occupations, skills, and competencies and analyzing workforce gaps are leading principles in workforce planning, as we and the Office of Personnel Management have previously identified. All personnel need to possess and maintain a level of competence that allows them to accomplish their assigned duties. Management needs to ensure that skill needs are continually assessed and that the organization is able to close any gaps. to obtain a workforce with the skills required to achieve organizational goals. Management also needs to provide employees the right training to develop and retain skill levels to meet changing organizational needs. USPTO developed a human capital strategy, its 2015-2018 People Plan, which replaced its 2011-2015 Strategic Human Capital Plan. The agency also identified the role of patent examiner as a mission- critical occupation and identified the competencies needed for this occupation. These competencies include technical work experience/education and technical competence, which we refer to collectively as technical competence. knowledge and skills of the individual examiners assigned to that center. Without periodically evaluating gaps between the technical competence of examiners and the knowledge and skills needed in each technology center, USPTO cannot ensure that it has appropriate strategies, such as training or other efforts, to close any gaps. The agency’s 2015-2018 People Plan does not include measures for monitoring progress in closing gaps, the authors say. The steps, in conjunction with developing measures to monitor progress toward closing any gaps, would help the agency address the effects of evolving technologies and workforce changes over time. requires that agencies (1) establish objective, quantifiable, and measurable performance goals and (2) establish performance indicators to measure progress toward each performance goal. The limitations to USPTO’s. ability to monitor examiners’ prior art searches at a technology center or art unit. level may hinder the agency�s ability. to identify and address issues in the thoroughness of examiners.“Internal controls should generally be designed to assure that ongoing monitoring. of their internal controls should assess the quality of performance over time,” the agency says.  examiners’ technical competence is an important factor in understanding patent applications and locating relevant prior art in the time allotted. USPTO has taken steps to identify the technical competencies of various examiner positions and to offer voluntary technical training opportunities to examiners. The agency has not conducted an overall analysis of the technical competence of its examiners to identify potential competency gaps for each technology center. Periodically conducting such analyses report to analyze the time examiners need to perform a thorough examination, the authors say. interpret written technical materials, rules, regulations, instructions, and reports. Specific technical competencies vary depending on the technology examined by each technology center and art unit. USPTO has documented specific technical competency for examiners in a series of “job analysis worksheets’ The technology centers use performance appraisal plans to individually assess examiners’ skills and competency gaps, officials say. But doing so does not address the question of whether broader Competency gaps exist at the technology center level or how they can be addressed. USPTO is updating its contract for initial classification services to require a higher level of expertise. The agreement between USPTO and EPO that supports the CPC system commits both offices to exchange best practices on classifications. As of March 2016, EPO and USPPO had not agreed upon a measure of consistency between the offices. The agencies can enhance and sustain their collaborative efforts by defining and articulating a common outcome and establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies, the authors say.. Establishing agreement with EPO on a target of consistency in classifying patent applications would help to implement this practice. the Department of Commerce’s written comments, reproduced in appendix IV, the Department concurred with our recommendations. USPTO provided additional technical comments that we incorporated, as appropriate. We also provided a draft of this report to EPO and JPO for their views and comment. EPO indicated it had no comments on the draft; JPO provided technical comments. The Department noted ongoing efforts to work with EPO to identify a target level of consistency for CPC decisions and develop a plan to monitor consistency. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: Hiring Efforts Are Not Sufficient to Reduce the Patent Application Backlog. USPTO: Improvements Needed to Better Manage Patent Office Automation and Address Workforce Challenges. USpTO: USPto Has Made Progress in Hiring Examiners, but Challenges to Retention Remain. US PTO: Key Processes for Managing Patent Automation Strategy Need Strengthening. U.S PTO has made progress in hiring examiners but challenges to retention remain. of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the USPTO, the Commissioner for Patents, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. not identified a target level of consistency or a plan to monitor consistency between USPTO contractor and EPO classifications. The potential benefits of adopting the new classification system may be reduced as inconsistently classified patents make it more difficult for examiners to identify relevant U.S. and foreign patent literature. The new search system US PTO plans has the potential to integrate additional sources of nonpatent literature, an approach that EPO and JPO have taken and cited with other patent offices. USPTO is taking a number of steps to improve patent quality. USPTO has experienced some challenges working with EPO to adopt and consistently implement a new patent classification system. To enhance USPto’s ability to identify relevant prior art, we recommend that the Secretary of Commerce direct the Director of USPPO to take the following seven actions as the agency continues to implement its efforts to improve prior art searches. To ensure that USPBO is able to take full advantage of its investment in quality patents, the agency should develop a plan to monitor consistency to achieve the target. USPTO has found that classifications for some U.S. patent applications under the CPC system are inconsistent with EPO’s classifications. USPTO officially adopted the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) system in January 2015. CPC gives examiners greater access to foreign patent literature compared to the prior system. It can be expanded more easily to include new technologies, USPtoT officials say. The new system is to be jointly used by both offices. Officials from both offices say it is a response to technological change. We conducted this performance audit from November 2014 to June 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In assessing USPTO’s efforts, we identified criteria in the federal standards for internal control and the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, as amended. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. This appendix provides details on steps in the patent examination process at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) This report describes the challenges examiners face in identifying relevant prior art. It also describes how selected foreign patent offices have addressed challenges. The report assesses the extent to which the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has taken steps to address any challenges. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. Report was coordinated with our report on patent quality. The European Patent Office and the Japan Patent Office were selected based on comments observers made about the quality of their work. World Intellectual Property Organization says 2.7 million patent applications were filed worldwide in 2014. 2.2 million applications filed with patent offices in the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, and Europe. EPO issues patents that cover 42 countries, most of which are member countries that are party to the European Patent Agreement (EPO) The organization estimates that approximately half of all applications worldwide are repetitive filings in a patent family, and the rest are initial filings. The IP5 offices, including EPO and JPO, each receive hundreds of thousands of applications each year. EPO and JPO have about one-half and one-fifth as many examiners as USPTO, respectively. There is a limit on the number of federal employees JPO can have; therefore, 494 of its 1,702 examiners are fixed-term. English (about 80 percent of applications), French (about 5 percent), and German (about 15 percent) are the official languages of the EPO, JPO and other patent offices. The EPO has three official languages, one of which is used for processing an application.  EPO only recruits students with at least a master’s degree and almost all JPO examiners join the office after graduate school. At EPO, examiners must also meet a requirement that they understand English, German, and French. JPO officials identified the longevity of examiners as a strength, stating that examiners are well trained and have experience that may enhance the quality of patent application examinations.to officials from these offices. EPO examiners spend their first 2 years in training, alternating periods of classroom training with periods of on-the-job training. EPO’s quality management system also calls for random audits, including a minimum of two prior art search audits for each examiner per year. JPO officials also reported taking steps to ensure that the patents it issues are of high quality. These steps include a director quality check, consultations with other examiners, and quality audits of a sample of examinations. In 2014, examiners recorded approximately 83,000 consultations and received approximately 243,000 new applications, according to JPO official's. EPO and JPO have procedures to review examiners’ work before issuing or denying a patent. At EPO, applications are examined by a panel of three examiners: a first examiner, second examiner, and chair. An individual examiner may serve as first examiner on some applications and second examiner or chair on others. USPTO has taken actions to leverage the work of foreign patent offices just as EPO andJPO have done, but the agency has experienced challenges working with EPO on a new patent. EPO and JPO examiners use classification and keyword searches instead of more complex search tools. EPO uses some automated tools that assist in keyword-based searches or provide automated search results. One EPO tool provides recommended search terms in its three official languages to examiners, based on a database of examiners’ past searches. The results are in the form of a ranked list of potentially related documents, which provides a starting point for examiners before they begin a manual search. The examiners in both offices hire examiners with technical expertise and provide several years of training. EPO’s primary search tool allows examiners to use a single interface to search through all of EPO's internal databases as well as some external databases of prior art. In addition to creating an internal database of nonpatent literature documents to facilitate examiners’ searches, EPO also added descriptive metadata to index these documents to help examiners find the most relevant documents. The system also incorporates features that make it user-friendly—for example, grouping documents to avoid examiners facing dozens of copies of the same article from different sources. EPO officials identified their search engine and the large number of indexed prior art resources available within the search engine as strengths of the office. EPO officials said that the office prefers to have internal collections of these resources so they may be integrated into its search tools. Some sources remain external and separate from EPO’s search systems. Because the cost of bringing sources into EPO's search systems is high, the office needs a strong business case to justify the expense. According to these officials, EPO needs to be able to provide a service to the public that it can't provide today. USPTO is collaborating with foreign patent offices to give examiners access to examination files from those offices. USPTO, in collaboration with EPO, designed and implemented a new, joint patent classification system. The U.S. Patent Classification system became outdated following budget constraints in the early 2000s that undermined the agency’s efforts to update the classification system in the United States, Europe, or other offices that adopt the system. In the pilot with the Korean Intellectual Property Office, examiners perform independent searches and examinations, then compare results. uses commercial databases of nonpatent literature to augment its internal database and annually evaluates whether each external database is useful for prior art search. Using patent classification systems. EPO and JPO use classification systems to help examiners narrow their searches and find relevant patent literature even if the patent application uses inconsistent terms or is written in a foreign language. Examiners may then look at other applications and patents within the same group to find similar inventions. A system that has more groups— sometimes more than one. Classification systems allow examiners to conduct prior art searches based on the classes assigned to an application, independent of its language and wording. This can improve search quality by producing results that would not be found from a specific keyword search but are nonetheless closely related. Reducing the number of results an examiner needs to consider decreases the time needed for the prior art search, thereby improving efficiency. According to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, the average time it takes to search for a patent is about three minutes. worksharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished applications at other offices. These search reports may include prior art relevant to similar applications filed with EPO. EPO and JPO incorporate specific nonpatent literature resources into their offices’ main search tools, which may allow examiners to more efficiently search both patent and nonpatents literature by keyword, rather than searching multiple sources individually. JPO’s internal databases include JPO patent literature and some foreign patent literature. USPTO examiners face a variety of challenges in identifying relevant prior art during patent examination. EPO and JPO use several approaches that may help their examiners address challenges. These approaches include worksharing, creating internal databases of nonpatent literature, using patent classification systems, adopting advanced search tools, hiring and training of examiners to promote technical expertise, and incorporating review and audit procedures. The exchange of prior art searches or patent examination results among patent offices facilitates more efficient prior art search. patent offices to leverage others’ work and knowledge. The IP5, a multilateral forum of the five largest patent offices, identified worksharing as the main tool for addressing an increasing number of patent applications. JPO examiners still have to review the relevant literature themselves, but access to foreign examination results may help examiners identify relevant art or sources of prior art. An EPO official also noted thatWorksharing systems allow more efficient access toforeign patent literature. and help JPO Examiners more easily see foreign examiners' work. About half of all patent applications worldwide are part of patent families filed in multiple offices. To gain patent protection in multiple countries, inventors may file applications for the same invention in several different offices. Because the underlying invention is the same, the search and examination results at one office may be useful to examiners in another office. Worksharing can ameliorate the challenges posed by the quantity of potential prior art that examiners must search and the time pressure examiners face by allowing for worksharing. USPTO contributes data to three worksharing systems that make applications, prior art citations, and examination results from foreign patent offices available to examiners and the public. One system, the Common Citation Document, provides bibliographic information, such as title and source, of patent and nonpatent prior art citation. Another system, Global Dossier, provides access to the examination history of applications. A third system, PATENTSCOPE, run by the World Intellectual Property Organization, gives access to applications filed with multiple offices under the Patent Cooperation Treaty. USPTO has entered into two pilot programs to jointly examine certain applications. Applicants who file related patent applications with USPTO and either JPO or the Korean Intellectual Property Office may request to enter the pilot. In the pilot with JPO, USPPO will review the applications of both JPO and the Korean IP Office. The Collaborative Search Pilot Program is open to all patent applicants in the U.S. and to all other countries in the world. It is intended to address challenges related to managing the large quantity of prior art and accessing prior art. technology was determined when the examiner performance and production system was first created in the 1970s or when subsequent art units were added. USPTO adjusted the time allotted to examiners between fiscal years 2010 and 2012 and gave all patent examiners a total of 2.5 additional hours per application. The agency did not evaluate art unit or technology-specific factors prior to making this change. In April 2016, approximately 1,000 examiners received an additional 2.7 hours for examinations of certain technologies. The time pressures created by USPTO’s system for determining allotted examination time have important implications for examiners’ ability to conduct thorough prior art searches. About two-thirds of examiners responding to our survey reported having insufficient time to complete a thorough Prior Art Search. The Department concurred with our recommendation on assessing the time examiners need to conduct a thorough prior Art Search for different technologies. We continue to believe that the agency should review the time allotted for all technologies, and not only those identified through feedback related to CPC. of examiners in the Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry technology center. How often examiners searched for foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations, or foreign-language nonpatent literature was statistically associated with their description of the sufficiency of time they had to complete a thorough prior art search. A majority of examiners (an estimated 72 percent) worked voluntary/uncompensated overtime in the past 6 months to meet their goals, as shown in figure 6. An estimated 30 percent of examiner worked an average of more than 10 hours of voluntary/uncompensated overtime per biweekly period. However, on the basis of our survey, an estimated 56 percent of examiners experience no pressure to work overtime. Experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed had mixed opinions about the need for overtime. In a 2007 report on USPTO’s efforts to hire and retain an adequate workforce, we found that an estimated 70 percent of Examiners worked voluntary/Uncompensate overtime in the previous year. Examiners are expected to complete their examination of an application in a certain number of hours. The time allotted varies depending on factors such as the technology and the seniority of the examiner. Less than half of the examiners—an estimated 46 percent—were moderately or very confident that they found the most relevant prior art during the time allotted. The allotted time includes the time needed to review the application, perform that examiners spent an average of 8 hours per application during the past quarter. becoming GS-14 examiners. Question 3 in the survey asked examiners approximately how many hours they spent per application on prior art searches in the past quarter. Examiners provided a variety of open-ended responses. Some respondents chose to provide a range, such as “5 to 10,” while others provided a single number for hours spent perApplication. Some examiners also provided responses that did not clearly indicate the approximate hours per application spent on priorArt.com. Most examiners below the GS-14 level must have their actions reviewed by a more senior examiner. Some GS-13 examiners are in the process of becoming primary examiners. In addition to applying for a patent from USPTO, an inventor may also seek patent protection in other countries for the same invention by filing in multiple patent offices. Such interrelated patent applications are described as a patent family. The World Intellectual Property analyzed the responses to the survey for all examiners, as well as responses by technology center and by the General Schedule (GS) level. and interviewed USPTO officials; a group of four supervisory patent examiners; officials of the examiners’ union, the Patent Office Professional Association. We also conducted semistructured interviews with subject matter experts (experts) active in the intellectual property field and knowledgeable about the subject of prior art. We selected and interviewed 18 experts to obtain views of different stakeholder communities, including four academic experts and four patent holders from the following technology fields: chemical technologies, electrical and others. The survey was designed to collect information on challenges USPTO faces in finding relevant prior art. To identify our survey population, we obtained a list of patent examiners as of May 2015. We excluded examiners from the following 3 technology centers: We excluded the Designs technology center because these examiners work on design patents instead of utility patents; design patents are outside the scope of this engagement. The survey was fielded between August and November 2015, and the results were published in November 2015. technologies, and mechanical technologies, based on data from USPTO that identified the companies receiving patents in these fields from 2010 through 2014. Five attorneys based on their leadership (e.g., as chairs or co-chairs) of patent-related committees or sections of various bar associations. Three nongovernmental organizations we identified during background research that had activities or publications related to patents. Two patent data experts who were listed in a 2015USPTO analysis evaluating search technologies. In addition, we conducted a web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible patent examiners from across 8 of the 11 fields. policies, search tools, and human capital management. Our survey results show the extent of the challenges may vary by technology center or examiners’ GS level (see app. III). Because we surveyed a generalizable stratified random sample of examiners, our results provide estimates for each technology center included in our study. See the related e-supplement, GAO-16-478SP, for the original survey language and more detailed results. In addition to the contact named above, Chris Murray (Assistant Director), Tind Shepper Ryen, Krista Breen Anderson, Hilary Benedict, Richard Burkard, John Delicath, Alice Feldesman, Armetha. agriculture, and business methods. We received responses from 2,669 eligible examiners for an 80 percent response rate. Because we used a probability procedure based on random selections, our sample is only one of a large number. We drew our stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible USPTO patent examiners from a list of 3,336 eligible patent examiners. This resulted in nine strata with a target survey population totaling 7,825 examiners. and have different statutory and administrative requirements than utility patents. We excluded examiners who perform “reexamination” work and not initial patent examinations. We then defined nine strata by technology center, with one technology center separated into two strata, as described in table 6. Specifically, the Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License and Review technology center includes a diverse set of technologies, including transportation, construction, and Electronic Commerce. We also excluded examiner employed at USPTO for less than 1 year. According to USPTO policy, examiners will consider this information when reviewing a patent application. Excessive references make it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. Applicants are generally not required to explain the relevance of the references or to point examiners to the particular portions of references that are relevant. Some relevant prior art may require a fee to access, may not be in a text- searchable format, or may otherwise be difficult to access. commonly known in this field but may not be found by searching a public database. One expert suggested that prior art from before the mid-1970s is difficult to find because patents issued before then have not been fully digitized. Less than half of examiners encountered applications with a subject matter in which they have knowledge of existing prior art based on their education or previous work experience. The training examiners receive may also affect their ability to maintain the technical competence they need to effectively identify relevant prior art. Patent examiners told us that prior art searching is the most time-consuming aspect of patent examination. Based on our survey, an estimated 80 percent of examiners spent, on average, from 6 to 20 hours initially examining patent applications and completing a first office action. For the prior art search portion of these efforts, we estimate that 67 percent find they have somewhat or much less time than needed to complete thorough prior art searches given a typical workload. Our survey also found that examiners’ perception of the sufficiency of time for completing thorough priorArt searches varies by technology center. 45 percent of all examiners in the eight technology centers we reviewed find that the large quantity of art makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. Fewer examiners—34 percent—find that the quantity makes it  easier. responses varied among technology centers, as shown in appendix III. In response to an open- ended survey question, one examiner described their difficulty as “overwhelming.’’ In the Computer Networks, Multiplex Communication, Video Distribution, and Security technology center, an estimated 42 percent of examiners find CPC classifications make it “somewhat or much easier” Misclassification occurs when an application is not classified into the group most closely associated with the invention. This can result in applications being routed to the wrong USPTO technology center or art unit for examination. About half of examiners (an estimated 50 percent) find that additional translators would make it somewhat or much easier, according to a survey by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), which oversees the patent system. The U.N.’s Office for Patent Examinations (OPEX) is the body that oversees the USPtoT. is because misclassified applications may be difficult to find when examiners search for patent literature using technology-specific patent classification categories. Ensuring examiners’ technical competence. According to most experts we interviewed, ensuring that examiners have sufficient and appropriate technical backgrounds, knowledge, or skills for conducting thorough prior art searches is also a challenge. The role of patent examiner is a difficult one that can take years to learn, and examiners with less education or work experience, may not have the technical knowledge necessary to identify relevant prior art. USPTO and EPO told us that there were disagreements between the two offices on how to classify some applications. USPTO examiners in certain technology centers reported difficulty with the CPC system in our survey. Inconsistently applying the classification system to applications undermines its usefulness, the authors say. Also, misclassified applications may require examiners to familiarize themselves with new technologies, they say, which increases the amount of time it takes for them to conduct their prior art searches and negatively affect their confidence in the system. USPTO provided examiners and classification contractors with training on how to classify applications. USPTO assigned lead quality experts to each technology center to provide training and assistance. The agency has not identified specific reasons that account for differences between its system and the CPC system. The examiner may revise the classification during examination. The CPC system is being rolled out across the U.S. over the next few months, the agency says. The new system is expected to be fully implemented by the end of the year. USPTO uses two methods to review examinations, which may help the agency monitor the effects of the challenges described above as well as the thoroughness of searches. USPTO does not require supervisory examiners to document these reviews in a consistent form, the agency cannot analyze the data to examine issues with prior art search quality in specific technology centers and art units. Beginning in November 2015, OPQA made changes to its review processes that along with an increase in staff, should allow the office to perform statistically valid assessments. about 12,000 audits in 2016, according to OPQA officials. In 2015, USPTO drafted a master review form that could standardize OPQa and supervisory examiner reviews with a single, consistent approach and documentation. As of March 2016, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office had not made a decision about the final content of the review form, when supervisory patent examiners might begin to use the new form, or how the data from the reviews would be used. USPTO supervisory patent examiners are required to review at least four office actions of each of their primary examiners per year. Auditors in OPQA documented the results of their reviews, and the office used them to evaluate the examiner corps from year to year. Supervisory examiners do not need to perform an independent search for prior art, according to a USPTO training document, but should adjust their reviews based on an examiner’s skills, abilities, and performance history. The Department said it would ensure adequate search data are collected to assess the quality of searches at the technology center level. The Department noted that a great deal of information on examiners’ prior art searches is potentially available from records and reviews by primary examiners, supervisors, OPQA, and others. Over time, the Department concurred, it would investigate using audits and reviews to monitor the thoroughness of examiners' prior art Searches over time. The department noted that these reviews have not been carried out or recorded in a consistent manner in the past. draft of the new master review form did not require OPQA or supervisory examiners to evaluate the thoroughness of an examiner’s search. If a reviewer finds that the examiner should have made a rejection but did not, the form asks the reviewer to identify the source of prior art needed for the missed rejection. The March 2016 draft of the form does not include, and does not require the examiner to record his or her search strategy for prior art associated with the inventor's name. Survey results show, examiners’ search strategies and the sources they use will differ based on the technology. Examiners have access to guidance and training on classification-based searches. USPTO has not documented technology-specific guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search for each class. We adjusted our report to acknowledge the information USPto provides on these suggested search areas. We also recommend that reviews of examiners' prior art searches collect sufficient information to assess search quality at the technology center level. art searches are conducted and documented that could help to address a weakness of its past efforts. However, USPTO still faces limitations in its ability to use the data to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches. To improve its monitoring of priorArt searches, US PTO should take the following three actions: Develop written guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search within each technology field (i.e., mechanical, chemical, electrical), technology center, art area, or art unit. Establish goals and indicators for improving prior Art searches. We reviewed documents from the agency related to prior art search procedures and capabilities. We also interviewed stakeholders knowledgeable about the offices’ practices, such as academics who study these offices. Because these individuals were not necessarily knowledgeable about USPTO practices, they are not included among the 18 experts discussed above. The report also looked at initiatives related to information technology resources or capabilities, the examiner workforce and related human capital management efforts, training practices, and international cooperation. For more information, visit the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office's website. USPTO is procuring an automated prior art search capability that could enhance examiners’ ability to identify relevant prior art. In June 2015, USPTO requested information on a search system that uses the claims and specification within a patent application to search for patent and nonpatent literature automatically, without human involvement. The new system will initially replicate the current systems, such as EAST and WEST, which focus on U.S. patent literature and include only one source of nonPatent literature. USPTO is in the process of a major, multiyear $405 million effort to upgrade its information technology tools. A new system will manage all aspects of patent examination, including certain aspects of their prior art searches. The new system, called Patents End-to-End, will, according to USPTO’s Strategic Information Technology Plan for fiscal 2014-2018, will make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted to examiners. enhance accurate and consistent results in examination quality. USPTO’s goals for patent quality in the strategic plan and for the quality initiative do not currently include goals or indicators assessing the thoroughness of prior art searches. We have previously reported that establishing program goals and associated indicators constitutes a leading practice for planning within federal agencies. Among other things, the Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 is aimed at improving the quality of federal government programs and services. It is not required to establish goals for improving prior art search quality. Examiners have minimum production goals, based on the time allotted, for the number of office actions they must complete. USPTO uses several different information technology systems to assist examiners in conducting prior art searches. Of the 18 experts, 10 agreed that the search tools and capabilities available to examiners create challenges to conducting thorough prior art Searches. One expert said that examiners’ electronic priorArt searches predominantly rely on using keywords, and this is a problem if the examiners do not know the most appropriate keywords. different applications may use different terms to describe the same thing. Inconsistent terminology can make it more difficult for examiners to find relevant prior art because searching for one term using keyword searches will not identify documents that use a different term. Examiners reported that issues with the clarity of the application make itMore difficult to complete thorough prior art searches in the time needed to do so. According to four of the experts we interviewed, the absence of standard terms is particularly a challenge for software-related applications. USPTO has taken or begun planning various actions that may help address challenges in identifying relevant prior art. But some of these actions have limitations that may hinder their effectiveness. USPTO requires examiners to perform a thorough prior art search and record their search results or search history. But the agency has not clearly defined what constitutes a thoroughPrior art search.not conduct additional searches. The agency has also not established goals and indicators for improving prior art searches, the authors say. They say the agency cannot identify and address issues that are more prevalent in certain technology centers or art areas. USPTO requires applicants and others assisting in filing an application to submit all information known to be material to patentability. Examiners we surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art references provided by applicants. 60 percent of examiners in the Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, and Products technology center and 60 percent in the Chemical and Materials Engineering technology center reported difficulties in identifying relevant prior art. To complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted, compared to other technology centers, examiners need more time. The focus of patent examination is to determine whether the invention in a patent application satisfies the legal requirements for a patent, including that the invention be novel and not obvious. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners establishes certain requirements and processes that examiners must follow in examining patent applications, including performing prior art searches. There are generally two types of prior art—patent literature or patent expert exhaustive readiness. The examining process involves a variety of steps, at least one of which includes prior art searches. USPTO plans to evaluate changes to the agency’s system for determining the number of applications a patent examiner is expected to review within a specified period of time. The agency has not identified plans to assess the amount of time examiners in different technologies need to perform thorough prior art searches. Without this information, the agency does not know if it is allotting examiners appropriate amounts of time to complete their work. Based on our survey, most examiners find that they do not have sufficient time for thorough priorArt searches. Time pressures may reduce examiners’ ability to conduct thorough prior art searches. USPTO may not have reasonable assurance that examiners in all technology centers have the skills and knowledge to identify relevant prior art during patent examination. Examiners face a number of challenges in their efforts to search for prior art, including the large volume of prior art from multiple sources to consider, unclear patent applications, difficulties identifying or accessing relevant nonpatent literature and prior art in foreign languages, and limits on the time available. practice that examiners should attempt to identify all applicable grounds for rejecting a claim or claims during their first review. According to USPTO’s manual for patent examiners, this practice aims to avoid unnecessary delays. Such delays could be caused by examiners waiting to continue examining an application until previously identified issues are resolved. However, the practice of compact prosecution may discourage examiners from resolving any issues of clarity or ambiguity before conducting their initial searches for relevant prior art. For example, as one examiner commented in our survey, in order to follow the compact prosecution practice, The large volume of prior art available from multiple sources makes searching for relevant prior art challenging. Nonpatent literature overall and software-related prior art are more difficult to find. Prior art related to computer technologies has also been hard to find, according to one expert we interviewed, in part because a lot of information is now available in a variety of formats. The amount of patents, publications, and other nonpatent Literature has grown exponentially, making it harder to findrelevant prior art in the time allotted. relevant prior art from searches for certain types of prior art more than other types. How often examiners search for certain type of prior Art varies by technology center. Expert: Clarity of applications can pose a challenge to finding relevant prior art. Examiners requested a method capability to efficiently search for prior art using a single, integrated search that includes both patent literature and multiple sources of nonpatent literature. The time it takes examiners to search the large and increasing volume of nonPatent literature and the inefficiency of having to search many different sources individually. CMH test. The test statistic is Wald Chi-Square. We also performed CMH tests on responses to questions on how often examiners search for certain types of prior art. The types of art included were foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations, foreign- language nonpatent literature, and industry-related nonpatents. We found that examiners were more likely to search for prior art that they had not previously seen or that they were less likely to have time to complete a thorough search. submissions may address challenges related to the quantity and availability of prior art. According to information from USPTO, third parties submitted prior art for less than 1 percent of the approximately 600,000 patent applications received per year since third-party submissions began in 2012. An internal review of 300 randomly selected applications found that examiners used a submission to reject a patent application in 20 to 25 percent of such cases. We estimate that 83 percent of examiners have rarely or never seen an application with a third- party submission. Since 2012, USPTO has had authority to receive submissions from third parties that may help identify potentially relevant prior art for published patent applications. This process, sometimes described as crowdsourcing, allows experts and other interested parties to share documents that they believe will aid USPto’s examination of an application. Prior art submitted by third parties can help identify prior art that is not immediately available to examiners or that may be difficult to find.USPTO considered allowing examiners to use crowdsourcing to solicit such art for specific applications or topics. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners requires them to conduct a thorough prior art search. Patent literature consists of previously issued U.S. or foreign patents and published patent applications. Nonpatent literature can include such things as product manuals, standards established by international organizations, textbooks, periodicals, or conference presentations. Both patent and nonpatent Literature may be written in a language other than English, referred to as foreign-language art in this report. USPTO officials say adopting the CPC system helps examiners give greater consideration to foreign patent documentation. Patent examiners may face difficulties with applications that have been translated from a foreign language. The effect of unclear applications may be exacerbated by USPTO’s policies. In our patent quality report (GAO-16-490), we provide additional information on how the clarity of applications affects patent quality. All rights to this article are reserved by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. For. confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. USPTO anticipates that a pilot system will be available to a limited number of examiners. The new system could expand upon the capabilities of a currently available system. Such a system could improve the search tools available to examiners and help address the challenge of managing the quantity of potentially relevant prior art. USPTO uses the current system to perform searches for about one-tenth of the agency’s incoming applications, whereas it expects to use the new system for every application. USPTO’s Scientific and Technical Information Center (STIC) operates systems that can search U.S. patent literature and that store some nonpatent literature. Examiners may access additional foreign patent documents through other web-based tools. In some cases, USPTO examiners may not be able to use public search engines because searching for specific terms or concepts from an unpublished application may put the confidentiality of the application at risk. On the basis of our survey, a majority of examiners (an estimated 86 percent) agree that having access to immediate machine translation of foreign-language documents would make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search. As of May 2015, USPTO had nearly 8,300 patent examiners across the eight technology centers we reviewed. Examiners at the GS-14 level or above are generally primary examiners. Primary examiners may accept or reject a patent application without additional review.machine translation services from STIC and three contracted translation vendors that currently cover 35 languages. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office uses the General Schedule (GS) classification system for examiners, whose levels range from GS-5 to GS-15.