loan subsidy known as a special allowance payment(SAP) The SAP amount is determined on a quarterly basis by a statutory formula which is tied to a financial index. The SAP is designed to compensate lenders for the difference between the below-market,statutorily set interest rate charged to borrowers and a market set interest rates that is intended as fairmarket compensation on the loan asset. In some instances lenders receive interest income from borrowers exceeding the amountcalled for by the SAP calculation. The amount of income lenders receive above the government SAPrate is often called "floor income" The SAP affords lenders necessary protection in high interest environments during which thestatutorily established borrower rate may provide lenders insufficient below-market rate returns. Some argue that since the SAP is designed to approximate fair market compensation it isunnecessary to compensate lenders at levels that exceed the SAP rate. It is often noted that in anearlier period, "excess interest provisions" were adopted that essentially installed the SAP in the system. SAP rate as thesole lender reimbursement rate for loans. Some FFEL program loans provide lenders a guaranteed interest rate of atleast 9.5% (hereafter, these loans are referred to as 9. 5% floor loans). This guarantee is provided inthe SAP formula applied to these loans, which requires the federal government to supplementborrower interest payments. Several recent proposals have called for reducing federalsubsidy costs by establishing the SAP rate asThe SAP rate is the sole lender reimbursed rate. 9.5% floor loans comprise a relatively small percentage of all outstanding loans. They have accounted for a very large proportion of federal SAP subsidies. In recent years lenders havebeen using a variety of refinancing techniques, and also invested earnings from existing 9. 5% floorloans to make or purchase new ones. There appear to be a number of ways for banks to finance 9.5%, including by using the proceeds from the sale of existing loans and by using earnings from new loans. A consolidation loan may be comprised of one underlying loan or multipleunderlying loans. A borrower who consolidateswhile in the grace period can secure a 2.88% interest rate. Over the last two years, in which very lowrates have been available, an estimated $63 billion in loan volume has been consolidated. This has enabled a largenumber of borrowers to secure a valuable refinance benefit.not exceed 9%. The average interest rate on a consolidation loan is 1.9%. periods for extended and graduated repayment plans vary with the size of the loan. It is likely that some attention may be devoted to adopting more comparable repaymentoptions across the two programs. Some interest exists in adding a new "interest only"repayment option. Under such an option, a borrower would have low "interest-only" payments intheir initial years after graduation, but would also delay the point at which they begin paying downloan principal. In general, the debate pertaining to the fixed rate an extension of the debate on thefixed rate benefit. Proponents of the existing rate setting formulas say it provides important repayment relief and sends a signal to students and potentialstudents that repayment will be manageable. Opponents say eliminating the opportunity to lock in a fixed rate would be tantamount to taking away a benefit that was available when borrowers received their Stafford loans. The removal of this benefit in a low interest environment would amount to dropping a large share of the interest subsidy currently available to borrowers. Those opposed to sustaining theexisting rate setting formula suggest it would be detrimental to the economy. to undergraduate and graduate students. The interest rates onsubsidized and unsubsidized Stafford loans adjust annually, based on a statutorily established,market-indexed, rate setting formula, and may not exceed 8.25%. To qualify for a subsidized Stafford loan, astudent must establish financial need. The federal government pays the interest on the borrower'sbehalf on the subsidized Stafford loans while the borrower is in school (on at least a half-time basis)and during grace periods and deferment periods. As of July 2006, new Stafford and PLUS loans will carry fixed interest rates. The desirability of thisplanned switch has been the subject of considerable debate. Student loan interest rates were a focal issue in the 1998 reauthorization. The statutory ratesetting formulas were used to establish rates for loans disbursed from July 1, 1998 through June 30, 2006. They were initially enacted in June 1998 and extended in the HEA amendments of June 2000. They are used to set rates for Stafford and Plus loans. The current rate setting formulas were adopted as a result of deliberations that centered on replacing so called "comparable maturity rates" that were set to take effect July 1, 1998. The formula for calculating interest rates on Stafford loans is based on the 91-day Treasury bill rate plus 1.7% while the borrower is in school. Stafford rates are capped at 8.25%. The formula in effect for calculatingInterest rates on PLUS loans isbased on the 90-day treasury bill rate and 3.1% PLUS rates are caps at 9%. rate structure before it tookeffect. This led to the adoption of the rate setting formulas currently in effect. However, due to costconsiderations under prevailing budget scoring rules, the HEA amendments of 1998 were only able to install the current formula until June 30, 2003. The interest rate issue was revisited in 2002 with the passage of P.L. 107-139. This measureextended the existing variable rate setting formula through June 30,. 2006. Additionally, it installedfixed interest rates of 6.8% for Stafford loans and 7.9% for PLUS loans disbursed thereafter. the upcoming reauthorization of the HEA it is likely that borrower interest rates will onceagain receive consideration. Some feel that the 6.8% fixed rate set to take effect for new loans made on or after July 1, 2006 is a good rate in comparison to historical borrower rates. Others feel that a borrower is better served under a variable rate formula where the borrower is able to take advantage of low market rates when available (such as the 3.37%repayment rate being charged) benefit centers on its cost. As the consolidation loan interest rate formula has been modified byCongress, consolidation loans have evolved into a refinance benefit as well. The current consolidation loaninterest rate formula affords borrowers the opportunity tosecure a fixed rate equal to the weighted average interest rate on the loans at the time of origination. It also enables a borrower to pursue a better interest rate than the current weighted averageinterest rate on loans at origination of $1.5 million. It was originally intended to simplify repayment for borrowers and simplify loan repayments.  FFEL borrowers are allowed to choose among standard, graduated, and income sensitive repayment plans. In DL, standard repayment offers a 10-year term. Under the income contingent repayment plan, repayment must occur over a period not to exceed 25 years. Income contingent repayment is available to all DL unsubsidized and subsidized Stafford borrowers. In FFEL, all repayment plans offer a10-year repayment term with the exception of extended repayment under which repayments must occur within a time period not-to-exceed 25 years, for example. this year) but still receive protection against high rates thanks to the8.25% interest cap. Part of the debate is likelyto focus on enhancing or preserving borrower benefits. There will also likely be concerns about thefederal subsidy cost. This is because, in the FFEL program, lenders are provided a federal interestsubsidy payment (discussed later) In the DL program, where the federal government acts as lender, federalsubsidy costs increase when repayment revenues are reduced. Across both consolidated. The FFEL and DL programs disburse the same set of loans, but loan terms and conditions are notperfectly parallel across the two programs. In the DL program,where the government acts as lender, federal subsidy costs are increased when borrower fees orrepayment revenues paid to the government are reduced. Several proposals have beenforwarded recently that call for reductions in borrower fees. More generousborrower benefits generally increase federal costs. Lenders may opt to pay a 3% origination fee. of1%, capped at 8.25%. (4) It is generally thecase that enhancements to borrower benefits increase federal subsidy costs. For instance, in theFFEL program, where the government insures and subsidizes loans made by private lenders, federalsubsidy costs increase when less revenue is derived from borrower fees and when interest subsidypayments to lenders are increased. (5) There are underlying tensions inherent in the current design of the loan programs that affect many of the reauthorization issues considered in this report. FFEL borrowers may be required to pay a 1%insurance premium. This fee goes to guaranty agencies to help offset loan insurance costs. Guarantors may wave the fee, and if the fee is assessed lenders may opt to pay the fee or a portion of the fee on the borrower's behalf. It is likely that a reduction in borrower origination fees (particularly for student borrowers)will be considered in reauthorization. Helping students by reducing charges is a goal upon whichmany can agree, but finding offsetting costs can be difficult. revenues from other sources is often a challenge. In FY2003,borrower origination fees generated approximately $1.3 billion in revenue across the two programs. attention may be devoted to examining the comparability of borrower fees chargedacross and within the two loan programs. Loan Limits. To limit the federal government'ssubsidy costs, and to limit the amount of debt incurred by borrowers, annual and aggregate Staffordborrowing caps have been established. Considerable interest has surfaced in the adequacy of theexisting loan limits. Dependency status is a key determinant of a student's personal borrowinglimits. Dependent students are therefore afforded lower personalborrowing limits than independent students. Parents of dependent students areafforded the opportunity to take out federal PLUS loans to support dependent students. Some have questioned,however, whether dependent students in particular are being provided adequate borrowingopportunities if they have to self-fund their education. The HEA, Section 428 (20 U.S.C. Â§ 1078) provides the funding for the Stafford loan program. finance their studies. In general, those in favor of expanding loan limits suggest loan limits have not kept pace withtuition increases and thus constrain students' ability to finance their education. Those opposed suggest it is undesirable for students to incurmore debt, and question whether the expansion of borrowing opportunities will have any positiveeffect on access, choice or persistence. Also at issue arefederal subsidy costs, because as borrowing opportunities are expanded so are federal subsidy costs. Repayment Plans. Issues concerning repaymentplans that surface with some regularity relate to differences offers an overlygenerous borrower benefit that is costly to the point of placing future aid in jeopardy. They alsoquestion whether it is necessary to offer a refinance benefit when the rate is already subsidized onStafford loans. Further they question whether a benefit received in the years after postsecondaryschooling contributes in any way to students' postsecondary access, persistence, or choice. They notethe repayment period subsidy is provided without regard to need, over a lengthy period potentiallyextending up to 30 years beyond schooling, and disproportionately benefits students who attendedfour-year private institutions and/or graduate programs. state authorities are able to raise "low cost"funds, and then re-lend the funds at higher rates. The 1980 HEA amendmentstook steps to curb the profitability of tax-exempt loans by reducing by half the SAP rate on loans. The amendments also established minimum SAPs,for loans disbursed on or after October 1, 1980, which ensure a minimum return of $1,000,000. The student bond volume began to grow rapidly, andconcerns about the profits of tax exempt student loans surfaced. 9.5% on theseloans. (16) The discourse on the profitability of tax-exempt student loans continued through the 1980son into the early 1990s. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ( P.L. 103-66 ) contained a provision eliminating the floor on tax- exempt loans supported through tax- exempted financing forissuances on or after October 1, 1993. These loans were afforded the same SAP rates as wereavailable for taxable loans. for lenders. There seems to bebroad Congressional support for curbing this rate guarantee for future loans. The legislativedevelopments that led to the enactment of the guarantee are briefly described below. As part of an effort to ensure the FFEL program would be fully capitalized in the program'searly years, provisions that served to encourage the issuance of tax-exempt student loan bonds were included in the Tax Reform Act of 1976. Such bonds are exempt from federal taxation, and are usedby states to finance below market interest rate loans for students. The federal government operates two major student loan programs: the Federal FamilyEducation Loan (FFEL) program and the WilliamD. Ford Direct Loan (DL) program. In FY2003, these programsprovided $45.8 billion in new loans to students and their parents. The FFEL and DL programs provide the following types of loans: Stafford loans (subsidized and unsubsidized): Lowinterest, variable rate loans available. Low-cost, high-interest, fixed-rate loans are also available. The Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA) is being considered for reauthorization. Title IV of the act authorizes the major federal student aid programs. In FY2003, the federal student loan programs provided $45.8 billion in new loans tostudents and their parents. This report discusses issues concerning theStudent loan programs that are likely to be considered during reauthorisation. The report is organized in the following manner. First it discusses the issues that may be considered when the HEA is reauthorized. provided by private lenders, and the federalgovernment guarantees lenders against loss through borrower default, death, permanent disability,or, in limited instances, bankruptcy. Under the DL program, operated through the U.S. Departmentof Education, the federal government provides the loans to students and their families. The two programs rely on different sources ofcapital and different administrative structures, but essentially disburse the same set of loans. The DL program was intended to streamline the student loan deliverysystem and achieve cost savings. rate-setting formula was initially enacted in the Student Loan Reform Act of 1993. The formula afforded the Secretary of Education a great deal of latitude in establishing borrower rates. The decision to move toward a comparable maturity rate was made in 1993 within thecontext of the assumption that the DL program would be phased in over a series of years and eventually replace the guaranteed loan system. (7) In years following the enactment of the SLRA,Congressional support emerged for sustaining both loan programs and, within this context,considerable attention was devoted to replacing the comparable maturity. Multiple refinanceopportunities (i.e., offering borrowers with relatively high fixed rates the prospect of securing abetter rate) Any added interest benefit for a borrower would likely expand federal subsidycosts. Another way to address this is to eliminate consolidation loans' fixed rate benefit. It is likely that proposals calling for the elimination of provisions that constrain borrowers'choice among consolidators will receive consideration during reauthorization. Some FFEL lenders object to making a change in this area, asserting they offersome up front discounts on Stafford and PLUS loans. Borrowers seeking a FFEL consolidation loan are eligible to pursueconsolidation when the borrowers have entered the repayment or grace period on each loan they areseeking to consolidate. In contrast, borrowers seeking a DL consolidation loan may consolidate anyeligible loans that have been fully disbursed. Married persons, each of whom has eligible loans, are eligible for a joint consolidation loan. Borrowers with less than $7,500 in outstanding loans seeking to consolidate in FFEL may receive a maximum repayment term of 10 years. A 12-year repaymentterm is available to borrowers with that level of debt in DL. one of the borrowers mustmeet the full set of individual eligibility requirements for a new consolidation loan. However, eachagrees to become jointly and severally liable for repayment of the note regardless of any changes inmarital status. It is likely that proposals to eliminate joint consolidations will receive consideration in the reauthorization. While joint consolidation can simplify repayment for a married couple, concerns have beenraised in recent years about disadvantages that may be associated with joint consolidation for someborrowers. For instance, borrowers with a joint consolidation loan must both meet the requirementsfor a deferment or forbearance in order to receive those benefits. There is some debate about how best to phase out theguarantee for nonprofit lenders. The Taxpayer-Teacher Protection Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108-409 );signed October 30, 2004, curbs growth in 9.5% loans, for one year. It does not curtail the guaranteeon new loans stemming from "recycling"of proceeds from outstanding 9. 5% loans. These loans were issued on orafter October 1, 1980 and prior toOctober 1, 1993. A phase out of the 9.5% guarantee would produce savings in mandatory spending. Thesesavings could be used to offset new expenditures. Proceeds from the sale of the bank would be used for new 9.4% loans. The proceeds from the sales of the Bank of Canada’s stake in the Bank for International Settlements (BOCS) would also be used as a source of funding for the Bank. The BOCS is a joint venture between the BSC and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (BRC). sharing" approach. Under this approach, uses ofreserves are restricted, and guarantors are afforded flexibility in the use of their operating funds. There is a clearer distinction between reserves and operating funds, and clearer direction about wherevarious revenue streams are to be deposited -- and ultimately about how these sources of revenueare to be used. It is likely that some attention will be devoted to the issue of how the federal government will manage its reserves in the event of an economic downturn in the U.S. solvency of Federal Funds (i.e., locallyheld federal reserve funds) and the size of Operating Funds -- which can be used to support agencyoperations and also for discretionary student financial aid expenditures. Some concerns have been raised aboutshrinking reserves and robust Operating Funds. Some proposals have already called for mandatinginsurance premiums to strengthen reserves. Some observers have suggested guarantor fees for loancollections and defaulted loan rehabilitation work may be too high thus inflating operating funds. Had the loans not been joined, eachborrower could qualify for these benefits based upon their own status. Concerns have been raised about complications that may ensue for unsuccessful marriages given that both partiesagree to be liable for the total repayment of the joint consolidation loan. Also, in instances involving a spouse who becomes permanently disabled, a disability discharge is provided for that spouse but each spouse remains liable for repayment of remaining loan amount. Guaranty agenciesadminister the federal government's loan guarantee. The role guarantors play within the FFELprogram has evolved a good deal since the program's inception. Initially, the federal governmentintended to encourage the growth of state loan insurance programs. Over time the federalgovernment assumed the role of providing the insurance and now guaranty agencies service the federal guarantee and perform various program administrative tasks. Changes adopted during the 1998 reauthorization focused on strengthening therelationship between revenues and activities, and improving efficiency. The 1998 amendments adopted a "risk-based" approach to the FFEL program, with the aim of making it more efficient.