UNSG Report, a total of 87 humanitarian workers have been killed in Syria in the conflict. This includes 17 staff members of the UN, 53 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, 8 volunteers and staff of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society. Administrative procedures put in place by the Syrian government have delayed or limited the delivery of humanitarian assistance, according to UNSG reports. These reports detail multiple instances of unanswered requests for approvals of convoys, denial or removal of medical supplies from convoys. staff, and restrictions on international and national NGOs’ ability to operate. One organization told us that the Syrian government has effectively prohibited it from undertaking more permanent activities for displaced persons inside Syria. In early 2016 State reported that since the beginning of 2015, the Syriangovernment had received 113 requests from the UN to deliver humanitarian aid. of the UN had been asked to deliver aid, of which 113 requests had been made since the start of 2015. Of the 113 requests made, of the 113, of them were for humanitarian aid to be delivered in Syria. Humanitarian assistance is routinely prevented or delayed from reaching its intended target due to shifting conflict lines, attacks on aid facilities and workers. The years of conflict have led to shifting areas of control as armed groups claim and lose territory. In late May 2015, for example, after ISIS took over the city of Palmyra, it was reported that aid workers had not been able to reach the city. The UN has released a report on the situation inside Syria, as well as interviews with officials providing assistance to Syria. Secretary General (UNSG) reports on the humanitarian situation in Syria from March 2014, when the reports began, through December 2015. The reports, which are submitted to the Security Council pursuant to Resolution 2139 (2014), provide information on the Humanitarian Situation in Syria. The extent to which the parties to the conflict are allowing humanitarian relief organizations to access people in need inside the country is also part of the reports. We also conducted interviews with officials from State (Population, Refugees, and Migration), and USAID (the The UN reported that in 2015, only 10 percent of all requests for UN inter-agency convoys to hard-to-reach and besieged areas were approved and delivered. Even when these convoys were approved, the officials participating in delivering the assistance were sometimes subjected to hours-long delays, stretching into the middle of the night. State's and USAID’s implementing partners also told us that they rarely operate inside ISIS controlled areas because they cannot ensure that they will be able to operate. within the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and operational independence. The UN reports contain multiple instances of ISIS blocking humanitarian and commercial access into and through areas under its control. For example, in November 2015, the UN reported that ISIS controlled and blocked humanitarian access to a stretch of highway leading to the western parts of Aleppo city. As a result, theUN was unable to deliver assistance to over 220,000 people. Due to restrictions, USAID and State staff manage the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria remotely from neighboring countries. forces and indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition groups. Implementing partner officials based in Damascus, Syria, told us that they are constantly reaching out to contacts to determine the safety of planned delivery routes. Humanitarian workers inside Syria must work within the insecure operating environment, affecting their ability to carry out their mission and placing their lives at risk. In addition, aid facilities are often indirectly impacted or directly targeted, leading to widespread damage. According to the UN reports, there are frequent instances of gunfire, car bombs, barrel bombs, rocket strikes, and mortar attacks near aid facilities. include the Syrian government, non-state opposition groups, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and the al-Nusrah Front. In February 2016, the United States and Russia brokered a cessation of hostilities. According to the UN, the reduction in violence allowed for increased humanitarian assistance deliveries to hard-to-reach and besieged locations in Syria during the months of March and April. Other countries, including Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, have strategic interests in Syria and have been directly or indirectly involved in the conflict. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a serious humanitarian challenge. Syrians, as well as Palestinian and Iraqi refugees residing in Syria, have become increasingly vulnerable due to high levels of violence and insecurity. As of May 2016, the UN reported that more than 4.8 million Syrians had fled the country and registered as refugees, 6.5 million people were internally displaced, and 13.5million people inside Syria were in need of humanitarian assistance. In addition, millions of people remain trapped in besieged and other hard-to-reach areas of the country where delivery of aid is difficult. As of May 2016, the UN reported that 4.6 million people inside Syria are located in hard-to-reach areas. More than 500,000 of those remain besieged by ISIS, the government of Syria, or non-State armed opposition groups. Parties to the conflict heavily restrict or deny humanitarian access to besieged areas, and people risk infectious disease, malnutrition, poor sanitation, and lack of medical care. The UN estimated that the lives of roughly 42,000 people remained besieged by government forces in the towns of Madaya and Buqayn. reportedly seized the Syrian Arab Red Crescent warehouse, which contained food assistance for 35,000 people and hygiene kits for 15,000. This represented the largest loss USAID has experienced delivering aid inside Syria. According to one NGO based in Amman and operating in Syria, conflict lines in southern Syria that had been stable for a number of years began shifting rapidly in February 2016 due to Russian air strikes. All UNSG reports from 2014 and 2015 include descriptions of indiscriminate aerial bombardment by government forces. facilities and personnel; missing or detained humanitarian workers; and injury or death of humanitarian workers. In one instance, an air strike hit the Syrian Arab Red Crescent offices in Idlib, destroying ambulances and vehicles. The UN reported that, as a result, the capacity of the Red Crescent to provide first aid services in the city was curtailed. Medical facilities have also been attacked (see figure 7). Physicians for Human Rights reported that as of November 2015, there had been 336 attacks on 240 separate medical facilities and 697 medical personnel killed inside Syria. According to the UN, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance inside Syria has risen steadily since 2012. U.S. funding obligated for humanitarian assistance for people affected by the conflict in Syria began in fiscal year 2012 and totaled just over $5 billion, as of February 2016. Food, shelter, nonfood items, health and nutrition, and water, sanitation and hygiene are among the main types of assistance provided inside the country, reflecting the most acute needs. The United States and the international community provide funding for a range of humanitarian Assistance inside Syria. The increasingly violent and widespread Syrian conflict has hindered effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. Financial oversight in humanitarian assistance programs includes managing program funds to ensure they are spent in accordance with funding instruments. U.S. agency officials must manage programs from outside of Syria, creating challenges for financial oversight, such as increasing the opportunity for fraud and diversion. A dangerous operating environment, access issues, and remote management of programs can hinder the delivery of aid. Based on our research, we believe the best way to deliver aid to people inside Syria is through cross-line deliveries. Since 2013, the United States has consistently led global funding efforts. The United States provided more than a quarter of the total international funding for the 2015 Syria humanitarian response. The resumption of active conflict in several governorates has hindered the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance as well as people’s access to essential services. In general, implementing partners operating out of neighboring countries, mainly Jordan and Turkey, cross the border into Syria to deliver assistance into opposition controlled areas. In this report we examine humanitarian assistance provided by the Department of State, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and implementing partners to people inside Syria. In February 2012, the U.S. embassy in Syria suspended operations because of concerns over staff safety due to escalating violence. Since then, the government has coordinated Syria-related activities from locations in Jordan and Turkey through two interagency teams. The Southern Syria Assistance Platform and the Syria Transition Assistance Response Team manage humanitarian programs for Syria in partnership with UN agencies, international NGOs, and national organizations. Humanitarian assistance operations on the ground inside Syria are heavily influenced by the ongoing conflict, which began in March 2011. To determine the extent to which State, USAID, and their partners have assessed risks to the programs, we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 12 fiscal year 2015 State and USAID funding instruments from 9 different implementing partners. The funding instruments were awarded by State’s Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration. The implementing partner was based in Syria or a neighboring country from which cross-border operations into Syria were conducted. While the results of our review of funding instruments cannot be generalized to the entire list, they present a mix of instrument dollar values, implementing partners and their locations, and types. By 2015, USAID had awarded roughly $50 million to an international NGO to deliver emergency food items to beneficiaries in southern Syria. Officials randomly select parcels for inspection to verify the quantity and quality of the contents. USAID awarded about $16 million in fiscal year 2015 to deliver medical supplies and equipment to support health-related infrastructure, such as clinics, among other types of aid and services. In Jordan, we visited their warehouse and observed officials randomly select items for inspection. of the types of controls implemented. USAID OIG has noted that aid organizations providing life-saving assistance in Syria and the surrounding region face an extremely high-risk environment. The absence of adequate internal controls can jeopardize the integrity of these relief efforts and deny critical aid to those in need. State and USAID do not require implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance delivered to people inside Syria. While most partners assessed safety and security risks associated with such programs, most did not assess financial risks, such as fraud and loss due to theft and diversion. Syria is funded through voluntary contributions to public international organizations. Neither the funding instruments for these contributions nor State’s Federal Assistance Policy Directive require the implementing partner to conduct comprehensive risk assessments specifically related to the assistance. While there is not a requirement, according to State, it has established framework agreements with its implementing partners emphasizing the commitment of the partner to internal controls, including risk management. However, the voluntary contribution agreements between State and these implementing partners do not reference the framework agreements or require comprehensive risk assessment. warehouse where supplies were received, checked for quality, affixed with quick response (QR) codes, and packaged, as shown in figure 8. State and USAID have taken steps to oversee partner programs delivering humanitarian assistance inside Syria. State officials in the region conduct quarterly meetings with partners and collect information on programmatic objectives and on partner programs. State also has enhanced monitoring plans in place with its implementing partners to augment quarterly reporting with information on risks of diversion of assistance. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. USAID officials screen proposals from prospective partners to identify those that have appropriate measures to mitigate risks. USAID officials in the region maintain regular contact with partners, attend monthly meetings with them, conduct random spot checks of aid packages at warehouse facilities. Officials receive quarterly reports from partners to monitor progress before submitting them to USAID headquarters for additional review. The U.S. State Department asks partners to notify them upon discovering incidents of diversion. For example, one implementing partner provided frequent updates on losses it sustained from its transporters until the issue was resolved. monitoring data on individual activities, and assessing the quality of monitoring data reported to USAID. In the absence of direct program monitoring, USAID and State officials noted that they utilize information provided by implementing partners to help ensure effective delivery of assistance and to help their financial oversight. USAID officials in the region explained to us that while partners provide data and information, their inability to consistently access project sites limited the extent to which partners could obtain and use the data. The report was based on interviews with officials from USAID, the State Department, and the United Nations. of implementing partners, we interviewed officials from State and USAID in Washington, D.C. and Amman, Jordan. We also reviewed USAID’s contract with the third party monitoring organization, and supporting documentation, such as the monitoring plan, site visit template, and a complete monitoring report for February 2016. We interviewed officials. from State, USAID, and implementing partner organizations in Geneva, Switzerland, and Ankara and Antakya, Turkey. We met with officials from USAID and. implementing partner Organizations in Amman,. Jordan; and conducted telephone interviews with officials. GAO recommendation, FFP updated its program guidance in March 2015 to state that partners applying to conduct cash transfer and voucher-based food assistance programs should include in their applications an assessment of the risk of fraud or diversion. According to USAID, this represents a requirement that cash transfer, voucher programs conduct a fraud risk assessment. It does not apply to all types of food assistance or to assistance provided through OFDA. In the absence of a requirement for all implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments, USAID noted that it works closely with partners to ensure. State and USAID also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. In its written comments on our report, State concurred with our recommendation. State noted risk assessment initiatives that it has in place with its implementing partners, and indicated that it would include provisions in future voluntary contribution agreements that refer to fraud. USAID noted it has developed checklists to address fraud mitigation and will soon update its guidance to require its implementing partner to submit fraud.that are reproduced in appendix II and appendix III. are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of State, the Administrator of USAID, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs should have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601 or melitot@gao,gov. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. USAID noted that its third party monitoring in Syria is not intended to serve an auditing function or investigate allegations of fraud. USAID could work with the third party monitor to ensure that its field monitors are trained in methods to identify fraud risks. We agree that the field monitors do not audit the program, but they provide a crucial on the ground presence in areas unavailable to U.S. government employees. Based on USAID’s comments, we clarified the language of this recommendation. USAID’s OFDA hired a third party monitoring organization to review its projects in Syria. USAID officials in the region explained that the USAID OIG has conducted fraud awareness training for officials. In the absence of such activities, fraudulent practices may go unnoticed or take longer to detect. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a the partners in our sample did not assess fraud risks. In addition, State and USAID may not have visibility into areas of risk needed to effectively oversee programs. implementing partners may not have all of the information needed to design appropriate controls to mitigate fraud risks. The inability of some partners to consistently access areas in Syria and directly monitor programs has created challenges for oversight. U.S. agencies have taken some steps to oversee partner programs; nevertheless, opportunities to assess and mitigate the potential impact of fraud risks remain. For those partners that had conducted risk assessments, these controls generally responded to risks they had identified. For example, some implementing partners identified aerial targeting of humanitarian aid workers and beneficiaries as a major vulnerability. U.S. humanitarian assistance programs in Syria have experienced instances of fraud. Without formal assessments, implementing partners may not have all information needed to design appropriate controls to mitigate such risks. USAID drafts memoranda highlighting potential risks for material support to terrorist groups and identifies the mitigation strategies implementing partners will use to reduce those risks. State’s humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria is directly connected to the fraud risk assessments, and over time, managers may adjust the control activities if they determine that controls are not effectively designed. programs related to the crises in Syria and Iraq. According to officials at the USAID OIG, they have four ongoing investigations of allegations of fraud and mismanagement related to programs for delivering humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. Two of the investigations involve allegations of procurement fraud, bribery, and product substitution in USAID funded humanitarian cross-border programs related to procurements of non-food items. Further, in May 2016, USAID reported the identification of bid-rigging and multiple bribery and kickback schemes related to contracts to deliver humanitarian aid in Syria. in 2012 due to security conditions and the safety of personnel, among other factors. According to State and USAID officials, the inability to access Syria limits the visibility that staff have over the provision of humanitarian assistance. USAID also acknowledged several gaps in their monitoring system due to remote management, such as verifying progress, obtaining comprehensive information. The U.S. State Department says it is working with the Syrian government to improve the security situation in the country and provide more access to humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people. verify progress. Staff from several USAID-funded implementing partners told us they were unable to access project sites in southern Syria. Past audit work has shown challenges to such an approach, including cases of partners not fully implementing monitoring practices, resulting in limited project accountability. USAID Office of Inspector General (OIG) has reported that assistance projects implemented in developing countries are at significant risk of fraud, waste, and abuse, and further noted that those risks are multiplied when projects unfold in Syria. implemented controls to mitigate this risk, such as distributing goods to beneficiaries on overcast days and making door to door deliveries of aid packages. Another partner with field sites in Damascus identified the risk of ambush as a vulnerability and provided its drivers with instructions on taking evasive actions and fleeing to safety. Four of the nine partners in our sample conducted cross-border delivery operations from neighboring countries such as Syria and Turkey. Partners in our Sample had also implemented controls to mitigating risks of fraud and loss within their operations. armed opposition groups at checkpoints. Partners also implemented controls to mitigate fraud risks during the distribution process. For example, partners developed criteria for identifying and selecting eligible beneficiaries. Examples of people meeting selection criteria included internally displaced people, people with disabilities, and female heads of household. In some cases, parcels were delivered to the intended destinations, but only if they were delivered by the intended recipient. The shift of liability to the transporter has limited the instances of diversion, although we did not confirm this. as Turkey or Jordan and, therefore, procured goods in the host country or the region and warehoused them prior to transport into Syria. Officials from two implementing partners we interviewed in Amman stated that they conducted spot checks of assistance packages in warehouses to confirm the quantity of the contents and ensure that the quality of the items complied with the terms of the contract. According to another implementing partner, officials from its organization visit the vendor warehouses before signing contracts to verify that U.S. government commodity safety and quality assurance guidelines are met. as packing slips and waybills to verify the contents of shipments. Staff used technology, such as geotagged photographs, to document the arrival and contents of the shipment. These partners stated that the lack of visibility over the assistance while in transit in Syria, and managing the projects remotely from Jordan, were risks to their operations. Furthermore, partners that relied on transporters to deliver assistance within Syria mitigated the risk of loss, including loss due to theft by the Syrian Army or.  partners mentioned working with local councils to develop beneficiary lists. Staff crosschecked the names of beneficiaries on the list with identification provided by the beneficiary, and then relayed that information to the partner’s field office in Jordan for verification. Officials added that this method for verifying beneficiaries was an ongoing process, as the lists sometimes changed due to the movement of people. Two implementing partners that we visited in Jordan, who delivered food and medical supplies, among other types of assistance in southern Syria, provide examples. Government provides the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission has issued an internal control framework. Internal control generally serves as a first line of defense in safeguarding assets, such as food and nonfood items. In implementing internal control standards, management is responsible for developing the detailed policies, says the Treadsway Commission. The framework is widely used around the world and includes the five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication. To evaluate implementation of controls to mitigate risks and ensure appropriate financial oversight of assistance, we used a nongeneralizable sample of 12 fiscal year 2015 State and USAID funding instruments. We also conducted telephone interviews with officials in Antakya and Ankara, Turkey, to discuss their policies and practices regarding risk assessments. To determine the extent to which U.S. agencies are overseeing the activities, we analyzed relevant documents from each of the organizations related to control activities, including policies, procedures, and manuals. to discuss their policies and practices regarding control activities. We also conducted site visits to warehouses in Jordan maintained by two of the implementing partners. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We conducted this performance audit from July 2015 to July 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide areasonable basis for its findings and conclusion based on its audit objectives, the report says. and evaluation of fraud risk management activities with a focus on outcome measurement, and using the results to improve prevention, detection, and response. The monitoring plan associated with the contract contains guidelines for field monitors to document their assessment of the project at the completion of a site visit. However, it lacks specific guidelines to identify potential fraud risks during site visits. For example, the guidelines in the monitoring plan instruct field monitor to use color-coded indicators, one of which states that issues at a project site require immediate attention and action. Fraud is mentioned with the indicator, but it is presented as one of several examples of highly concerning findings to document. Field monitors are instructed to verify that water was delivered to a location, and that water quality tests had been conducted, when applicable. Additionally, the templates created by the third party monitoring organization to document site visits instruct monitors to verify the presence or absence of supplies, and the quality of them, among other instructions. For example, water and sanitation projects instructed field monitors to check that water had been delivered and tested. The monitoring plan contains a training curriculum for field monitors, which has several objectives designed to familiarize them with the protocols, procedures, and instruments used for data collection and reporting. However, the curriculum lacks specific courses for recognizing potential or actual instances of fraud that may occur on site. The template lacks specific indicators to alert field monitors to collect information on and identify potential fraud. Additionally, USAID officials say the plan does not include specific training categories for monitoring and verification vocabulary, sampling of records and other secondary data, and color coding issues of concern. The enhanced monitoring plans do not require implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments. All of the implementing partners in our sample have policies, procedures, or guidance related to conducting risk assessment for their programs to provide humanitarian assistance into Syria. Several maintain risk registers that assess a wide variety of risks. One partner based in Damascus has a risk register which, according to the partner, assesses 28 different risks. Most implementing partners have conducted risk assessments for staff safety risks (seven of nine) or security risks. Few implementing partners have conducted risk assessments for the risk of fraud, says GAO. Risk assessment is essential for ensuring that partners design appropriate and effective control activities. Control activities to mitigate therisk of fraud should be effective, the GAO says. The agency or program should consider the specific fraud risks it faces, and prioritize them, it says. It should also consider the potential likelihood and impact of fraud schemes, and prioritize fraud risks, it adds. The GAO’s A Framework for Managing Fraud Risks in Federal Programs is available at: http://www.gao.org/fraud/frivolity-risk-management. Director), Jennifer Young, Justine Lazaro, Cristina Norland, Kyerion Printup, Karen Deans, Kimberly McGatlin, Diane Morris, Justin Fisher, and Alex Welsh made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.