IRS estimated that it prevented or recovered $22.5 billion in fraudulent IDT refunds in filing season 2014. IRS received an additional $290 million for fiscal year 2016 to improve customer service, IDT identification and prevention, and cybersecurity efforts. IRS has worked with tax preparation professionals, states, and financial institutions to better.enforcement of tax laws to include IRS’s efforts to address IDT refund fraud. In 2015, IRS reported allocating more than 4,000 full-time equivalent staff. Fraudsters continue to adapt their schemes to identify weaknesses in IDT defense. IRS can take steps to better authenticate the identity of taxpayers before issuing refunds. IRS should assess the costs, benefits, and risks of its authentication options, the authors say. The IRS has developed guidance on how to prevent IDT fraud, they say. It's time for the IRS to take further steps to prevent and detect IDT Fraud, they write. The authors say the IRS should take additional steps to.detect and preventIDT fraud. IDT refund fraud occurs when a refund-seeking fraudster obtains an individual’s Social Security number, date of birth, or other PII and uses it to file a fraudulent tax return seeking a refund. This crime burdens legitimate taxpayers because authenticating their identities is likely to delay the processing of their tax returns and refunds. Given current and emerging risks, in 2015 we expanded our high-risk area on the IDT fraud database to include more fraudsters and their PII. IRS temporarily suspended the Identity Protection Personal Identification Number (IP PIN) service on IRS.gov. IP PIN is a single-use identification number provided to taxpayers who are victims of identity theft (IDT) to help prevent future IDT refund fraud. Service on IRS’s website allowed taxpayers to retrieve their IP PINs online. As of April 7, the IP PIN service was temporarily suspended by the IRS. The IRS stated that it was conducting further review of theIP PIN service and is looking at further strengthening the security features. standards and guidelines that include minimum information security requirements. During fiscal year 2015, IRS collected more than $3.3 trillion; processed more than 243 million tax returns and other forms. IRS relies extensively on computerized information systems, which it must effectively secure to protect sensitive financial and taxpayer data for the collection of taxes, processing of tax returns, and enforcement of federal tax laws. In carrying out its mission, IRS relies heavily on computerize information systems. IRS’s mission is to provide Americans with top-quality service by helping them to understand and meet their tax responsibilities. The IRS collects and maintains a significant amount of personal and financial information on each U.S. taxpayer. Protecting this sensitive information is essential to protecting taxpayers’ privacy and preventing financial loss and damages that could result from identity theft and other financial crimes. The IRS employs about 90,000 people in its Washington, D.C., headquarters and at more than 550 offices in all 50 states, U.s. territories, and some U.N. embassies and consulates. More than $403 billion in tax refunds. federal agencies spent about $13.1 billion on cybersecurity in fiscal year 2016. The president’s fiscal year 2017 budget proposes investing over $19 billion in resources for cybersecurity. Cyber incidents can adversely affect national security, damage public health and safety, and compromise sensitive information. In June 2015, the Commissioner of the IRS testified that unauthorized third parties had gained access to taxpayer information from its Get Transcript application. According to officials, criminals are targeting the IRS’ Get Transcript app to steal information. used taxpayer- specific data acquired from non-agency sources to gain unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax accounts. These data included Social Security information, dates of birth, and street addresses. In an August 2015 update, IRS reported this number to be about 114,000. In a February 2016 update, the agency reported that an additional 390,000 accounts had been accessed. The online Get Transcript service has been unavailable since May 2015. In March 2016, IRS stated that as part of its ongoing the online service was still suspended. IRS has implemented numerous protections over key financial and tax processing systems. IRS had not always effectively implemented access and other controls, including elements of its information security program. In our most recent review we determined that IRS had improved access controls, but some weaknesses remain. Identifying and authenticating users—such as through user account-password—is a key part of the security measures IRS has in place to prevent unauthorized access to computing resources, programs, information, and facilities. Cryptography controls protect sensitive data and computer programs by rendering data unintelligible to unauthorized users. Audit and monitoring is the regular collection, review, and analysis of events on systems and networks. IRS policies require the use of encryption, and the agency continued to expand its use of encrypting sensitive data. However, key systems we reviewed had not been configured to encrypt sensitive user authentication data, the report found. The report found that the IRS had failed to protect the integrity of transmitted or stored data. IRS established policies and procedures for auditing and monitoring its systems. It had not established logging for two key applications used to support the transfer of financial data and access and manage taxpayer accounts. Physical security controls, such as physical access cards, limit access to an organization’s overall facility and areas housing sensitive IT components. It was not consistently maintaining key system and application audit plans, according to the report. The report was published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) on November 14, 2013. combinations—provides the basis for establishing accountability and controlling access to a system. IRS established policies for identification and authentication, including requiring multifactor authentication for local and network access accounts. The agency used easily guessable passwords on servers supporting key systems. In addition, while IRS continued to expand the use of two- factor access to its network, the Treasury continued to use a single-factor password for most of its systems. It also improved identification andAuthentication controls by, for example, expanding theUse of an automated mechanism to centrally manage, apply, and verify password requirements. Inspector General for Tax Administration reported that IRS had not fully implemented unique user identification and authentication or remote electronic authentication that complies with federal requirements. Authorization controls limit what actions users are able to perform after being allowed into a system and should be based on the concept of “least privilege,” granting users the least amount of rights and privileges necessary to perform their duties. While IRS established policies for authorizing access to its systems, it continued to permit excessive access in some cases. For example, users were granted rights and permissions in excess of what they needed to. We have previously reported that IRS can take steps to improve its response to data breaches. The agency did not require considering the number of affected individuals as a factor when determining if affected individuals should be notified of a suspected breach. IRS did not document lessons learned from periodic analyses of its breach response efforts. We recommended that IRS correct these weaknesses, but the agency has yet to fully address them.our new recommendations, it will review them to ensure that its actions include sustainable fixes that implement appropriate security controls balanced against IT and human capital resource limitations. the system monitors inbound and outbound traffic for malicious activity. IRS needs to continue to address weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. Fully implementing key elements of a breach response program will help ensure that when breaches of sensitive data do occur, their impact on affected individuals will be limited. The risks IRS is exposed to have been illustrated by recent incidents involving public-facing applications, highlighting the importance of securing systems that contain sensitive taxpayer and financial data. In summary, while IRS has made progress in implementing information security controls, it must continue to do so. IRS had yet to address weaknesses in its review of access lists for both employees and visitors to sensitive areas. IRS had weaknesses in configuration management controls, which are intended to prevent unauthorized changes to information system resources. IRS developed policies for managing the configuration of its IT systems and improved 30, 2015, report says. It also made 43 technical recommendations in a separate report with limited distribution to address 26 new weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. The report says these recommendations will help IRS improve its controls for identifying and authenticating users. some configuration management controls, it did not, for example, ensure security patch updates were applied in a timely manner to databases supporting two key systems. To its credit, IRS had established contingency plans for the systems we reviewed, which help ensure that when unexpected events occur critical operations can continue without interruption or can be promptly resumed. The IRS had also established policies for developing contingency plans and for testing those plans, as well as for implementing and enforcing them, the review found. The review found that the IRS had failed to apply a security patch that had been available since August 2012. backup procedures. The agency established a comprehensive framework for its program, including assessing risk for its systems. However, IRS had not updated key mainframe policies and procedures to address issues such as comprehensively auditing and monitoring access. In addition, the agency had not fully mitigated the risk of unauthorized access to the agency’s mainframe systems, the report says. It says IRS had documented and tested contingency plans for its system and improved continuity of operations controls for several systems. Nevertheless, the control weaknesses can be attributed in part to IRS's inconsistent implementation of elements of its agency-wide information security program. previously identified deficiencies or ensured that its corrective actions were effective. IRS told us it had completed corrective actions for 28 of our prior recommendations; however, we determined that 9 of these had not been effectively implemented. The collective effect of the deficiencies in information security from prior years that continued to exist in fiscal year 2015, along with the new deficiencies we identified, are serious enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance of IRS. The deficiencies represented a significant deficiency in IRS’s internal control over financial reporting systems as of September. functions, protecting sensitive data when they are stored or in transit, auditing and monitoring system activities, and physically securing its IT facilities and resources. Table 1 below provides the number of our prior recommendations to IRS that were not implemented at the beginning of our fiscal year 2015 audit, how many were resolved by the end of the audit, new recommendations, and the total number of outstanding recommendations at the conclusion of the Audit. In commenting on drafts of the reports presenting the results of our audit, the IRS Commissioner stated that while the agency agreed with some of the recommendations, it did not agree with all of them. NIST is responsible under FISMA for developing security standards and guidelines for agencies. These include standards for categorizing information and information systems according to ranges of impact levels. OMB and NIST have prescribed policies, standards, and guidelines that are intended to assist federal agencies with identifying and providing information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from the unauthorized access, use, disclosure, alteration, and destruction of information and Information systems. The guidelines also include guidelines for identifying an information system as a national security system. for its Identity Assurance Office to assess costs, benefits, and risk of authentication tools. In February 2016, officials told us that this office plans to complete a strategic plan for taxpayer authentication across the agency in September 2016. Until it completes these steps, IRS will lack key information to make decisions about whether and how much to invest in authentication options. Under FISMA, the Director of OMB is responsible for developing and overseeing the implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines on information security. will be minimized. IRS also needs to assess the costs, benefits, and risks of alternatives for better authenticating taxpayers who access its systems. strengthening the security posture of IRS—and other agencies— also depends on the key roles played by OMB, NIST, and DHS in providing oversight and guidance. I would be happy to answer any questions you have. If you have any questions regarding this statement, please contact Gregory C. Wilshusen at (202) 512-6244. the proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol. At this level in-person identity proofing is required. It is otherwise similar to Level 3, except with stronger cryptographic methods in place. Federal law also gives OMB and DHS responsibility and authority for oversight of operational aspects of federal information security. In particular, the OMB Director is charged with overseeing and enforcing agency compliance with information security requirements by taking certain actions authorized by relevant federal law. OMB has developed various mechanisms to carry out its oversight function. OMB the power of enforcement and accountability related to evaluating agencies’ management of their information resources. In particular, in enforcing accountability, OMB is empowered to recommend reductions or increases in an agency’s budget. OMB Cyber and National Security Unit (OMB Cyber) within the Office of the Federal Chief Information Officer. This unit is responsible for strengthening federal cybersecurity through oversight of agency and government-wide programs, among other things. The unit was established in fiscal year 2015, and is based in Washington, D.C. for the information and information systems that support the operations of the agency. The head of each agency is responsible for, among other things, ensuring that senior agency officials carry out their information security responsibilities. The act also assigned OMB and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) oversight responsibilities to assist agencies in effectively implementing information security protections. In addition, NIST isresponsible for developing the information security standards for the federal government. The agency is also responsible for developing information security policies and procedures. Modernization Act of 2014 codified its responsibility for certain operational aspects of federal agency cybersecurity. In particular, DHS is responsible for administering, in consultation with OMB, the implementation of agency information security policies and practices for information systems. It also operates the federal information security incident center (the U.S Computer Emergency Readiness Team or US-CERT), deploying technology to continuously protect the nation's information systems and networks. The agency is also responsible for developing, issuing, and overseeing the Implementation of binding operational directives to agencies. and implementing policies to address emerging IT security risks, and oversight of government-wide response to major incidents and vulnerabilities. CyberStat Reviews: OMB has also established the “CyberStat Review’ process, which involves evidence-based meetings led by OMB to ensure agencies are accountable for their cybersecurity posture. FISMA reporting: As required by FISma, OMB reports annually to Congress on the effectiveness of information security policies and practices at executive branch agencies during the preceding year. diagnose and mitigate threats, compiling and analyzing data, and developing and conducting targeted operational evaluations of systems. In May 2015 DHS issued its first directive, which required all departments and agencies to review and mitigate all critical vulnerabilities on their Internet-facing systems. DHS identifies these vulnerabilities using scanning tools and reports the results to agencies on a weekly basis. Agencies are then required to mitigate the DHS-identified vulnerabilities within 30 days of the report, or provide a justification to DHS outlining barriers, planned steps for resolution. supplied agencies with tools and technologies to assist in protecting against cyber threats and vulnerabilities. Since fiscal year 2013, DHS has provided agencies the opportunity to use a suite of tools and capabilities to identify cybersecurity risks. National Cybersecurity Protection System: NCPS is an integrated system-of-systems intended to deliver a range of capabilities for intrusion detection, intrusion prevention, analytics, and information sharing. When deployed on an agency’s connection to the Internet, NCPS can be used to identify and mitigate cyber threats. unique operational challenges. Risks to cyber-based assets can originate from unintentional or intentional threats. Unintentional threats can be caused by natural disasters, defective computer or network equipment, software coding errors, and the actions of careless or poorly trained employees. Intentional threats include targeted and untargeted attacks from criminal groups, hackers, disgruntled employees, and disgruntled customers. The senior agency official responsible for information security is the Associate CIO, who heads the IRS Information Technology Cybersecurity organization. employees, foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare, and terrorists. These adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities, willingness to act, and motives. These threat sources make use of various techniques, or exploits, that may adversely affect federal information, computers, software, networks, and operations. These exploits are carried out through various conduits, including websites, e-mails, wireless and cellular communications, Internet protocols, portable media, and social media. Further, adversaries can leverage common computer software programs as a means by which to deliver a threat. As technology has advanced, the federal government has become increasingly dependent on computerized information systems. Federal agencies rely on such systems to process, maintain, and report large volumes of sensitive data, such as personal information. Ineffective protection of these systems and information can impair delivery of vital services and result in loss or theft of computer resources, assets, and funds. It can also undermine of agency missions due to embarrassing incidents that erode the public’s confidence in government, the report says. damage to networks and equipment; and high costs for remediation. Federal law includes requirements intended to improve the protection of government information and systems. The Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014 requires the head of each agency to provide information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of the agency’s information or information systems. More specifically, federal agencies are to develop, document, and implement an agency-wide information security program to provide security. The number of information security incidents affecting systems supporting the federal government is increasing. The number of incidents reported by federal agencies to the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) increased from 5,503 in fiscal year 2006 to 67,168 in fiscalyear 2014, an increase of 1,121 percent. According to OMB, agencies reported 77,183 incidents in fiscal Year 2015. Similarly, theNumber of incidents involving PII reported byFederal agencies has more than doubled in recent years, from 10,481 in 2009 to 27,624 in 2014. Authentication occurs when an individual proves through the means of authentication that he or she possesses and controls the token. The cryptographic methods used at this level may still allow someone with malicious intent to intercept the transmission of a password through eavesdropping and crack it using a dictionary attack. Approved cryptographic methods should be strong enough to protect against impersonation of the verifying entity. Level 4: Is intended to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance, requiring at least two authentication factors. An individual proves possession of a physical or software token in combination with some memorized knowledge. federal systems and websites, including the following. OMB M-15-13, Policy to Require Secure Connections across Federal Websites and Web Services, which requires all publicly accessible federal websites and web services to provide service through a secure connection. O MB M-04-04, E-Authentication Guidance for Federal Agencies, which addresses federal government services accomplished using the Internet, instead of on paper, and calls for identity verification or authentication to make sure that online government services are secure and protect privacy. NIST Special Publication 800-63-2, Electronic Authentication Guideline, provides technical guidelines for federal agencies implementing electronic authentication. It covers remote authentication of users (such as employees, contractors, or private individuals) interacting with government IT systems over open networks. It provides technical requirements for agencies to use in selecting technology to authenticate users. It also provides technical recommendations for agencies on how to use the technology to protect users' privacy and security. It is published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from the government. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The daily transcript is a written version of each day's featured news story. Use this transcript to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The Daily Transcript is published weekly and is curated by CNN's iReport team. For more information, go to the Daily Transcript's News Quiz, or go to http://www.cnn.com/newsquiz/2013/01/07/26/29/28/290715/news/features/top-stories/topstories.