operational suitability, testers determine whether or not the agency can logistically support the asset to an acceptable standard. Critical operational issues (COI) are one metric used to determine an asset’s operational effectiveness and suitability and are stated in the form of a question. COIs are examined during testing to evaluate a system's ability to provide the desired capability and perform its mission. COTF assessed the NSC's COIs, for example, by comparing the outcome of the test event against the full scope of the COI. determine whether the COI was met or not. Unmet COIs are often the result of related deficiencies, which are identified during testing and include any system that is lacking in its ability to meet normal standards or to function as intended. Deficiencies are scored based on the severity of the problem and its impact on the asset’s ability to accomplish its mission. COIs and deficiencies identify during testing both factor into an asset's overall operational effectiveness and suitability rating. In addition to verifying that an asset is operationally effective and suitable, operational testing also tests key performance parameters. Operational testing can occur over many test events. Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E) is meant to gather the data necessary to resolve COIs. Follow-on operational test and evaluation (FOT&e) is conducted after IOT &E and an asset’s full rate. The test event concludes with a rating of operationally effective or not effective, operationally suitable or not suitable. Table 1 provides examples of COIs and KPPs for the NSC. production decision and focuses on refining the conclusions that were made during previous operational test events. It also validates any incomplete or deferred requirements and verifies the correction of deficiencies identified during IOT&E. COTF writes a test report that focuses on the resolution of the asset’s COIs and any deficiencies that were identified during testing. These reports typically include a summary of the resolutions of the COIs. FOT&e concludes with an operational effectiveness and suitability rating similar to that of IOT &E. It focuses on evaluating production changes and reevaluating the system to ensure that it continues to meet operational needs. DHS and Coast Guard acquisition guidelines require operational test and evaluation by an independent test agency. The Coast Guard uses the U.S. Navy’s COTF to conduct operational tests and other evaluations for its major acquisition programs. For operational effectiveness, testers determine whether or not an asset can meet its missions. For for operational suitability, testers assess an asset's operational effectiveness and suitability to perform its duties as a Coast Guard vessel or aircraft carrier. For full-rate production, testers must confirm that the production configured system meet all requirements before approval. The Coast Guard has encountered several issues that require major retrofits and design changes on the NSC. The total cost of changes we identified as of June 2015 totals approximately $202 million. In order to minimize cost increases, the Coast Guard plans to maintain the original equipment design for the production of the remaining NSCs and conduct retrofits after accepting delivery of the cutters. The Coast Guard will be faced with paying for the replacement of these systems with new equipment that it must also purchase. The Coast Guard is in the process of designing the OPC, which is the last of the major cutter classes to be built. This cutter class is intended to bridge the mission gap between the FRC and NSC. The OPC is estimated to cost $12.1 billion, making it the most expensive Coast Guard recapitalization program to date. Without updated guidance that establishes timeframes and responsibilities for completing all testing, the Coast Guard risks encountering the same scenario with OPC and other future DHS assets. studies underway to identify the root causes of these problems. Until the causes are identified and corrective actions implemented, the Coast Guard is at risk of experiencing costly and potentially mission-limiting problems. DHS agreed to provide oversight and specify any further actions the NSC program should take at the conclusion of the studies related to the propulsion systems. The process has matured in its acquisition of cutters, it has matured its acquisition processes, which has been demonstrated in its approach with the FRC and OPC programs. High engine temperatures limit the top speed of the cutter in certain conditions. Cracked cylinder heads are the NSCs number one operational degrader and cost driver for maintenance. Overheating generator bearings have caused at least one patrol to be cut short due to the lack of an effective backup generator. Although the Coast Guard has two Coast Guard ships, they are not fully operational. The Coast Guard is currently working on a new fleet of six ships to replace the current fleet of four. The new ships are expected to be ready by the end of 2014. The problems identified with these systems during operations will continue to impact the NSC until the design changes are implemented across the fleet. Early testing can allow performance issues to be discovered at a point when fixes can be incorporated into the design of an asset while it is still in production. As we have previously found for Department of Defense programs, continuing with full-rate production before ensuring that assets meet key requirements risks replicating problems in each new asset until such time as the design is complete. Figure 1 shows selected systems that will require retrofits after all eight cutters are built. The Coast Guard could continue to buy assets without having demonstrated their full capabilities in testing. DHS’s guidance for its major acquisitions does not require programs to conduct FOT&E. We concluded in our January 2016 report that this gap in DHS guidance also has implications for that is the Coast Guard will be operating 6 NSCs before it has resolved issues from Iot&E and knows the cutter's full capabilities. of at least the 6th NSC before the testing is complete. DHS approved the NSC program for full rate production in October 2014. FOT&E will begin in the fall of 2016 and is scheduled to continue through at least 2017, COTF officials say. The Coast Guard will conduct FOT &E and the acquisition review board (ARB) will review major acquisition programs for proper management, oversight, accountability, and alignment with DHS’s strategic functions at acquisition decision events and other meetings as needed. The resulting acquisition decision memorandum (ADM) from October 2014 directed the Coast Guard to conduct Fot & E and the ARB. IOT&E that involved equipment failures by restoring the operational status of the related systems on the Stratton. They have plans to correct four more. According to Coast Guard documentation and officials, they may not correct 2 deficiencies due to the cost of making fleet-wide changes. The Coast Guard has developed a warranty provision under its contract with the FRC. For the OPC, the Coast Guard plans to begin IOT&e by December 2023, by which time it expects to have 1 operational OPC of a planned buy of 25. IOT&E took place about 2 years later than planned and after 7 of the 8 planned NSCs were under contract, with 3 operational. We have previously found that delaying critical test events can lead to late discoveries and could result in additional design changes and costs to programs. During testing, the NSC successfully demonstrated 18 of its 19 COIs, with one COI — cybersecurity—being a success. The 8 N SCs are planned to be fully operational by 2020 and the Coast Guard is phasing out the legacy 378-foot High Endurance Cutters. are measures of the capabilities considered essential to mission accomplishment. In our January 2016 report, we found that during IOT&E and other test events, the NSC fully met 12 of its 19 KPPs. The Coast Guard is not able to demonstrate that it is providing the capabilities that it intended to field. For instance, the Coast Guard has not yet demonstrated that it can achieve a hard and soft kill against a subsonic cruise missile as required, or fully meet interoperability requirements with the Department of Defense, DHS and other government agencies. Of the 7 KPPs not met, 3 pertain to the NSC’s cutter boat operations. We found that the Coast Guard and COTF have different interpretations of the cutter boat K PPs. The cutter boats are designed to be integral to the. NSC's overall capability, operate both within. and beyond the visual range of the N.SC, and enhance the overall mission effectiveness of theNSC in. every mandated mission area. The NSC conducted IOT&E according to the test and evaluation plan for the cutter boats. and determined that the three KPPs involving cutter boats were not fully met since the boats are unable to operate through all sea state 5 conditions. According to Coast Guard officials, the September 2012 requirements document for the NSC should have been written more clearly to convey the sea state expectation for cutter boat launch and recovery operations. The NSC’s sea state KPP was never intended to be applicable to the operation of the cutter boats. In January 2016 we recommended, and the Coast Guard concurred, that the N SC’S K PPs for the operation  should be. are the capabilities considered essential for mission accomplishment. KPPs are listed by threshold values, which are the minimum acceptable level of performance. For example, a KPP for the NSC is being able to reach a maximum speed of 28 knots for a threshold value and 31 knots for an objective value. K PPs differ from COIs in that KPP's focus on specific performance metrics, while COIs focus on certain types of missions that an asset should be able to conduct or an asset’s ability to be ready to perform those missions. deferred to FOT&E. This deferral was due to the DHS Director of Operational Test and Evaluation postponing the testing of the NSC’s cybersecurity capabilities until a more robust test plan could be developed to reflect emerging threats. Five of the 10 major deficiencies pertained to the N SC’S weapon systems and cutter boats. None of the major deficiencies were rated as severe, which would preclude the NCC from accomplishing its mission. In its assessment, COTF found the NNC to be operationally effective and suitable, but with 10major deficiencies. of the NSC’s IOT&E event, DOT&E stated that the reliability and operational availability issues of the weapon systems. The CIWS, NULKA launcher, and TRS-3D air search radar, and the 57-mm gun were all repaired following the event. Post-operational reports indicate that problems persist with these systems as they were often unavailable during operations. Despite these findings, as noted above, COTF found the N SC to be operationally effective and suitable. complete three action items: (1) complete testing of the cybersecurity COI; (2) verify the correction of all major deficiencies, including the unmet KPPs; and (3) assess the NSC’s cyber-security capabilities. The cybersecurity COi is planned to be tested in 2016, which, if successful, will address the first and third requirements of the ADM. Other testing events are expected to occur through 2017 and possibly beyond. According to Coast Guard officials, they have corrected 4 of the 10 major deficiencies. award, by the end of fiscal year 2016, a contract to one of these shipbuilders to complete the detailed design of the vessel and construct the first 9 to 11 ships. Competitive contracts can allow for the best return on investment for taxpayers by saving taxpayer money, conserving scarce resources, improving contractor performance, curbing fraud, and promoting accountability for results. According to Coast Guard officials, the Coast Guard currently plans to award the construction contract for the lead OPC ship in fiscal year 2018. The Coast Guard’s fiscal year 2016 Capital Investment Plan reflects $1.5 billion in funding for the OPC. After the first 3 of the planned fleet of 25 OPCs are built, the Coast Guard plans to increase its purchase to 2 O PCs per year until the fleet is complete.and deliver this ship in 2021. The Coast Guard attributes the delays to procurement delays, including a bid protest that GAO ultimately denied in June 2014. As we found in April 2015, the initial and full operational capability dates both slipped 15 months. to date reflects some lessons learned from the NSC acquisition, for example in the areas of competition and the schedule for IOT&E. As the $12 billion OPC program moves forward, it may have opportunities to further incorporate some best practices that we have highlighted in our past work on shipbuilding. The Coast Guard is using a two- phased, competitive strategy to select a contactor to construct the OPC. In general, as we have previously found, competition is likely to save taxpayer dollars as opposed to a sole source acquisition approach. The Coast Guard plans to award a contract for the second phase of this acquisition by the end of June 2016. The government owns technical data rights, it does not need to rely on only one contractor to meet requirements. The key performance parameters remain the same and the design for several critical systems remains the same. As a result, the Coast Guard will be able to make certain design changes to the ship, though the key performance requirements will not change. The contract will allow bidders to change the design of the ship. Bollinger Shipyards for the FRC program that has held the contractor responsible for production deficiencies. Coast Guard does not always have insight into how much it costs the contractors to fix these issues. Officials noted they are confident that the Coast Guard has received value from this warranty. The Coast Guard plans to use these strategies when purchasing the OPC. Based on best practices that we have previously identified, the Coast Coast Guard may have opportunities to incorporate additional shipbuilding best practices with the O PC program. 2009, we reported on best practices that commercial shipbuilders use to ensure that ships are delivered on time and within budget. We found that before a contract is signed, a full understanding of the effort needed to design and construct the ship is reached. To minimize risk, buyers and shipbuilders reuse previous designs to the extent possible and attain an in-depth understanding of new technologies included in the ship design. Before construction begins, commercial ship builders complete key design phases that correspond to ship performance parameters. with the completion of a three-dimensional product model. Final information on the systems that will be installed on the ship is needed to allow design work to proceed. During construction, buyers maintain a presence in the shipyard and with key suppliers to ensure the ship meets quality expectations and is delivered on schedule. We will continue to assess the progress of the FRC and OPC acquisitions going forward. If you or your staff have any questions, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to respond to any questions. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, please contact GAO at (202) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov. In addition, contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary. If you wish to reproduce this material separately, please contact us for permission. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-TALK (8255). In the UK call the helpline on 0800-8255.