navigation services center, called the Swanwick Center. NATS reduced its staff costs by nearly $20.1 million and its costs for services and materials by about $18.5 million between 2002 and 2003. Between 2003 and 2004, NATS reported, it reduced its operating costs for air traffic services by another $21.4 million through cost control measures. All five ANSPs said they have improved productivity through modernization, that is, through investments in upgrading or replacing air navigation facilities and equipment. Airservices Australia reported increases in controllers’ productivity following the introduction of the new center.  modernization has produced operational efficiencies, including fewer and shorter delays. Commercialization has allowed the ANSPs to implement modernization projects more efficiently. NATS reduced its average delay per flight from 2.7 minutes in 2002 to 0.74 minutes in calendar year 2003, while handling almost 2.1 million flights. Formerly, the uncertainty associated with the annual appropriations from national governments made it difficult to plan over multiple years. According to the AN SPs, access to cash flow and borrowed funds has allowed them to plan and execute projects more efficiency. Before commercialization, air navigation services under government control faced increasing strains. Many were underfunded, as evidenced by freezes on air traffic controllers’ wages and insufficient funds to replace aging technologies. Technology replacement programs often cost more, took longer, and delivered less than promised, and stakeholders complained about performance and customer service. In some instances, the country as a whole faced widespread fiscal problems and the commercialization of air navigation Services was simply part of a larger movement to reform government enterprises. For instance, the New Zealand government established 14 state-owned enterprises in 1987, includingAir navigation services, rail services, and We also reviewed literature from academics and experts on commercializing air navigation services. We synthesized information from our interviews with information from the literature to arrive at some general lessons on the commercialization of the five air navigation service providers we reviewed. Unless otherwise noted, we converted the local currencies of each country into U.S. dollars using the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s purchasing power parity historical series for each country. We adjusted for inflation using the Gross Domestic Product price index of the Congressional Budget Office's economic projection for 2005 to 2005. Our review included site visits, agency interviews, and analyses of documents provided during our site visits and obtained through our own research. The ANSPs were commercialized between 1987 and 2001 and have been operating since then as performance-based organizations. We interviewed government officials, ANSP executives and. representatives, union officials, and representatives of aviation stakeholders in each country to. synthesize information on how air navigation services were delivered before commercialization. We also interviewed officials from the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), EUROCONTROL, and the European Commission. We developed a descriptive analysis of selected foreign countries’ commercialized, performance-based air navigation services providers (ANSP) We reviewed the characteristics and performance of five such organizations. We then analyzed the similarities and differences in ownership, length of experience with commercialization, and size and scope of operations. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II.Please call me at (202) 512-2834 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of thisReport. The UK and Germany report their data to EUROCONTROL, whose Performance Review Commission collects data for benchmarking. All five commercialized ANSPs rely on user charges as their primary source of revenue and on capital markets for additional funding. Before commercialization, governments funded air navigation services through annual appropriations. Since commercialization,. each ANSP collects and manages its own revenues, charging fees for services. The air. navigation service is operated by the UK and German air navigation service providers. air navigation service charges. If costs exceed revenues, ANSPs use different strategies to meet those shortfalls. For example, NAV CANADA established a “rate stabilization fund,’ which it used to store revenues when the aviation industry was healthy. The fund could be used to protect against future losses, or to pay a dividend to shareholders. If an ANSP generates revenues from charges in excess of its costs (i.e., operating profits), it may rebate them to the users, lower the charges for the next year. The government should still regulate the safety of the ANSP’s operations. The ANSP should be encouraged to be as competitive, efficient, and cost-effective as any other commercial business. Commercialized ANSPs rely primarily on user fees to cover their costs. An industry downturn presents a fundamental financial risk for such AN SPs that they must be prepared to mitigate, whether through a reserve fund, cost-cutting measures, user fee increases, additional borrowing, restructuring, or some combination of these or other options. Commercialization was intended not only to relieve the government of a fiscal responsibility but also to free the ANSP from some governmental constraints. The government also reformed electricity as a state-owned enterprise in 1994 and telecommunications in 2004. According to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), a commercialized ANSP, whether wholly or partly owned by the government or fully privatized, should function as an autonomous body and should have greater freedom from the government in conducting its financial affairs and developing postal services. European Parliament in January 2004. Each member state is to develop an independent safety and economic regulatory authority to oversee its ANSP. The UK established such an authority before commercialization, and Germany is planning to develop one. According to information from each of the ANSPs we reviewed, air navigation safety has not declined since commercialization. All five ANSP's have taken steps to control costs and have improved efficiency of their operations by implementing new technologies and equipment, the authors say. At a minimum, safety has been improved, they say. All five ANSPS are also members of the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), a voluntary international trade organization. The UK and Germany are members of EUROCONTROL, a European organization responsible for regulating the safety of air navigation, monitoring the performance of air traffic management systems, and developing a seamless air traffic system in Europe. The ANSPs adhere to ICAO principles, according to the European Aviation Safety Act of 2004. The European Aviation safety Act of 2005 was passed by the European Parliament in 2005. In some countries, the ANSP may not be the sole provider of approach control and terminal services. All but Germany’s DFS also offer oceanic air navigation services. The five commercialized ANSPs are affiliated with one or more international aviation-related organizations. The governments of all five ANPS are members of the Association of National Air Navigation Service Providers (ANPS) The ANPS provides air navigation service to both civil and military aviation. In addition to air navigation-related services, they may offer meteorological, training, and consulting services and charge for these services. Some commercialized European ANSPs have developed an alliance to procure systems. For instance, Germany has developed a strategic alliance with Switzerland and the Netherlands for the joint procurement of a new radar system. Through their cost control initiatives and modernization efforts, some of the AN SPs have been able to lower their unit costs and, in turn, lower their charges to major commercial airlines, which pay the largest proportion of user fees and therefore are the primary users served by the ANSCs. Airservices Australia, for instance, for Airservices Australian, for.its oceanic system and automated tower/terminal control system. safety control, and safety monitoring through standards that comply with national and international obligations. DFS’s Safety Management System was also certified by the German Ministry of Transport in 2004. To promote safety, the system requires activities such as operational risk assessments, surveillance, audits, and incident investigations. The five commercialized ANSPs vary in the extent to which they are owned by the government—wholly, partially, or not at all. Three of these AN SPs—Airservices Australia; Airways Corporation of New Zealand, Ltd.; and DFS are state-owned. A supervisory board oversees policy making and operations and has fiduciary responsibilities to shareholders. The members of this board may represent key stakeholders, such as the airlines, employees, general aviation, and the national government. As in a corporation, an executive officer implements the ANSP board’s policies and is, in turn, accountable to the board. For example, in the UK, government appointees, the airlines and BAA (the airport consortium) are represented on NATS’S board of directors. Airservices Australia is structured around three market-oriented business groups. The managers of these five groups form the Executive Committee. The committee advises the board as well as carry out the board’s policies. While the supervisory board and its executive officers have a say, the executive officers are responsible for the day-to-day operations of the ANSP. The board has no say in the decisions made by the executive committee. The Executive Committee advises the chief executive officer to advise the board. The CTA rejected an appeal of the increases brought by certain operators. Its board approved the fee increases to balance revenues and expenses as required by legislation. According to the ANSPs, involving stakeholders in efforts to design, acquire, and deploy new technologies can be beneficial. For example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand noted that its investment decisions are very much driven by customers’ needs. Airways said it consults closely with the airlines before deciding to acquire new systems and to implement technology upgrades. it is beneficial to involve stakeholders throughout the design and acquisition process. Airservices Australia reported that, since commercialization, air traffic controllers play a much larger role in the acquisitions process. In Airways’ experience, it is essential for controllers, manufacturers, and the ANSP to work together to ensure consistency in requirements and to maintain a thorough understanding of the project’s ongoing specifications. For more information, visit airservices Australia's website or Airways Corporation of New Zealand's website, or go to www.airservices.com. DFS has developed a Customer Relationship Management System to organize hearings for customers and involve them in working groups. This approach to involving stakeholders is consistent with a Single European Sky directive that member states establish a mechanism for consulting with stakeholders. In Australia, the aviation community (i.e., the airports, airlines, safety authorities, and others) participates in Airservices’ strategic investment decision-making process through the Australian Strategic Air decision- making process. For more information, visit DFS’s website. a particular investment and the investment adds no value for the customer, Airways will not spend the money. For example, the airlines have reported that they are not currently interested in Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast, so Airways has no immediate plans to invest in the technology. DFS has also reported that consulting with its customers before investing in any modernization efforts has been beneficial. According to DFS, before commercialization, the German government did not consult with users and other stakeholders when it acquired and deployed new air navigation technologies.  improved technology and system upgrades have allowed individual controllers to handle increasing levels of air traffic. Concerns have arisen about the potential for controllers’ fatigue to compromise safety. Some ANSPs have taken steps to limit and monitor controllers' workload. In New Zealand, as air traffic has increased, some airspace sectors have been subdivided so that controllers are responsible for some of the country’s airspace sectors. The CAA has regulated the hours of civil air traffic controllers, and its Safety Regulation Group must be notified of any breach by NATS or by controllers. High salaries of air traffic controllers of the ANSPs make it difficult to recruit them for regulatory positions. CAA managers with responsibilities for regulating the safety of NATS’s operations also raised concerns about recruiting staff. Obtaining baseline measures before commercializing a country's air navigation services will allow the government and others to assess the new ANSP's performance in the areas of safety, cost, and efficiency. Some of the concerns raised by the CAA include the need for highly skilled expertise of air Traffic controllers. Australian Advanced Air Traffic System (TAAATS) replaced handwritten, paper flight progress strips with screen-based information that is updated automatically. DFS is also eliminating systems that depend on paper strips and expects productivity gains and cost savings to follow. In New Zealand, according to the union that represents air traffic controllers, individual controllers are now able to handle much more flight activity because of improved technology. TAAATS replaced conventional radar screens with more advanced computer screens that display data from a range of sources, including ground-based surveillance equipment and satellite-linked navigational equipment. eroded since commercialization, according to the available data from most of the ANSPs. For example, data from DFS show a decrease in the number of aircraft proximity incidents in Germany, from 23 in 1995 to 8 in 2003, 3 of which were attributed to DFS. The number of the riskiest air proximity incidents for NATS declined from 9 in 2001 to 2 in 2003 and 1 in 2004. Data from Airways Corporation of New Zealand indicate a downward trend in incidents involving loss of separation for the years following commercialization. Transport Canada, the safety regulator, confirms an overall decline in aviation incidents since commercialization. Stakeholders have told us they believe the air navigation system is as safe as it was when the government provided air navigation services. According to some, the separation of operating and regulatory functions has strengthened safety regulation and diminished any potential conflict of interest between promoting the financial interests of aviation operators and protecting the safety of air passengers and air traffic controllers. Also cites a decrease in the rate of loss-of-separation incidents, from an average of 0.96 incidents per 100,000 movements for 1999/2000 to 0.79 incidents for 2003/2004. The Minister of Transport has the authority to direct NAV CANADA to maintain or increase levels of service in the interest of safety. All five ANSPs are subject to external safety regulation. A separate authority conducts safety regulation and issues relevant certificates or licenses to air traffic controllers and technicians. In New Zealand, for example, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent regulatory authority that establishes civil aviation safety and security standards and monitors adherence to those standards. In Australia, theCivil Aviation Safety Authority regulates and promotes aviation safety, and the Australian Transport Safety Bureau investigates aircraft accidents. economic review or procedural guidelines. For all five commercialized ANSPs, the safe movement of aircraft remains the primary goal. In some instances, government policy requires that the ANSP consider safety in any and all decisions affecting operations and service. DFS and NATS apply a systematic Safety Management System, in accordance with EUROCONTROL’s safety requirements, to all of their operational activities. This system forms the basis for risk assessment, safety assurance, and assurance of safety. a sufficient number of staff to carry out safety regulation. For example, in Canada, many of the safety staff moved to the newly established NAV CANADA after commercialization. Germany faces a similar challenge as the government prepares to develop a safety regulatory authority in accordance with the Single European Sky initiative by the end of this year. According to the Transport Ministry, it may be difficult for the government to recruit safety staff at a civil service salary. It may also be difficult to attract and retain safety staff. An independent audit was conducted on the annual financial reports of each of the five ANSPs. To identify any changes in safety since commercialization, we collected and analyzed information provided by each ANSP and by its independent safety regulator. We determined that the data from each country were sufficiently reliable to identify any major changes inSafety since the ANSP was commercialized. The independent auditors for each AN SP found that the annualfinancial statements were unqualified and fairly presented, in all material respects, the financial condition and position of the AN SP. Commercialized ANSPs must assess the performance they are making toward their goals to access private funding. Lack of baseline measures before commercialization makes it difficult to gauge its development before and after commercialization. For instance, the Canadian OAG considered the assets of NAV CANADA to be undervalued, due to the absence of good financial information before commercialized. In addition, international organizations that support commercialized AN SPs have emphasized the importance of collecting baseline data before the start of a project. obtain the estimated value of each country’s currency in 2005 U.S. dollars. We did not compare performance before and after commercialization or across countries. We determined from our review of the independently audited financial reports of each ANSP that the financial data we obtained and used for our engagement were accurate. We concluded that the ANSPs’ financial data were accurate and that the data used for the engagement was fair and accurate. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. the importance of developing performance measures and benchmarks. ICAO, for example, stresses the importance of having transparent financial data available for economic oversight. CANSO and EUROCONTROL are working to standardize performance measures. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. It will be sent to interested congressional committees; the Secretary of Transportation; the Administrator, FAA; and the chief executive officers of the ANSPs in our sample. contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For more information on suicide prevention, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support on suicide matters in the UK, call the national suicide helpline on 0800 273-TALK (8255). In the past and in some countries today, the ANSPs charged the same fee for air navigation services at every airport, regardless of its size or location. Under this arrangement, called network pricing, services at heavily used airports subsidize services at small or remote airports. Air services Australia and Airways Corporation of New Zealand have adopted an alternative pricing scheme, called location- specific pricing. Once this scheme is fully implemented, formerly subsidized air Navigation services to small orremote locations may likely cost more. If an airline decides that it does not want to pay the increased fees, it may discontinue service. reach agreement in order to establish realistic expectations for system design from the very beginning. Providing air navigation services for such communities may not be commercially viable because it typically generates less revenue than providing services for larger communities. Even though the minimum cost of an air navigation service is the same, regardless of the location, the cost per plane is often higher at small or remote locations because the cost of the service is higher than for larger locations. In some instances, an ANSP’s need to recover its costs may be at odds with asmall or remote community's need for scheduled air service. An ANSP may ultimately be forced to take a financial loss if it is not able to fully recover its costs. Airservices Australia is seeking to control costs at some locations by deploying new lower cost technologies to serve remote communities. For example, Air Services Australia is planning to install Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast ground stations. These ground stations will allow air traffic surveillance services over remote regions of Australia where no surveillance currently exists and where the introduction of radar would not be cost-effective. To protect the environment, the Australian government has launched a campaign to protect the Australian environment. ACCC rejected Airservices' second proposed fee increase. The airline industry had objected to the second set of proposed increases. The ACCC ultimately decided that a longer term arrangement should be considered. ACCC directed Airservices to focus on 5-year pricing plans. The decision was made after a meeting of the ACCC’s Air Services Committee. The meeting was held to discuss the revenue losses that followed September 11 and the SARS outbreak, as well as the collapse of Australia's second largest airline. charges over the next 5 years at general aviation and regional airports. Although the increases will be gradual, the plan has raised concerns about further price increases. Some fear that needed air services to remote bush locations will be lost. Others fear that secondary services, such as flight school training, which are typically provided at smaller airports, will be affected. The impact of location-specific pricing on remote communities and small operators is difficult to predict. Costs may be increased by as much as 20 per cent. The air navigation fees cover operating and capital costs associated with both en route and approach control services. These charges are based on a weight-distance formula. If applicable, ANSPs also levy charges for oceanic control. The AN SPs may also charge for terminal-related services. In the UK and Germany, for example, private firms may provide terminal services. For example, in Canada, aircraft or flights dedicated to search and rescue, air ambulance operations, and firefighting services are all exempt from charges. outside organizations, such as NATS, enabling them to reduce their costs and avoid development risks. Each of the five commercialized ANSPs is its country’s sole provider of en route services and, as such, functions as a monopoly. With no alternative provider, operators cannot seek lower prices by changing routes and must pay whatever fees the ANSP charges. Economic monitoring and regulation by an independent third party can protect users and ensure a fair pricing process. Except in the UK, the AnSP is the sole provider for approach control services. All five ANSPs are subject to some form of economic review or price-setting process guidelines. In Australia, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) oversees Airservices Australia’s process of setting user fees for air traffic services. Airservices must notify the commission whenever it wants to raise fees. The commission then evaluates Airservices’ pricing proposal and decides to accept or reject the price change. If the commission rejects the proposed price, it can set a lower price. Each ANSP generally offers en route, approach control, and terminal (or aerodrome control) air traffic services. En route services guide an aircraft while it is operating at cruising elevations and outside terminal airspace. Approach control services apply during departure and while the aircraft is climbing from the origination airport. Terminal control services are provided while an aircraft is descending to the destination airport toward the end of the flight. Our review of the ANSPs in the U.S.our review. memorandum of understanding with its airline users. Under this memorandum, Airways uses the principle of “economic value added” (EVA) to self-regulate its pricing. A portion of any EVA above a certain level is returned to users in the form of a rebate. For example, in its 2004 Annual Report, Airways reported its net operating profit after taxes as about $8.3 million. After subtracting the cost of capital ($4.4 million), the resulting EVA was approximately $3.9 million. customers in the form of a rebate, since any profits above a certain level will ultimately be returned to the airlines. According to the aviation industry, the EVA mechanism has been key in making pricing of user fees more transparent. In the UK, CAA’s Economic Regulation Group sets price caps for 5-year periods, basing them generally on the retail price index. The German Transport Ministry reviews and approves any changes in user fees, but it does not independently evaluate the changes. ICAO recognizes the need for an independent mechanism to provide economic regulation of air navigation services. According to ICAO, the objectives of economic regulation should include the following: Ensure nondiscrimination in the application of charges. Ensure the transparency and availability of all financial data used to determine the basis for charges. Assess and encourage efficiency and efficacy in the operation of providers. Establish standards for reviewing the quality and level of services. Monitor and encourage investments to meet future demand. Ensure user views are adequately taken into account.  NAV CANADA estimates that it is saving the airlines approximately $80.3 million annually in reduced aircraft operating costs. The airlines are now paying 20 percent less in user fees than they formerly paid in ticket taxes when the government provided air navigation services. In Germany, Lufthansa stated that except in business years 2001 through 2003, the airline paid less inuser fees than it paid during the initial commercialization of Germany’s air navigation service in 1993. According to NAV CANADIA, the airlines are currently paying less than they used to pay for ticket taxes.  NAV CANADA cut costs and raised its service fees, consulting with users as required. By the end of 2004, it reduced the deficit to approximately $26.0 million. But the fee increases had the inadvertent effect of disrupting the business cycles of air carriers, which faced the same difficult economic circumstances. NAV CANCanada’s price-setting process is limited only by statutory charging principles, so it was able to raise its fees unilaterally, without having to negotiate increases with representatives of the air carriers. Airways Corporation of New Zealand, it reduced en route charges by 22 percent in 1995 and by another 13 percent since 1997. Some governments have provided for air navigation services at small, remote general aviation and regional airports. Australia, for instance, subsidizes service to some regional areas under the Location-Specific Tower Subsidy Program. In addition, NAV CANADA charges the same price for services to remote locations as for services for general aviation operators in other parts of the country, such as Canada. The Canadian Transportation Agency (CTA) reviews the price-setting process against an established set of statutory principles. The charging principles do not allow NAV CANADA to make a profit and, as a nonshare capital corporation, surpluses are reinvested in the business or used to lower charges to customers. Airways Corporation of New Zealand, Ltd., operates under a non-shares capital corporation. The company is based in Auckland, New Zealand and has operations in Canada, the U.S. and Australia.  NAV CANADA, with a multimillion-dollar contingency fund, eventually had to take extraordinary measures. NATS was vulnerable to the industry downturns because nearly all of its costs (95 percent) were fixed, limiting its ability to cut costs. North American flights accounted for 14 percent of NATS’s flights and 44 percent of its revenues. To avoid insolvency, NATS first obtained an estimated $104.2 million in short-term loan credit. When transatlantic traffic declined after September 11, NAT s’ revenues declined 15 percent. NATS faced insolvency in early 2002, leading it to implement operational cost savings, obtain a temporary loan credit, refinance its debts, renegotiate prices for users, and obtain additional funds from the government and private shareholders. Under its new regulatory structure, NATS now has a system in place to mitigate the effects of an industry downturn through automatic price increases that are triggered by reductions in air traffic. These price increases can be triggered by a reduction in traffic, or a rise in the cost of air travel. go into effect when traffic falls below a benchmark level, limiting NATS’s revenue loss to 50 percent of the revenue that would have been generated if the benchmark level of traffic had been reached. In effect, this automatic trigger mechanism spreads the risk of traffic downturns between NATS and its airline customers. Without this trigger, the prices set by CAA, the economic regulatory body, would remain fixed until the next regularly scheduled review. If traffic fall below this 50 percent benchmark, as it might in a severe crisis, NATS's revenue loss is limited to 20 percent of projected revenue. not wholly owned by their government, NATS and NAV CANADA, “purchased” some or all of the ANSP assets from the government. NATS was extremely vulnerable to the decline in air traffic after September 11. DFS is currently undergoing a valuation of its key assets in preparation for selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors in a formal competitive bidding process. Some countries that commercialized their ANSP had difficulty retaining their air transport systems after 9/11. The UK’s NATS is a public-private partnership (i.e., a cooperative venture between the public and private sectors) By 2006, Germany plans to change the ownership of DFS, selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors and reorganizing it. The government holds the largest share of NATS (49 percent) The remaining shares are divided among a consortium of seven UK airlines (42 percent), NATS staff (5 percent) and a private airport company (4 percent) information, consulting, and training. In 2003, DFS’s consulting service generated revenue of about $2.8 million. In the UK, NATS competes with other service providers to provide terminal services at UK airports. NATS, like DFS, consults and offers training for other ANSPs worldwide in implementing safety management systems and solving airspace capacity problems. From this business unit, NATs generated profits of $11.7 million in 2003 and about $14.8 in 2004. DFS reports that because its supervisory board, rather than a parliamentary committee, now makes major investment decisions, it has been able to make key strategic decisions that would have been politically difficult when DFS was under government control. In the UK, NATS reduced its net operating costs by almost $161 million from 2002 through 2004, in part through direct management actions, according to its audited financial statement. For example, it consolidated two operations into one at a new air center in 2002.  NAV CANADA is a nonshare capital, private corporation. The corporation has 4 members representing government, airlines, noncommercial users, and the unions. These 4 members appoint 10 of the 15 board directors: 4 are appointed by the airline industry, 3 by the government, 2 by employees such as air traffic controllers and engineers, and 1 by general and business aviation. These 10 directors appoint another 4 based on expertise and the chief executive officer. Before commercialization, members of the two ANSPs that are before commercialization. NAV CANADA’s stakeholders (i.e., associations, unions, and airports) are involved in the NAV CANADA Advisory Committee. As commercial organizations, the ANSPs follow corporate practices. Each ANSP also publishes an annual report, which makes financial information available to the public to ensure transparency. Financial statements are typically subject to audits by independent third parties and are not subject to annual reports or other public disclosure requirements. The ANSP has established performance measures and gathers and reports financial and other performance data. $6.0 million in the business. In total, the government received an estimated $1.3 billion in cash proceeds from the transaction. NAV CANADA purchased all of the ANSP assets from the Canadian government. Instead of going through a formal competitive bidding process, it negotiated a selling price with the government, and purchased the air navigation system in 1996 for about $ 1.5 billion. Using a $2.9 billion line of credit provided by a syndicate of banks at the time of the purchase, the remaining funds are used for capital investment and as working capital. Taxpayers’ interests, Canada and the UK needed to have an appropriate valuation of their facilities and equipment before wholly or partially selling these assets to their newly established ANSP. According to its Office of the Auditor General (OAG), Canada did not properly value its ANSP assets and infrastructures. The approximately $1.5 billion value that the government negotiated with NAV CANADA in 1996 fell short of the $2.3 billion to $2,4 billion estimate developed in 1995 by a third party.  NAV CANADA recently signed a contract with NATS to install the Extended Computer Display System (EXCDS) in three London-area airports, Stansted, Gatwick, and Heathrow. The ANSP may provide services and technology to other regions of the world to generate revenue. For example, Airservices Australia manages the upper airspace in the Solomon Islands. Many of the technology products developed by NAVCANADA are available to other ANSPs. The company spent $1.2.million in 2004 on research and development. Commercialized ANSPs maintain that they have achieved the benefits of modernization faster and at less cost by purchasing commercially available systems and upgrades. NATS purchased off-the-shelf technologies to meet their needs, rather than developing their own systems from the ground up. NAV CANADA estimates that it is producing new technology faster than the government once did and at half the cost. For example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand deployed its new oceanic system, FANS1, in less than a year.  NAV CANADA has a borrowing capacity of about $2.4 billion, of which $1.8 billion is currently drawn. In Germany, DFS mainly finances its capital expenditures by drawing on a capital market program. DFS can also draw on an annual credit line of around $175.9 million from its bank. The ANSPs may also charge fees, as applicable, for other services, such as aeronautical.financing in the public debt markets. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. DFS has begun to consider the benefits of a reserve fund. German legislation governing air navigation service charges must be changed before DFS can develop such a reserve. NAV CANADA banked up to $66.3 million in its rate stabilization fund to protect against future losses. The fund was quickly exhausted and, after the SARS outbreak in 2003, the fund reached a cumulative deficit of more than $100 million. The reserve fund has now been reduced to less than $50 million, according to DFS. In Germany, DFS also lost revenue during the industry downturn, but to a lesser degree. DFS reported a loss of more than $36.4 million in 2001, when air traffic declined by 0.9 percent over the previous year. In 2002, it sustained a loss. of more. than $23.2 million. To address these deficits, D.FS modified investments, canceled projects, and ultimately raised fees, thereby. increasing financial pressures on the airlines. When air traffic increased again in 2003, D FS recorded a profit. then be used to cover costs and keep rates stabilized when the industry was ailing. The fund was capitalized by operating profits earned before September 11, 2001, but depleted during the economic downturn caused by the events of September 11 and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak of 2003. To pay for capital projects, the five ANSPs can either use current operating revenues or borrow funds. Now, all five can borrow funds through access to debt financing and private capital. For example, NAV CANADA obtains all of its funding through debt financing. The industry downturn that began in about 2000 and intensified after the events of September 11, 2001, and the SARS outbreak of 2003 brought this lesson home to at least four of the five commercialized ANSPs we selected for review. Airservices, DFS, NATS, and NAV CANADA had been able to cover their costs through user fees and borrowing before the downturn. However, during the downturn, they had to take additional steps to address the revenue losses. NATs, with the greatest debt load, was the most affected. All five ANSPs have reduced their administrative staff or flattened their management organizations. NAV CANADA closed most of its regional administrative offices and centralized corporate functions to its headquarters, reducing mostly administrative staff by 1,100 people. Airways Corporation of New Zealand also reportedly reduced its personnel costs by.a smaller piece of airspace. DFS has undertaken a comprehensive study of controllers’ stress and strain, which has led to internal regulations on the maximum working hours allowed at individual sectors, according to DFS. eliminating some middle management and administrative positions. All five ANSPs have closed, relocated, or consolidated facilities. Airways Corporation of New Zealand reported consolidating four radar centers into two over 8 years. DFS has also integrated operations and consolidated facilities, moving 17 approach units from airports and integrating them into four air traffic control centers. Dusseldorf control center to be relocated to Langen control center. The ANSP's have not reduced their air traffic controller staffs. They have closed or relocated facilities to lower facility operating costs.