We reported in 2008 that DB plan investments in hedge funds and private equity have grown, but such investments are generally a small portion of plan assets. This remains the case today. According to a Pensions & Investments survey, the percentage of large plans (as measured by total plan assets) investing in hedge Funds grew from 11 percent in 2001 to 60 percent in 2010. The average allocation to hedge funds among plans with such investments was a little over 5 percent. Among plans with investments in private equity, the average allocation was alittle over 9 percent. survey by Greenwich Associates found that 22 percent of midsize plans were invested in hedge funds. Survey data on plans with less than $200 million in assets are unavailable. One of the major challenges that both hedge fund and private equity investments pose to plan sponsors is uncertainty over the current market. The extent to which these smaller plans invest in hedge Funds and private Equity is unclear. The impact of hedge funds on the U.S. economy is not yet known, but is expected to be significant. value of the sponsors’ investment. With regard to hedge funds, plan officials may lack information on both the nature of the specific underlying holdings of the hedge fund. Because many hedge funds may own thinly traded securities and derivatives whose valuation can be complex and subjective, a plan official may not be able to obtain timely information on the value of assets owned by a Hedge fund. Further, hedge fund managers may decline to disclose information on asset holdings and the net value of individual assets. The plan is expected to be implemented by the end of the year. largely because the release of such information could compromise their trading strategy. In addition, even if hedge fund managers were to provide detailed positions, these managers may seek to profit through complex and simultaneous positions. Although we noted in January 2008 that some hedge funds have improved disclosure and transparency about their operations because of the demands of institutional investors, several hedge funds still refuse to provide such information. It is difficult for plans to independently ascertain the value or fully assess the degree of investment risk, the authors say. Investing through a fund of funds does not relieve plan sponsors of their fiduciary duties. Smaller plans may have only one-or two-person staffs, or may lack the resources to hire outside consulting expertise and may be locked out of top-performing funds. A representative of one pension plan with more than $32 billion in total assets noted that before investing in hedge funds, the plan would have to build up its staff in order to conduct the due diligence necessary during hedge fund investing. Operational risk is the risk of investment loss because of inadequate or failed internal processes, people, and systems. Operational problems can arise from a number of sources, including inexperienced operations personnel. Many hedge funds engage in active, complex, and sometimes heavily leveraged trading, and a failure of operational functions may have particularly grave consequences for the overall position of the hedge fund. Pension plan officials took steps to mitigate the risks and challenges of investing in hedge funds and private equity, the report says. Pension plan officials cited attaining returns superior to those attained in the stock market as a reason for investing in hedge funds. Hedge funds and private equity are also relatively illiquid investments. One plan official noted that as long as hedge funds add value net of fees, they found the higher fees acceptable. The fee structure of hedge funds is often more expensive than that of private equity funds, according to a recent study by the University of California, San Francisco. The study found that hedge funds charge higher fees than private equity fund investments. Plan sponsors and others cited the importance of negotiating key terms of investments in hedge funds and private equity. Such terms can include fee structure and conditions, degree of transparency, valuation procedures, redemption provisions, and degree of leverage employed. For example, pension plans may want to ensure that they will not pay a performance fee unless the value of the hedge fund investment passes a previous peak value, known as a high-water mark. Key contract terms for private equity may also include fee Structure and valuation. pension plans cited limited transparency as a prime reason they had chosen not to invest in hedge funds. As with hedge funds, valuations of private equity investments are uncertain during the investment’s long duration, which often lasts 10 years or more. Unlike investments that are traded and priced in public markets, plan officials have limited information on the value of private Equity investments until the underlying holdings are sold. In some cases, private equity funds estimate the value. of the fund by comparing thevalue of companies in their portfolio with the. value of comparable publicly traded assets. Hedge fund and private equity investments pose investment challenges beyond those posed by traditional investments. Both managers may use leverage to potentially increase an investment’s return without increasing the amount of capital invested. Although registered investment companies are subject to strict leverage limits, a hedge fund or private equity fund can make relatively unrestricted use of leverage. Leverage can magnify the potential returns of an investment, but it can also magnify its risks over time. To learn more about how to invest in hedge funds, visit: www.hedgefunds.com. Investing in a fund of funds provides investors with diversification across multiple funds. A fund of private equity funds can allow plans to invest in a variety of managers, industries, geographies, and year of initial capital investment. Fund of funds can be appropriate if plan sponsors do not have the skills necessary to manage hedge funds, according to a report by FTSE 100 index fund provider FTSe: A Managers' Exchange-Traded Fund (FTSE:FTSe)  investing through a fund of funds may provide a plan better access to hedge funds or private equity funds than a plan would be able to obtain through direct investment. Fund of funds have some drawbacks and limitations, including an additional layer of fees, such as a 1 percent flat fee and a performance fee of 5 to 10 percent of returns. Furthermore, funds of funds also pose the same challenges as direct investment in a portfolio of hedge funds. To invest in hedge funds, go to www.hedgefunds.com. making careful and deliberate fund selection when investing in hedge funds and private equity. Most of the plans we contacted described one or more specific strategies for their hedge fund investments. Some plans participate on the advisory board of a private equity fund, which provides a greater opportunity for oversight of the fund’s operations and new investments. However, this involves a significant time commitment and may not be feasible for every private equity investment. Also, several plan sponsors address some of the risks and challenges of investing in Hedge Funds and Private Equity by investing in them. procedures, though one plan sponsor noted the ability to negotiate favorable contract terms is limited when investing in top-performing funds. Due diligence and ongoing monitoring, beyond those required for traditional investments, are also important. For hedge funds, due diligence can be a wide-ranging process including study of a hedge fund’s investment, valuation, risk management processes, and compliance procedures, as well as a review of back office operations. As with hedge fund investments, plans take additional steps to mitigate the challenges of investing in private equity. assets such as hedge funds and private equity are becoming more commonplace. In light of these trends and ongoing public equity market volatility, it is reasonable to expect that the number of plan sponsors making such investments will increase in the future. Such assets may serve useful purposes in a well-thought- out investment program, offering plan sponsors advantages that may not be as readily available from more traditional investment options. But investments in such assets place demands on plan sponsors that are significantly beyond the demands of more traditional asset. The Department of Labor (Labor) can play a role in helping to ensure that plans fulfill their Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) fiduciary duties. In 2008, we recommended that Labor provide guidance for qualified plans under ERISA on the unique challenges of investing in hedge funds and private equity. For example, we stated that Labor’s Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) could outline the implications of a hedge funds’ limited transparency on the fiduciaries’ duty of prudent oversight. actions consistent with the best practices, and thus would be at risk of making imprudent investments in hedge funds. While EBSA is not tasked with offering guidance to public sector plans, such plans may nonetheless benefit from such guidance. Labor generally agreed with our recommendation, but said the lack of uniformity among these investments could complicate the development of comprehensive guidance for plan fiduciaries. To date, Labor has not acted on this recommendation. As plan sponsors seek to better ensure adequate return on assets under management, recent trends suggest that investments in alternative funds could be a good idea. The Secretary of Labor should provide guidance on investing in hedge funds and private equity for qualified plans under ERISA. We believe that a discussion of the challenges that such investments pose to small plan sponsors would be beneficial. I would be happy to answer any questions that the council may have. For further questions on this statement, please contact me at (202) 512- 7215. Individuals making key contributions to this statement can be contacted at: http://www.classes.org/classes/ERISA/ErISA. of ERISA fiduciaries in selecting, valuing, and accounting for hard-to-value assets, of which many hedge funds and private equity funds are composed. The Investor’s Committee published a report in January 2009 on the best practices for hedge fund investors. The report acknowledged that hedge fund investments are not necessarily suitable for some investors and provided many recommendations for investors selecting and monitoring their Hedge Fund investments. It also recommended obtaining a written statement of the fund's valuation policies and procedures. statement include Michael Hartnett, Sharon Hermes, David Lehrer, and Amber Yancey Carroll. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.