4-year intervals, commencing in fiscal year 2008. Navy originally planned to procure the first CVN-21 class aircraft carrier in 2006. Since then, the Navy has delayed procurement to 2008, which has delayed fielding this vital capability. Committee urges Navy and shipbuilder to identify opportunities to improve affordability of future aircraft carriers. In view of the potential for significant program savings, the committee recommends an increase of $50.0 million in SCN for CVN -21 class advance procurement. procuring CVN-78 and future aircraft carriers, rather than split funding (i.e., two-year incremental funding) as proposed by the Navy. Section 121 would also authorize the Navy to contract in FY2007 for the procurement long-lead items for CVN -79 and -80, aircraft carriers that the Navy plans to procure in FY2012 and FY2016, respectively. This authority resembles an economic order quantity (EOQ) arrangement, except the Navy would review economic order quantities and long lead time material procurement. for advance construction of the ship. This budget request reflects the second one-year slip in the program in recent years. This slip would cause a delay in the delivery of the CVN-78 until fiscal year 2015, with the ship it is scheduled to replace, the USS Enterprise (CVN-65), scheduled to be decommissioned in fiscal year 2013. Additionally, this slip translates into a cost growth of approximately $400.0 million, according to the Navy. The committee is concerned about this. The committee remains concerned that the use of incremental funding is not a solution to the Navy's problem in funding shipbuilding. The low rate of shipbuilding was driving higher costs, which in turn further reduced shipbuilding rates, creating a downward spiral. The committee believes that stable ship requirements, increased funding in the shipbuilding budget, and increased flexibility for funding large capital ships are critical elements of any strategy to reverse this trend. The Secretary of the. Navy's fiscal year 2007 report to Congress on the long-range plan for the construction of naval. vessels identifies a requirement to procure the CVN-21 class aircraft carriers at. Committee recommended approval of the Navy's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring LHA-6 and the two lead DDG-1000s. The committee directs the Navy to provide an updated funding profile, fully funding the remaining costs of the ship from fiscal years 2007 through 2010, with delivery of the fiscal year 2007 budget request. Under the proposed funding plan, the ship is to be funded over a total of nine years, with about 35.2% of its procurement cost provided in advance procurement funding between FY2001 and FY2007. delay. The committee has been told there is no technical reason for the delay, but that the delay was driven by budget considerations. Both the Secretary of the Navy and the Chief of Naval operations testified that large capital assets such as aircraft carriers are difficult to fund under the traditional full-funding policy. The program of record for CVN-78 has the detail design and construction funding split between two years. This provision would authorize that same funding to be split over four years, thereby allowing needed funding flexibility. In 1993, as part of its Bottom-Up Review (BUR) of U.S. defense policy and programs, the Clinton Administration decided to reinstate procurement of SSN-23 in FY1995 or FY1996. By this point, $382.4 million had already been obligated and expended on SSn-23. Congress's action on the 1992 rescission proposal also made an additional $540.2 million in funding available for obligation to SSN23. As a consequence, completing the approximate $2.4 billion cost ofSSN- 23 would require about $1.5 billion in additional funding. FY1998 to complete the cost of SSN-23 (as adjusted); Congress approved this amount. LHD-6 Amphibious Assault Ship. The House had recommended fully funding procurement of the Wasp (LHD-1) class amphibious assault ship Bonhomme Richard (L HD-6) The Administration had not requested this ship. The ship would have cost $2.4 billion as then estimated, about one-third of the total estimated cost of the ship. A total of $802.5 million was appropriated by Congress in the two years (FY1997 and FY1998) following the year (FY1996) in which SSN 23 was procured. The third and final Seawolf (SSN-21) class attack submarine, was originally procured in the FY1992 defense budget, which Congress passed in 1991. In early 1992, the George H. W. Bush Administration terminated procurement of further SeAWolf-class submarines and proposed rescinding funds for both the second and third boats. In acting on this proposal, Congress rejected the request to rescind funding for SSN-22, effectively suspended the procurement of SSN23, and gave the Secretary of the Navy the choice of whether to reinstate procurement. DOD sealift ships were procured through the National Defense Sealift Fund (NDSF), a DOD revolving and management fund. The NDSF is outside the procurement title of the DOD appropriations act and therefore not subject to the full funding policy. LHD-8 was incrementally funded by explicit funding. DOD's Large, Medium-Speed, Roll-on/Roll-off (LMSR) ships (as well as Navy Lewis) have been procured since FY1993. portions of 16 LMSRs whose construction contracts were awarded between FY1993 and FY1997. In explaining its use of funds in the LMSR program, DOD stated: The National Defense Sealift Fund (NDSF) is not a procurement appropriation but a revolving fund. Dollars appropriated by Congress for the fund are not appropriated to purchase specific hulls as in the case of, for example the Navy's DDG-51 program. Rather, dollars made available to the NDSF are executed on an oldest money first basis. and Clark (TAKE-1) dry cargo ships procured since FY2003 ) have not been subject to the full funding policy as traditionally applied to DOD procurement programs. As discussed in a 1996 CRS report, although individual LMSRs were ostensibly fully funded each year by Congress, in some cases DOD applied LMSR funding provided in a given year to partially finance the construction of L MSRs authorized in various years. For example, although Congress ostensibly approved $546.4 million in FY1995 for the procurement of two L MSR, the FY1995 funds were actually applied to help finance the procurement. LHD-6 was approved for procurement in FY 1993 but only $305 million in FY1993 funding was provided. The $893.8 million needed to complete the funding of the ship (as adjusted) was requested by the Administration in FY1994 and approved by Congress. The Navy in its FY2007 budget proposed procuring the amphibious assault ship LHA-6 in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. The ship in question is LHD-8, which was funded on an incremental basis, with the final increment provided in FY2006. aircraft carriers and large deck amphibious ships, and the Navy's fiscal year 2007 shipbuilding plan already assumes such authority for the second LHA class amphibious assault ship. The committee has approved the use of split funding for certain ships in certain cases. However, the committee does not believe that a blanket policy supporting incremental funding for any class of ship is appropriate. The provision states: H.R. 2863 / P.L. 109-148 (FY2006 Defense Appropriations Bill) The Senate Armed Services Committee approved the Navy's FY2008 request for the second of two increments of procurement funding for the amphibious assault ship LHA-6. The House did not recommend approval of carrier CVN-21. The Navy's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring LHA(R) was approved by the House in its report ( H.R. 5122 / P.L. 109-364) on H.Rept. 110-146 of May 11, 2007. Section 121 of the conference report on H.R. 5122 ( H.Rept. 109-702 of September 29, 2006) authorizes four-year incremental funding for the CVN-21 class aircraft carriers. Section 124 authorizes the procurement of the first two DDG-1000 destroyers in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. The section states in part: "It is the sense of Congress that there is sufficient benefit to authorizing the one-time exception provided in this section" be used as a precedent for incrementally funding any future DDG—1000 or any other shipbuilding program. The report recommends funding the procurement of one Littoral Combat Ship, or LCS (rather than the requested two) in FY2007, and rescinding funding (in Section 8043) for one of the three LCSs procured in FY2006. The Committee is troubled by this revelation and recommends rescinding the insufficient fiscal year 2006 funds currently allocated to the fourth LCS flight 0 vessel. insufficient to procure two ships and recommends $300,670,000 to fully fund procurement of one LCS seaframe. The Committee notes that this recommendation puts the Navy on its previously established path of procuring four LCS flight 0 ships by the end of fiscal year 2007. (Pages 115-116) Conference Report on H.R. 5631 ( H.Rept. 109-676 of September 25, 2006) approves the Navy's request for the initial (FY2007) increment of procurement funding for the LHA(R) amphibious assault ship. In the case of the F-22, incremental funding is requested in the middle of the production run. The use of incremental funding mortgages the future of the procurement budget of the Defense Department. In addition, the precedent for incremental funding for these programs could be applied to a variety of other procurements, leading to a loss of budget transparency and reducing the ability to perform oversight. Therefore, the recommendations in this bill include full funding for one DD(X) destroyer and theF-22 fighter program. complete full funding of one DD(X) vessel. This is the same level as the funding request for this item, but under the President's budget these funds would have been allocated on an incremental basis against two ships. The Committee cannot support such a far-reaching policy change which has implications beyond the Navy's shipbuilding program. The Navy's proposal requires special legislative authority, according to the report. The report also states: The Committee recommends $2,568,111,000 for the procurement of 1 DD( X) destroyer. Department of Defense to consider whether using advance appropriations in future budgets will improve the shipbuilding program. The committee also stated: The fiscal year 2006 President's budget requests $225,427,000 for [the]DDG-51 [destroyer program] for what the Navy describes as "program completion requirements and shutdown costs" These funds are requested for a mix of Class and ship specific plan, basic construction, ordnance, certification, and inspection costs. Such costs are traditionally included in the budget request for each ship. The Navy sought and was granted the authority to use incremental funding for the next of the follow-on ships of the DDG-1000 Next-Generation Destroyer program. The committee for FY2007 instead recommended full funding for one DDg-1000, and design funding for a second. Congress, in acting on the proposed FY2007 budget, approved the Navy's requested first increment of funding. The Navy's proposed FY2008 budget requests the second increment of funds for the two ships. The effect of the conference agreement would allow the Navy to split fund twin lead ships.  split funding is a two-year form of incremental funding. Under split funding, a weapon's procurement cost is divided into two portions, one of which is funded in the item's year of procurement, the other the following year. The Navy in its FY2007 and FY2008 budget submissions proposed to procure LHA-6 and the first two DDG-1000s using split funding in FY 2007 and FY 2008, and to procure CVN-78 using split Funding in FY2008-FY2009. As part of its proposed FY2005 budget and FY2005-2009 Future sufficient explanation is provided, the Committee recommends only providing funds for plans and those costs directly attributable to ships scheduled to deliver in the near-term. The Committee recommends reducing the budget request by $195,654,000. (Page 127) Conference Report The conference report ( H.Rept. 109-359 of December 18, 2005) on H.R. 2863 states: The conferees do not agree with House direction urging the Navy to reconsider split funding for the LHA(R) Program. The conference agrees to consider either split funding or full funding if proposed by the Administration. Full funding increases the opportunity to use performance-based fixed price contracts, allows for more efficient work planning and management of the capital project (or investment) Full funding in the budget year with regular appropriations alone is preferred because it leads to tradeoffs with spending for other capital assets. Advance appropriations have the same benefits as regular appropriations for improved planning, management, and accountability of the project (investment) The latter helps ensure that agencies develop appropriate plans and budgets and that all costs and benefits are identified prior to providing resources.  Regulations governing the full funding policy are found in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11 and DOD Directive 7000.14-R. Good budgeting requires that appropriations for the full costs of asset acquisition be enacted in advance to help ensure that all costs and benefits are fully taken into account at the time decisions are made to provide resources. Full funding with regular appropriations in the budget year also leads to tradeoffs within the budget. of 1870, as amended, and the Adequacy of Appropriations Act of 1861. action to cancel or modify an annual funding increment in a future-year budget. In this sense, advance appropriations can be thought of as a legislatively locked in form of incremental funding. OMB Circular A-11 allows for the use of advance appropriations to help finance capital assets under certain circumstances. Regular appropriations for the full funding of a capital project or a useful segment (or investment) in the budget year are preferred. If this results in spikes that, in the judgment of OMB, cannot be stopped, the advance appropriations are used. times—if needed to ensure that these items will be ready for installation into the end item. AP funding may also be used to pay for economic order quantity (EOQ) procurement of a set of long-lead items. Long- lead items are often manufactured not at the enditem's final assembly facility (such as a shipyard) but at separate supplier firms. In Navy shipbuilding, AP funding has most commonly been used to finance long- lead components for all of the end items to be procured under MYP arrangement. Congress has granted MYP authority for a relatively small number of procurement programs. The law governing MYP arrangements is set forth in 10 U.S.C. § 2306b. This provision permits the Navy to use a single contract for a total of 198 to 224 F/A-18E/Fs procured during the five-year period FY2000-FY2004. It is unclear whether the Navy will use MYP to procure a set of end items that are scheduled to be procured across a series of up to five fiscal years. EOQs normally take place within the context of a multiyear procurement (MYP) These ships have not been approved for MYP, and under past practice would not qualify for it under the requirements set forth in the law. MYP arrangements are permitted to cover items to be procured over a period of up to five years, while the authority granted under Section 121 would cover three ships that the Navy wants to procure over aperiod of nine years (FY2008-FY2016). In its report ( S.Rept. 109-254 of May 9, 2006) on S. 2766 , the Senate Armed Services said the authority would be used for the procurement of three ships. the item is procured. Congress imposed the full funding policy on DOD in the 1950s to make the total procurement costs of DOD weapons and equipment more visible. Congress's intent in imposing the policy was to strengthen discipline in DOD budgeting and improve Congress's ability to control DOD spending. Understanding total costs and how previously appropriated funds are used are key components of Congress's oversight capability. The fullfunding policy is consistent with two basic laws regarding government expenditures—the Antideficiency Act and the Budget Control Act. In spite of its potential advantages, Congress replaced incremental funding with the full funding policy in the 1950s. Congress has periodically reaffirmed the fullfunding policy since then. The U.S. government has spent more than $1.2 trillion on weapons since 2001, according to a report by the Center for American Progress. The report says that the cost of weapons and equipment should be transparent and transparent to Congress. It says that incremental funding makes the total procurement costs of weapons less visible to Congress and more difficult to understand and track. SSN-23, LHD-6, LHA-6 and CVN-78 amount to cases of de facto incremental funding. These ships constitute recent exceptions to the use of full funding in the procurement of Navy ships. Under incremental funding, a weapon's cost is divided into two or more annual portions, or increments, that reflect the need to make annual progress payments to the contractor as the weapon is built. Congress then approves each year's increment as part of its action on that year's budget. full funding policy means that DOD cannot contract for the construction of a new weapon or piece of equipment until funding for the entire cost of that item has been approved by Congress. Sufficient funding must be available for a complete, usable end item before a contract can be let. Support for the full funding policy has been periodically reaffirmed over the years by Congress, the Government Accountability Office (GAO), and DOD. AP funding may be used to pay for long-lead items—components of a usable end items that have long manufacturing lead. Most Navy ships procured since the late 1950s have been funded in accordance with the full funding policy. Before then, many Navy ships were procured with incremental funding. Most DOD procurement items are funded through a single decision by Congress to provide the entire cost of the item in the item's year of procurement. In spite of the existence of the fullfunding policy, a few Navy and DOD ships have been procured in recent years, such as the F/A-18 Hornet. Under advance appropriations, as under traditional full funding, Congress makes a one-time decision to fund the entire procurement cost of an end item. That cost, however, can then be divided into two or more annual increments. Supporters of advance appropriations could argue that it offers many of the potential advantages of incremental funding, such as avoiding or mitigating budget spikes. They could also avoid some of its potential disadvantages, including the risk of increasing weapon procurement costs created by uneconomic start-up and stop costs. a future year, which can enhance job security for construction workers at the yard that would build the ship. reducing the total construction cost of a ship through improved sequencing or year-to-year balancing of shipyard construction work. Most DOD procurement programs use annual contracting, under which DOD lets one or more contracts for each year's worth of procurement of a given item. Multiyear procurement is a special contracting authority, approved by Congress on a program-by-program basis, that permits DOD to use a single contract. as to achieve better production economies of that item than would have been possible under full funding. recognize that certain DOD procurement programs, particularly those incorporating significant amounts of advanced technology, bear some resemblance to research and development activities (which can be funded in increments), even though they are intended to produce usable end items. reduce the amount of unobligated balances associated with DOD procurement Programs. implicitly recognize potential limits on DOD's ability to accurately predict the total procurement cost of items, such as ships, that take several years to build. preserve flexibility for future Congresses to stop "throwing money at things" one Congress to "tie the hands" of one or more future Congresses by providing initial procurement funding for a weapon. DOD could start procurement of an item without necessarily understanding its total cost, the so-called "camel's-nose-under-the-tent" issue. It could also increase weapon procurement costs by exposing weapons under construction to potential uneconomic start-up and stop costs that can occur when they are under construction. It would also create a potential for DOD to start procurement without necessarily knowing the item's total cost. which can increase the costs of the displaced programs due to uneconomic program-disruption start-up and start costs. Avoid a potential bias against the procurement of very expensive items that might result from use of full funding due to the item's large up-front procurement cost. permit construction to start on a larger number of items in a given year within that year's amount of funding, so. so that the project can be completed on time and within the budget. so. the project could be completed by the end of the year. with poor production economies of sale, but is expected to rise in future years to levels that would be more than adequate to support higher, economic rates of ship procurement. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could permit construction to begin on additional ships in the near term. This second scenario is dependent on realizing the expected increase in ship-procurement funding in the later years. If this increase is not realized, then using incremental funding could simply trade poor productioneconomies of scale in theNear term for poor production Economies of Scale in future Years. marginally reduce the total cost to procure a given number of ships. By avoiding instances in which budget spikes caused ships to be moved from one year to another in ship-procurement plans, using incremental funding or advance appropriations can avoid perturbations in the production schedules for these ships. Using incremental funding can increase the procurement cost of a ship if one of more of the ship's funding increments is reduced or deferred. In some circumstances, incremental funding could increase rather than reduce ship- Procurement costs. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could marginally increase the number of ships that could be built for a given total amount of ship-procurement funding. Opponents could argue that compared to full funding, advance appropriations under certain circumstances could increase ship-construction costs by causing work on a ship to stop. Such movements of planned ship procurements can be a source of instability in Navy ship- Procurement planning.or other unexpected developments cause planned increments to be reduced or deferred. The Navy could move the carrier or amphibious assault ship from a preferred year of procurement to a less-preferred year that has fewer other Navy ships in it. Advance appropriations could help reduce instability in Navy ship-procurement plans. Navy can avoid or mitigate budget spikes that can occur when traditional full funding is used. The ships that best fit this description are aircraft carriers and "large-deck" amphibious assault ships. Accommodating budget spikes for such ships can require the Navy to move to other fiscal years other ships that the Navy would have preferred to procure in the spike year, says John Defterios, a former Navy official. of this option could argue that current practices weaken adherence to the full funding policy. Such practices, they could argue, increase the chance that supporters of other kinds of procurement items, such as aircraft and satellites, could seek to have them funded using incremental funding. This option would involve reducing or eliminating the use of incremental funding in Navy ship procurement and reduce or eliminate the use, in ships being fully funded, of AP funding for purposes other than funding the procurement of long-lead items requested by DOD. Congress's decision on ship funding approaches could also affect future Navy capabilities, annual Navy funding requirements, and the shipbuilding industrial base. Opponents of this policy could argue that it would deprive Congress of the flexibility it has under current funding practices. Could using incremental funding or advance appropriations reduce instability in Navy ship-procurement plans? Using incremental funding for aircraft carriers could help Navy and DOD to better define their thinking regarding Navy requirements, the authors say. The issue can be alternately expressed as how to procure Navy ships economically while maintaining key congressional prerogatives. Some observers have proposed procuring Navy ships using funding approaches. These alternative funding approaches include incremental funding and advance appropriations. Supporters of these approaches believe they could increase stability in Navy shipbuilding plans. The issue for Congress is whether to use these approaches or return to a more exclusive reliance on full funding. of the lead ships of each new class of Navy ships in the Navy's research and development account rather than the ship-procurement account, as the Navy has proposed in previous years. branch budget regulations on the full funding policy, at least not in the same way as these regulations recognize the use of AP funding for long-lead components. Supporters of this option could argue that current funding practices give DOD and the Congress the flexibility to use incremental funding on a limited basis for certain ships. Opponents the cost of shipbuilding and sustaining the shipbuilding industrial base. The committee remains convinced that the fullfunding policy is the correct policy for funding shipbuilding. The Committee understands that the Department of Defense this year considered submission of a legislative proposal that would permanently authorize use of "split funding" for ships. nuclear-propulsion components of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines. Congress in recent years has occasionally approved AP funding for conventionally powered Navy ships, such as destroyers and amphibious ships. Congress has also occasionally approvedAP funding for "advance construction" work on certain ships. This apparently refers to early shipyard activities for building the basic structure of a ship, as opposed to manufacturing long-lead components to be installed into the ship. It is not recognized in executive orders. The Navy did not request any AP funds for long- lead items. If a given increment of construction work on the ship is completed before the end of a fiscal year and that year's funding increment is entirely expended, the Navy might have to halt work. Under full funding, in contrast, the navy would have access to funding for the ship's entire construction cost and consequently would not have to resume work until the start of the next fiscal year, avoiding the additional work.be restarted. The Navy could argue that under full funding the ship would be able to be completed within the next two years. The Navy has identified the total cost to procure the twin lead ships of the DDG—1000 class as $6,582,200,000. The conferees insist that the Navy manage this program within that total cost, and will be unlikely to increase funding through a reprogramming or an additional budget request except in the case of emergency. This action is being taken based upon the expectation that the total Cost of these two ships is well understood and low risk. The unusual procurement of twin lead. ships raises the risk that future design changes or production problems will impact two. ships under construction simultaneously. This could raise costs significantly compared to other lead ship programs. In 2004, the Navy proposed funding the procurement of the lead DDG-1000 destroyer and the lead Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) program in the Navy's research and development (R&D) account. Funding the procurement through the R&D account would permit them to be incrementally funded without violating the full funding policy. Congress, in acting on the Navy’s proposed FY2005 and FY2006 defense budgets, rejected the proposal. The Navy's proposed FY 2005 and FY 2006 defense budgets were rejected. development account, directed the Navy to fully fund the lead DDG-1000 in the Navy's ship-procurement account, and fully funded the two lead LCSs. Advance appropriations have not been used in Navy ship procurement, but have been used by other executive branch agencies to fund various programs. As a funding approach, it can be viewed as lying somewhere between traditional full funding and incremental funding. It is not to be confused with advance procurement (AP) funding, which is permitted under executive branch budget regulations. the lead ship in the class. Including DD/NRE costs in the procurement cost of the lead unit is a practice that is not followed by other DOD procurement programs. Shifting these costs to the R&D account would make Navy ship-procurement programs look more like DOD programs for things such as aircraft, ground vehicles, and missiles. Opponents could argue that NN/Nre work is more closely related to production than to research. The House Armed Services Committee, in its report, said the current practice makes these costs more visible to Congress. The Navy has proposed to fund lead ships through the Navy's research and development (R&D) account. This approach would permit both DD/NRE costs and the hands-on construction costs of lead ships to be funded incrementally while not violating the full funding policy. This option can be viewed as an intermediate approach that is between the current practice of fully fundingDD/Nre costs and incrementally funding both these costs in the R&D account. Supporters of this option could argue that DD/ NRE work is best viewed as the final stage of research and Development and should be funded as such. current ship-procurement funding practices. strengthen adherence to the full funding policy in ship procurement. increase the use of incremental funding. shift lead-ship detailed design/nonrecurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs to the Navy's research and development (R&D) account. Each of these is discussed below. The Navy could argue that using advance appropriations for aircraft carriers or large-deck amphibious assault ships, they could argue, creates a risk of increasing the procurement cost of other ships. in 2001 did not adopt advance appropriations as a mechanism for funding Navy ships. The House Appropriations Committee, in its report ( H.Rept. 107-298 of November 19, 2001) on the FY2002 defense appropriations bill, stated that it was dismayed that the Navy continues to advocate the use of alternative financing mechanisms to artificially increase shipbuilding rates. The report notes that Section 401 [of H.Con.Res. 95 ] reflects an overall limit on advance appropriations of $23.158 billion in fiscal year 2007. in FY2007 and FY2008 by $14 billion, to $37.393 billion. The amendment would also insert a new provision (Section 409) that would include the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account on a list of accounts identified for advance appropriations. The Senate passed S.Con.Res. 18 on March 17, 2005, and the amendment was ordered to lie on the table. This appendix discusses Navy and DOD ships that have been procured in recent years or are currently being procured using incremental funding. S.Amdt. 146 to S.Con.Res. 18 is the earlier Senate version of the budget resolution. The report includes the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account in the list of accounts identified for advance appropriations in the Senate.has been included in all previous limitations on advance Appropriations in past budget resolutions. It would amend Section 401 of S. Con. Res. 18 —the section that restricts use of advance appropriations — to increase the amount of advance Appropriations. In 2001, some Navy officials advocated the use of advance appropriations for Navy ship procurement. This funding approach is used by several federal agencies other than DOD. The Navy in 2001 apparently did not receive approval from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to use the approach for ship procurement, and did not officially propose its use as part of its FY2002 budget submission to Congress. Congress did not approve of the approach in 2001, and the Navy did not propose it in its FY 2002 budget submission. its policy and budget for these costs after the last ship was appropriated. The Committee finds this decision troubling. First, budgeting for such costs after procurement of the last vessel obscures the actual cost to procure each ship. The Congress approved the Navy's request for multiyear procurement authority in fiscal year 2002 assuming a level of savings to the taxpayer that are now not being realized. Most disconcerting about this change in policy and resultant budget request is the Navy’s assertion that if these costs were not incurred, the Navy would not need to spend the money. The Committee recommends providing the Navy financial management authorities that have previously been denied. This authority allows the Navy, through above threshold reprogramming procedures, to increase funding for programs experiencing unforeseen shortfalls. The Committee understands that in fiscal year 2006, the Navy expects to spend more than $1 billion on shipbuilding. The Navy is considering several options for controlling long-term costs. It is aware that the new Chief of Naval Operations [CNO] is actively reviewing shipbuilding programs and is consideringSeveral options. 2005 after exhausting the $100,000,000 of the transfer authority the Congress provided, the Navy sought to use dollars specifically appropriated for outfitting and post delivery to address funding shortfalls. The Committee is concerned about this change in Navy policy as it will only further obscure actual program costs. The new reprogramming authority is provided only with the understanding that this change will not be implemented in the future. The additional repprogramming authority essentially provides the Navy a reactive mechanism or approach to cost management. stabilize the production path, and in our view, reduce the per unit cost of ships and increase our shipbuilding rate. The committee does not agree that creative financing methodologies that delay recognizing the true cost of shipbuilding are responsible actions. Incremental funding, advanced procurement, multiyear procurement, and various creative shipyard work allocation arrangements have failed to control the cost growth of vessel classes such as the Virginia class submarine, the replacement amphibious assault ship (LHA(R) and the future major surface combatant ship (DD(X) Senate Appropriations Committee remains gravely concerned about the overall health and stability of Navy shipbuilding. Committee finds unanticipated cost overruns to be the root cause of much of the instability in the program. Until budget estimates become more realistic, requirements stabilize and penalties for non-compliance will be imposed.this ship class, to ensure an adequate budget is in hand before contract award." (Page 146) Senate In its report ( S.Rept. 109-141 of September 29, 2005) on H.R. 2863 , the Senate Appropriations Committee stated: The Committee is alarmed that the Navy would knowingly sign a multibillion dollar contract for ships that would be both non-operational and undeliverable unless additional dollars, outside the contract, were provided. The Committee directs the Secretary of the Navy to provide a detailed report of all the costs required to complete each of the remaining 11 ships and a rationale for such a contractual arrangement by December 1, 2005. Until the ships are funded, the Navy will not be able to meet its contractual obligations. natural disaster, or other impact arising from outside the Navy's shipbuilding program. (Page 180) Appendix B. Legislative Activity for FY2006 H.R. 1815 / P.L. 109-163 (FY2006 Defense Authorization Bill) House In its report ( H.Rept.109-89 of May 20, 2005) on H.r. 18 1515 , the House Armed Services Committee states: [Chief of Naval Operations] Admiral [Vernon] Clark, in his posture statement before the House Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Defense stated, "We need to partner with Congress and industry to regain our buying power"