soldiers were retained on active duty medical extensions. One of the soldiers told us, “People did not know who was responsible for what. No one knew who to contact or what paperwork was needed….” As a result, all four have experienced gaps in receiving active duty pay and associated medical benefits while they remained under a physician’s care for injuries received while on their original active duty tour. To support themselves and their families, these four soldiers needed the active duty military pay they were entitled to receive. Four soldiers were eligible for continued active duty pay and associated medical benefits due to their involvement in Operation Enduring Freedom. Although these injuries precluded them from resuming their civilian jobs, they experienced significant pay problems as well as problems in receiving needed medical care. All four soldiers experienced pay disruptions because existing guidance was not clear on actions needed to ensure that these injuries were treated properly. The soldiers' pay problems were a result of the lack of clearly defined implementing procedures in this area, the authors say. active Army locations directed the soldiers back to the USPFO. Army Regulation 135-381 provides that Army Guard soldiers who are incapacited as a result of injury, illness, or disease that occured while on active duty for more than 30 consecutive days are eligible for continued health benefits. With medical extension status, soldiers are entitled to continue to receive active duty pays, allowances, and medical benefits while under a physician’s care. We also found procedures were not clear on how to ensure timely processing of active duty medical extensions. at Walter Reed and my congressman. My orders were finally cut. In the end, I was discharged 2 weeks before my care should have been completed because the second amendment to my orders never came. The whole mess was blamed on the ‘state’ and nothing was ever done to fix it.” One sergeant was required to stay at Womack, the medical facility at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, while on medical extension. His home was in New Jersey. He had not been home for about 20. months, since his call to active duty. While he was recovering from his injuries, his wife was experiencing a high-risk pregnancy and depended upon her husband’s medical coverage. Even though she lived in New Jersey, she scheduled her medical appointments near Fort Bragg to be with her husband. The sergeant submitted multiple requests to extend his active duty medical extension status because the paperwork kept getting lost. Lapses in obtaining approvals for continued active dutyMedical extension status caused the sergeant’S military medical benefits and his activeduty pay to be cut. one was really looking after their interest or even cared about them. These problems resulted in numerous personal and financial difficulties for these soldiers. “Not having this resolved means that my family has had to make greater sacrifices and it leaves them in an unstable environment. This has caused great stress on my family that may lead to divorce.” “My orders ran out while awaiting surgery and the care center tried to deny me care. My savings account was reduced to nearly 0 because I was also not getting paid while I waited” be stopped several times. He told us that because of gaps in his medical extension orders, he was denied medical coverage, resulting in three delays in scheduling a surgery. He also told us he received medical bills associated with his wife’s hospitalization for the delivery of their premature baby as a result of these gaps in coverage. We found several instances in which existing DOD and Army regulations and guidance in the pay and allowance area are outdated and conflict with more current legislative and DOD guidance. Some existing guidance reflected pay policies and procedures dating back to Operations Desert. to receive the higher housing allowance (with dependents) rate. As a result, several soldiers’ dependent information was not loaded into the personnel system correctly, and they were paid a single rate housing allowance instead of the higher married rate allowance. Other soldiers did not receive the correct housing allowance because they did not turn in complete forms and documentation to initiate the correct allowance rate or were late in turning in documents. For example, one soldier, who appeared to have submitted his lease agreement 6 days after being called to active duty, did not received the correcthousing allowance amount for the first 2 months of active duty. that he submitted documentation on three separate occasions to support the housing allowance he should have received as of the beginning of his October 2001 mobilization. Each time he was told to resubmit the documentation because his previously submitted documents were lost. Subsequently, while he was deployed, he made additional repeated inquiries as to when he would receive his housing allowance pay. He was told that it would be taken care of when he returned from his deployment. However, when he Returned from his Deployment, he was. told that he should has taken care. of this issue while in the U.S. 42 soldiers from the unit were underpaid their entitled family separation allowance when they mobilized. The underpayments occurred as a result of Maryland USPFO military pay officials’ errors in calculating the start and stop dates for this allowance. Several soldiers did not receive the correct type of basic training. The Army Guard command generated an amendment on August 21, 2003, to reinstate the original order to avoid future questions regarding the soldier’s tour of duty. The amendment was passed by the Maryland Army Guard Command and signed into law on August 22, 2003. family separation allowance when the soldier had only been on active duty for 2 weeks. According to the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 27, soldiers are only eligible for this allowance after they have been separated more than 30 days from their families on a continuous active duty assignment. This overpayment problem had not been resolved as of March 31, 2003. USPFO officials were unable to provide supporting documentation explaining why five soldiers continued to receive a family separation allowance after available documentation showed that these soldiers’ active duty tours had officially ended. and eligibility requirements for the basic allowance for housing and the family separation allowance, respectively. For example, during our audit work at one of our case study locations, we determined that because of inconsistent interpretations of existing guidance for “dependents” in entering transactions, a number of Maryland soldiers were not paid the correct amount. At another case study location, we found that existing guidance on eligibility determination was misinterpreted so that soldiers were erroneously refused the “single parent soldiers family separation allowances” to which they were entitled. allowance for housing after being mobilized as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. We were unable to determine specific causes and amounts of all the unit’s problems associated with the basic allowance for housing because the unit had remobilized in July 2003. Some of the historical records relating to housing entitlements applicable to the prior mobilization could not be located. Based on our inquiries, we determined that some soldiers were underpaid their housing allowance because the Maryland unit had been mobilized in 2003. informed that a soldier did not return with his or her unit, or how the USPFO was to take action to validate the status of such soldiers. Data input and eligibility requirements for housing and family separation allowances were not clear, the audit found. A soldier returned early from a deployment when the soldier appeared at a weekend drill while his unit was still deployed. The audit found that procedural guidance was not clear with respect to transaction entry for soldiers returning early from deployment. The U.S. military has been accused of failing to properly vet soldiers who return early from deployments. USPFO military pay officials entered the incorrect date for the tour and therefore shortened the unit’s soldiers’ allowance by 1 day. Other soldiers did not receive the correct amount for this allowance as a result of different interpretations of how to enter “dependent” information provided on housing allowance application forms. According to personnel officials, married soldiers are required to write in their spouses’ names as dependents on Form 5960 in order to receive the higher housing allowance amount. However, guidance did not clearly specify that simply checking the box indicating that they are married is not sufficient support. administrator stated that many of these soldiers received amended orders after their initial mobilization when it was determined that they were not deployable for a variety of reasons. The Maryland Army Guard command initiated amendment orders to stop the active duty pays when it became aware of the problem. The orders were not generated in time for the USPFO to stop active duty pay in the system. They believe that the amendment fell through the cracks due to the general confusion and the limited personnel processing the mass mobilizations after September 11, 2001. A sergeant incurred pay problems during his mobilization and deployment to Afghanistan. The active Army and his state's USPFO were confused as to responsibility for processing pay input transactions associated with a promotion. The end result was the soldier was overpaid during the time he was in Afghanistan. A sergeant was promoted from a sergeant first class to master sergeant (E-8) and his demotion back to an E-7, and a second promotion back to a E-8. The sergeant was also overpaid for his deployment and demotion. duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The sergeant wrote a letter from Afghanistan to a fellow battalion soldier back in his home state, discussing his pay problems. He stated that he was not receiving his special duty assignment pay from November 2001 to March 2002. His letter concluded, “Are they really fixing pay issues or are they putting them off till we return? If they are waiting, then what happens to those who (god forbid) don't don’t? " The sergeant was killed in action in Afghanistan on April 15, 2002, before he knew if his pay problems were resolved. Soldiers’ pays may appear as lump sum payments under “other credits” on their leave and earnings statements. In many cases these other credit pay and allowances appeared on leave and earning statements without adequate explanation. The sergeant apparently was not aware of receiving these payments because of the way they were combined. The review determined that some of the sergeant’s pays were started up to 2 months late, but others had actually been paid properly. pay personnel did not immediately detect the overpayments in monthly pay system mismatch reports. For these five soldiers, over payments continued for up to 3 months. One of these soldiers was discharged early because of drug-related charges. However, his pay continued for 3 months past his discharge date. By the time the USPFO stopped the active duty pay, the former soldier had received over pay of about $9,400. In July 2003, state military pay personnel initiated collection for the overpayment. In one case study unit, a mobilized soldier was released from active duty and discharged from the Army in June 2002, earlier than his planned release date. But, the soldier continuied to receive active duty pay. The soldier’s pay continued until the USPFO military pay supervisor identified the discrepancy on the September 25, 2002, personnel/pay mismatch report. Because this discrepancy was not identified until late September, the Soldier received $9,400 in extra pay following his discharge. In addition, we found a number of instances in which Army Guard soldiers’ active duty pays continued after their demobilization. early discharge for drug-related charges. Forty-eight of 51 soldiers in a California National Guard military police unit received late payments because the unit armory did not have a copy machine available to make copies of needed pay-related documents. Four Virginia Special Forces soldiers who were injured in Afghanistan and unable to resume their civilian jobs experienced problems in receiving entitled active duty pays and related health care. In some cases, the problems we identified may have distracted these professional soldiers from mission requirements, as they spent considerable time and effort attempting to address these issues. Five soldiers improperly received active duty pay and allowances even though they did not mobilize with the unit. Several other soldiers received promotions at the time of their mobilization, but state military pay personnel at the state pay office were not aware of this. The delay in entering the transfer and stopping pay caused each of these soldiers to receiveactive duty pay for 10 days. Even though his assignment to this military police unit did not require that special skill, the soldier was still paid for the 10 days he spent on active duty. 21 soldiers from the 114th Military Police Company experienced underpayments, overpayments or late payments. Of the estimated $50,000 in overpayment, we identified about $13,000 that was subsequently collected from the unit’s soldiers. For example, several soldiers did not receive their entitled $100 per month family separation allowance until 7 months after mobilization. We considered as late payments any active duty pays or allowances paid to the soldier over 30 days after the date on which the soldier was entitled to receive them. Thirteen soldiers received overpayments because they continued to receive pay after they were released early from active duty. Soldiers mobilized on October 1, 2001, and then received amended orders to be released from activeduty around October 13, 2001. Many continued to receiving basic pay,basic allowance for subsistence, basic allowance for housing, and family separation allowance payments through the end of November 2001. The unit did not receive the correct or timely entitlements related to basic pay and other entitlements when called to active duty in 2001. soldier readiness program contributed to some of the late payments we identified. Some soldiers did not receive their family separation allowance because they did not provide documentation supporting custody arrangements. confusion at the USPFO over the eligibility of single parents contributed to these late pays. It was later in the unit’s active duty tour that finance officers initiated action for 11 of the 114th Military Police unit's soldiers to receive retroactive payments, some for as much as 7-months of back pay. In another case, a former Special Forces soldier improperly received jump pay. not receive payments for up to 7 months after their mobilization dates, and others who still have not received certain payments. 93 soldiers experienced underpayments, overpayment, late payments, or some combination, during their tour of active duty at Fort Campbell and in Cuba. 3 soldiers experienced pay problems during their demobilization from Fort Stewart related to the proper payment of basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and location-based pays such as hardship duty pay. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $50,000. Finance officials at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, inadvertently entered a transaction to collect the entire amount of the housing allowance previously paid to the soldier. Sixty-two soldiers from the unit were overpaid their entitled subsistence allowance by active duty officials. As summarized in table 22, we identified a number of pay problems associated with five different types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment. The problems were resolved by paying the soldier a “catch-up” housing allowance payment. 56 out of 62 soldiers did not receive certain pays and allowances at all, or in a timely manner, after being activated on December 5, 2001. The types of pay for which most problems occurred during mobilization were parachute jump pay, foreign language proficiency pay, HALO pay, and basic pay. We identified 31 out of 65 soldiers from Virginia’s B Company who didn’t receive certain pay at all or were overpaid. We also found that these pay problems were exacerbated by breakdowns in customer service. and foreign language pay occurred at mobilization because the necessary documentation to support jump pay eligibility or language proficiency for a number of soldiers was not always provided to the USPFO or the mobilization station. For example, of the 8 soldiers in the unit who were underpaid for jump pay, 4 did not receive jump pay until mid- February 2002. In another instance, we identified 10 soldiers who were eligible to receive foreign language proficiency pay in January 2002, but didn't receive payments for 1 or more months. unresolved pay errors that had occurred as far back as 1996. According to U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, these problems should have been corrected during required annual soldier readiness reviews. USPFO officials told us that they have been working with a sergeant from Virginia’s B Company who performed a pay review. For example, over $22,500 was processed for 52 B Company soldiers’ and included in pay distributions from October 2001 to March 2003. eligible C Company soldiers. USPFO officials stated that they could not pay the increased amount until they received a copy of the new orders. The orders for the soldiers were not received for several months, which created a delay in the payment of the soldiers’ special duty assignment pay. Supporting documents showed that adelay in the production of the orders led to the delay in paying the $110 a month to the soldiers. The soldiers were paid the old amount and then paid the correct amount when orders were received. to continuation of active duty pay entitlements after they were released early from active duty. Maryland’s USPFO officials told us they had not experienced a large-scale mobilization to active duty in more than 10 years. We identified a number of causes associated with these pay problems, including delays in submitting documents, incorrect data entry, and limited personnel to process the mass mobilizations. Seventy-five of 90 soldiers from the 200thth were mobilized to the active duty force. did not receive them within 30 days after being mobilized on October 2, 2001. The types of pay entitlements either not paid at all or paid late associated with the unit’s initial mobilization included basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and family separation allowance. According to DFAS reserve component mobilization procedures; the California USPFO was responsible for initiating these pays. However, a late payments during the mobilization phase primarily resulted from military pay personnel's lack of understanding of their responsibility for initiating active duty pays. inquiries with cognizant USPFO personnel to identify if (1) soldiers’ entitled active duty pays and allowances were received within 30 days of initial mobilization date. As such, our audit results only reflect problems we identified. Soldiers in our case study units may have experienced additional pay problems that we did not identify. In addition, our work may have identified additional problems with pay and allowances that we were not aware of at the time of the audit. We apologize for any confusion caused. period of his demotion. DFAS garnished his wages and collected approximately $1,100 of the soldier's salary. The soldier's wife had to obtain a grant of $500 from the Colorado National Guard's Family Support Group to pay bills. We found existing guidance did not provide for clear responsibility and accountability between USPFOs and the Army Guard’s and active Army’S mobilization station and in-theater finance offices to enter transactions for deployed soldiers. However, we found that existing guidance was not clear on who was responsible for the transactions. In May 2003, DFAS-Indianapolis erroneously processed a payment transaction instead of a debt correction transaction in DJMS-RC. This created a payment of $20,111, which was electronically deposited to the sergeant’s bank account without explanation. A debt of $30,454 still appeared on his Leave and Earnings Statement. About 9 months after his demobilization, the sergeant's unpaid debt balance was reportedly $26,559, but the actual amount of his debt had not yet been determined. as of September 2003. Under current procedures, if a soldier is determined to owe the government money while on active duty, he is assessed a debt and informed of this assessment with a notation of an “Unpaid Debt Balance” in the remarks section of his Leave and Earnings Statement. This debt assessment notification procedure is even more egregious when debts, particularly large debts, are assessed in error and up to two-thirds of the soldier’s pay may be garnished to begin repaying the erroneous debt. For example, at our case study units, we found that the only notice several soldiers received when they were erroneously assessed payroll debts was an ‘Unpaid debt balance’ Soldiers owed debts for the 11 months of their active duty tour. They were told it would take approximately 4 to 5 years to pay off these debts. Some soldiers now returned from active duty, resumed participation in monthly training, and began having two-thirds of their drill pay withheld and applied to offset their largely erroneous debt balances. The soldiers were told not to write a check because the exact amount of each soldier’s debt could not be readily determined and tracking such a payment against an as-yet undetermined amount of debt could confuse matters. overseas or continued to receive paychecks, as if they were still on active duty status, for over 2 months beyond their release from active duty. Of the estimated $494,000 in overpayments, we identified about $88,000 that was subsequently collected from the soldiers of Colorado’s B Company. Despite considerable time and effort of DFAS and others across the Army Guard and Army, as of the end of our fieldwork in September 2003, Colorado's B Company debt problems had not been resolved. In fact, for one sergeant, his pay problems were further complicated by these efforts. special forces soldiers to address pay problems, in some cases, distracted them from important mission operations. In addition, several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decision whether to reenlist. According to several soldiers from Colorado’s B Company, the combined effect of recurring pay problems adversely affects morale and may have an adverse effect on a soldier's willingness to continue his military career. The soldiers also reported receiving poor payroll customer service during their active duty tours. or her service with the Army Guard. As of September 30, 2003, three soldiers had left B Company primarily due to frustration over pay problems. As summarized in table 4, we identified a number of pay problems associated with eight different types of active duty pays and allowances related to the unit’s mobilization to active duty. These problems resulted from failure to enter data, data entry errors, or late entry of data needed. For more information, go to: http://www.armyguard.org/. We identified over $1 million in largely erroneous debt transactions as a result of breakdowns in this area. At the Colorado Special Forces unit, we found that actions taken by the Colorado USPFO in an attempt to amend 34 soldiers’ orders resulted in reversing the active pay and allowances the soldiers received for 11 of the 12 months they were deployed on active duty. As a result, 34 soldiers received notice on their Leave and received garnishment of up to two-thirds of the soldier’s pay. DOD erroneously billed 34 soldiers in a Colorado National Guard Special Forces unit an average of $48,000 each. The largely erroneous total debt for these soldiers of about $1.6 million remained unresolved at the end of our audit in September 2003. DOD officials did advise us that, as a result of our work, they implemented a software change on September 18, 2003, intended to help avoid such problems in the future. We were informed of this problem in April 2003 and sent a follow-up letter in June 2003. At five of the 6 units audited, we identified 86 individuals who had total pay and allowance debts of approximately $300,000 as of March 31, 2003. A sergeant with the Colorado Army National Guard, Special Forces, encountered numerous severe pay problems associated with his mobilization to active duty. The sergeant’s active duty pay and other pay and allowances should have been stopped on December 4, 2002. However, when he was released from active duty, he was paid with no explanation. We gathered available data and analyzed the pay experiences of Army Guard special forces and military police units mobilized to active duty in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. We audited six Army Guard units as case studies of the effectiveness of the controls over active duty pays in place for soldiers assigned to those 31, 2003. These case studies are presented to provide a more detailed view of the types and causes of pay problems. We did not independently verify the reliability of the pay controls.and controls. they are receiving all entitled active duty pays and allowances. The extensive problems we identified at the case study units vividly demonstrate that the controls currently relied on to pay mobilized Army Guard personnel are not working and cannot provide reasonable assurance that such pays are accurate or timely. The personal toll that these pay problems have had on mobilized soldiers and their families cannot be readily measured, but clearly may have a profound effect on reenlistment and retention. It is not surprising that cumbersome and complex processes and ineffective human capital strategies, combined with the use of an outdated.  450 of the 481 soldiers from our case study units had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization to active duty. For one unit, these pay problems resulted in largely erroneous debts totaling $1.6 million. Due to the lack of supporting documents, we may not have identified all of the pay problems related to the active duty mobilizations of these units. The payment problems we identified did not include instances of fraudulent payments, which were a major finding resulting from the further investigation of improper payments found in our 1993 audit. duty in January 2003, sent to Kuwait in February 2003, and deployed to Iraq on military convoy security and highway patrol duties in April 2003. Of the 152 soldiers mobilized in this unit, we identified 54 soldiers who our review of available records indicated were either overpaid, underpaid, or received entitled active duty pays and allowances over 30 days late. We found that these pay problems could be attributed to overpaid or underpaid soldiers, or for whom erroneous pay-related debts had been created. Data collected from Army Guard units mobilized to active duty indicated that some members of the units had concerns with the pay support customer service they received associated with their mobilization. Of the soldiers who provided written comments about customer service, none provided any positive comments. Several had negative comments about the customer service. including such comments as “nonexistent,” “hostile,’ or “poor.’’ The Army Guard is the Army’s second-largest pay system. still deployed during the period of our review; Colorado’s 220th Military Police Company. The purpose of our limited review was to determine if there were any pay problems experienced by a more recently mobilized unit. We also obtained in-depth information from soldiers at four of the six case study units. Using a data collection instrument, we asked for soldier views on pay problems and customer service experiences before, during, and after mobilization. There were 325 soldiers in these units; in total, we received 87 responses. Many cases in which active duty pays were not started until more than 30 days after the entitled start dates because soldiers did not submit the paperwork necessary to start these pays. None of the DOD, Army, or Army Guard policies have been changed since the last readiness review. We identified a recurring soldier concern with the level and quality of customer service they received associated with their pays and allowances when mobilized to active duty. Have a question about a soldier's pay or allowance? Send it to us at tips@dailymail.co.uk. pay and allowance entitlements throughout their active duty mobilizations. Identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Review the pay problems we identified at our six case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. Evaluate the feasibility of using the personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. The Army Guard is a joint service of the U.S. Army and the National Guard. during their active duty tours adversely affects morale and may have a negative effect on the soldiers’ willingness to continue serving with the Army National Guard. Several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decisions whether to reenlist. We identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit’s mobilization to active duty. These problems resulted from failures by unit soldiers to provide necessary documentation to initiate certain pays, and data entry errors or late entry of data needed to start active duty pays. Army Guard soldiers may go to the military pay section of their home state’s Army Guard, the designated active Army area servicing finance office, and a toll free number, 1-888-729-2769. Not all Army Guard soldiers and their families were informed at the beginning of their mobilization of the pays and allowances they should receive while on active duty. This information is critical for enabling soldiers to identify if they were not receiving such pays and therefore require customer service. In addition, as discussed later in this report, we found that the documentation provided by the Army Guard did not facilitate customer service for soldiers. As a result, we found indications that Army Guard soldiers had difficulty using the leave and earnings statements to determine if they received all entitled active duty pays and allowances. Without such basic customer service, the soldiers cannot readily verify that they receive all the active duty pay and allowances to which they were entitled. In addition, several soldiers told us that they had difficulty discerning from their leave and Earnings statements whether lump sum catch-up payments fully compensated them for previously underpaid activeduty pay and allowance entitlements. The company commander for the unit told us that he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received as it moved through the initial mobilization process. Only two knowledgeable military pay officials were present to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers mobilized for his unit. The Fort Lewis finance office asked the California USPFO to supply additional personnel and temporarily reassigned soldiers from other units stationed at Fort Lewis to assist in the pay processing. As summarized in table 26, we identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit. USPFO military pay official mistakenly instructed the unit to take its pay data to the mobilization station to enter transactions to start active duty pays. DFAS reserve component mobilization procedures state that the USPFO has the initial responsibility for initiating these pays. The Fort Lewis mobilized to active duty, these personnel were able to enter the omitted transactions needed to startactive duty pays and correct the previous erroneous entries. It was not until more than 2 months after mobilization that the unit was able to begin cost of living allowance pays for 36 of the unit’s soldiers. military pay personnel at the unit’s mobilization station were the initial cause of the pay problems. In total, 48 out of 51 soldiers of the 49th Military Police Company did not receive certain pay and allowances and incentive pays at all. An Army pay technician at the Fort Lewis finance office entered the incorrect code, thereby paying a soldier the wrong type of allowance, which resulted in an underpayment. USPFO officials were unable to provide sufficient documentation to explain why 3 soldiers appeared not to have received cost of living allowance payments due them for a 2-month period. elapse between the receipt by the responsible Army Guard or Army pay office of proper documentation and processing the related pay transaction through the pay system. The case study units lacked specific written requirements for conducting and documenting monthly reconciliations of pay control breakdowns. Pay system input errors associated with amended orders, delays and errors in coding pay and allowance transactions, and slow customer service response were among the problems. Colorado USPFO military pay-processing personnel told us they are reviewing pay records for all deployed soldiers from this unit. case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. The National Guard Financial Services Center is working with each of the identified units and supporting USPFOs to ensure all pay issues are resolved. The Army and DFAS will continue to work the correction of any specific cases identified as still open for these units. Many of the cases identified have already been resolved or involved a delay in payment over 30 days from entitlement rather than an actual unresolved discrepancy. (p. 77/Draft Report) month, so that all elements were to be reconciled and all necessary corrective actions taken over a 3-month period. However, documentation was not always retained to determine the extent to which these reconciliations were done and if they were done consistently. Our findings are similar to those in reports from Army Guard operational reviews. One such report concluded, “Failure to reconcile the. pay and personnel record discrepancies each month.’‘‘The results of the most recent reviews at three of the six case study locations we audited showed that state Army Guard personnel were not performing effective reconciling of pay and Personnel record discrepancies. instances at two of our case study locations in which military pay technicians at either a USPFO or an active Army finance office made errors in amending existing orders. These errors resulted in establishing virtually all prior pays made under the original orders as debts. A major contributor to the pay errors we found in this area was that existing procedures did not clearly state how USP FOs and Army finance personnel should modify existing order tour start and stop information in the pay system. Also, these procedures did. that this was primarily because unit commanders have many such administrative duties, and without additional training on the importance of these actions, they may not receive sufficient priority attention. The lack of unit commander training may have contributed to the pay problems we identified at our case study units. For example, at our Virginia case study location, we found that when the unit was first mobilized, USPFO pay personnel were required to spend considerable time and effort to correct hundreds of errors in the unit’s pay records dating back to 1996. Personnel/Pay Mismatch listing monthly provides a perfect opportunity to establish fraudulent personnel or pay accounts. Several instances we identified in which soldiers received pay and allowances for many months after their release from active duty likely would have been identified sooner had USPFO military pay personnel investigated the personnel/pay mismatch report discrepancies more frequently. We determined a number of causes for these pay problems. First, we found a lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable staff. In addition, after-the- fact detective controls were not in place. The USPFO does not have the resources required to carry out such reconciliations each month. The purpose of the reconciliation is to ensure that for common data elements, the pay and personnel systems contain the same data. As summarized in table 25, we identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit’s mobilization to active duty. Failures to enter transactions or late entry of transactions needed to start active duty pays by Army GuardUSPFO military pay personnel and by active Army. The Mississippi Army National Guard USPFO identified the overpayment and took action on October 2, 2002, to stop the individual's pay. However, collection efforts on the $9,400 overpayment did not begin until July 2003, when we pointed out this situation to USPfo officials. The lack of an integrated set of systems was also apparent in the relationship between JUSTIS and the order. Further, the problem was not detected because reconciliations of pay and personnel data were not performed timely. B Company soldiers expressed dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses, were required to spend attempting to identify and correct problems with their pay. Another complaint concerned the circular nature of any attempts to get assistance. USPFO officials acknowledged that in instances in which the active Army finance office did not resolve soldiers’ pay problems, USPfo staff would try to fix the problems. According to several soldiers, the combined effect of recurring pay problems and receiving poor payroll customer service had a number of adverse effects. the unit’s soldiers an average of $48,000 each, for a largely erroneous total debt of over $1.6 million. Many soldiers with the company characterized the service they received from the state United States Property and Fiscal Office (USPFO) and the active Army finance offices as “poor’ or “openly hostile” Some of the soldiers in the unit expressed significant dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses were required to spend attempting to identify and correct their pay. The underpayments and late payments resulted in adverse financial repercussions for a number of the unit’s members and their families. We were told that neither the spouses nor the soldiers received clear guidance on whom to contact to address their pay concerns. For example, some of the spouses tried to contact the soldiers while they were deployed to find out why they were not receiving the anticipated funds. Some of the units’ members were not paid at all for some of their missions, we were told. Soldiers sought help from the active Army’s finance offices at Fort Knox and Fort Campbell. Officials at those locations told soldiers they should contact their home state Army Guard USPFO. According to DFAS officials, the active army finance offices have the capability to service Army Guard soldiers. Colorado”s B Company soldiers turned back Army finance office could not effectively answer questions concerning their pay entitlements or transaction processing documentation requirements. A frequent complaint we received was the circular nature of any attempts to get assistance on pay issues while deployed overseas. Special forces personnel were particularly critical of the customer service they received both while deployed in Afghanistan and when they were demobilized from active duty. Unit officials expressed frustration with being routed from one office to another in their attempts to resolve problems with their active duty pays and allowances. For example, the unit administrator told us he contacted the servicing area active Army finance office for the 101st Airborne in West Virginia because his unit was attached to the West Virginia Army base. He described the experience as time consuming and frustrating. the 101st when they were deployed. The finance office instructed him to contact the USPFO in West Virginia because, although he was from a Colorado unit, his unit was assigned to a West Virginia Army Guard unit. Several systems issues were significant factors impeding accurate and timely payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. The lack of an integrated or effectively interfaced pay system with both West Virginia and Colorado was cited as a reason for the pay problems for the 101st. The 101st was deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan. We selected six states that had a large number of special forces or military police units that had been mobilized, deployed, and returned from at least one tour of active duty in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. We chose California, Colorado, Maryland, Mississippi, Virginia, and West Virginia. We also identified and performed a limited review of the pay experiences of a unit. We further limited our case study selection to those units both mobilized to active duty and demobilized from active duty during the period from October 1, 2001 through March. Six case study units were deployed to various locations in the U.S. and overseas in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. In addition, we conducted a limited review of the pay experiences of a seventh unit mobilized more recently and deployed to Iraq in April 2003. The Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company was one of the seven units reviewed. The pay problems we found in our six cases study units persisted, as shown in figure 2. The unit was deployed to help perform a variety of critical tasks. Of 119 soldiers of the Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company, 105 experienced at least one pay problem associated with mobilization in support of Operation Noble Eagle. Pay problems included overpayments, underpayments and late payments of entitlements. The unit was demobilized from active duty at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002. Of the estimated $74,000 in ofOperation Noble Eagle, the unit had estimated over pay of $74k and underpayment of $11k.  unit administrative officer, while deployed in Cuba, discovered the soldier still on company pay records and reported the error. Following his discharge, this soldier continued to receive active duty pay until August 31, resulting in an overpayment. The unit, including 90 soldiers who received orders to mobilize with the 200th Military Police Company, reported to its home station, Salisbury, Maryland, on October 1, 2001. The soldiers demobilized at Fort Stewart, Georgia, where they were released from active duty on July 10, 2002. The Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company was called to active duty in support of Operation Noble Eagle for a 1-year tour. For C Company, 63 soldiers received their last 3 months of special duty assignment pay over 30 days late. The USPFO inadvertently overlooked the manual transaction entries required to process special duty assignments pay for those soldiers. Another 3 soldiers did not receive their last three months ofSpecial Duty Assignment Pay because of a clerical error. The soldiers were paid on December 27, 2001, through January 5, 2003. The President declared a national emergency as a result of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. The Secretary of Defense delegated to the Secretary of the Army the authority to order Army Guard soldiers to active duty as part of the overall mobilization effort. Approximately 93,000 Army Guard troops were activated as of March.mission. The U.S. military is committed to the mission of preventing, detecting and responding to acts of terrorism and acts of war. The mission is led by the U.N. Security Council and the United Nations. Army Guard soldiers accounted for 34 percent of the total reserve components mobilized in response to the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. Army Guard soldiers participated in direct combat in Afghanistan under Operation Enduring Freedom. U.S. homeland security missions, Operation Noble Eagle, were also part of the 9/11 response. In general, missions to fight terrorism outside the United States were categorized under OperationEnduring Freedom, while missions to provide domestic defense were categorized as OperationNoble Eagle. For more information, visit www.armyguard.org. On January 2, 2002, the Virginia Army National Guard’s B Company, 3rd Battalion, 20th Special Forces, was called to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The unit in-processed at Fort Pickett, Virginia, and departed for Fort Bragg, North Carolina. In early May 2002, B Company deployed to Afghanistan to perform search and destroy missions against al Qaeda and Taliban terrorists. Although several of B Company's soldiers returned from Afghanistan during August and September 2002, most of the unit's members returned to Fort. Bragg for demobilization during October 2002 and were released from active duty on January 1, 2003. West Virginia’s 19th Special Forces Group, 2nd Battalion, C Company, was called to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for possible Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists. It returned to Fort Campbell for demobilization and was released from active duty on December 4, 2002.discontinued. As discussed earlier, these pay-related problems for wounded soldiers caused significant hardship for them and their families. The Colorado Army National Guard’s B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces, was mobilized to active duty on orders for a 2-year period. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists as part of Operation Enduring Freedom. No charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9505. then proceeded to Camp Fretterd located in Reisterstown, Maryland, for the soldier readiness program (SRP) in- processing. On October 13, 2001, they arrived at their designated mobilization station at Fort Stewart, Georgia, where they remained for the next 2 weeks undergoing additional in-processing. The company arrived at Ft. Eustis, Virginia, in late August 2002 and was released from active duty on September 30, 2002. In addition, 3 of the 90 soldiers were deployed to guard the Pentagon. The 49th Military Police Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment (HHD) was mobilized to active duty for a period not to exceed 24 months. The unit performed its active duty mission at Fort Lewis, where it provided base security as part of the military police force. The 49th MP HHD mobilized at its home station, Pittsburg, California, and then proceeded to its designated mobilization station, Fort Lewis on October 12, 2001. Fort Stewart did not provide the amended orders with the earlier release date in time to stop the pay.and allowances through July 15, 2002. 17 soldiers who had significant problems with their HALO pay. According to USPFO personnel, the unit commander for C Company did not provide a list of the unit members who were eligible to receive HALo pay. Soldiers who are eligible for regular parachute pay and HALO Pay are paid the higher of the two amounts, but not both. In this case, the 17 members of C Company’s HALO team should have received a $225 per month payment from the beginning of their mobilization. USPFO occurred about 2 months after the unit mobilized. When the USPFO personnel attempted to collect the soldiers’ regular parachute pay, they inadvertently collected a large amount of the soldiers' basic active duty pay for the first month of their mobilization. Personnel at the US PFO stated that the error caused debts on soldiers' accounts but was corrected immediately after a pay supervisor detected the error in February. Even after the pay was corrected, USP FO personnel did not stop the regular parachute pays for the HALO team members, but instead let it continue, then collected the $150. Nine soldiers in the unit were eligible for HALO pay in January 2002. Pay problems occurred for seven of the nine soldiers during January 2002, the initial month of their mobilization. Two soldiers, who were not eligible to receive HALO. pay, received HALo pay for 3 months. Another soldier received HALO Pay starting in January but did not become eligible for. this pay until mid-April 2002. Documentation was not available to explain these errors. In May 2002, Virginia’s B Company left Fort Bragg and traveled to Afghanistan. While in Afghanistan, the C Company provided a more accurate list to the USPFO some time after the first list. Problems with HALO and family separation pay were not resolved for several months after the mobilization. As a result, the soldiers’ pay problems persisted into their deployment overseas. Based on our findings that the pay problems continued after this review, it does not appear that the active Army finance office at Fort Knox carried out its responsibility to review and validate all of C Company soldiers' active duty pays and allowance support records. for foreign language pay, and 10 soldiers who were overpaid for HALO pay. We found that some soldiers received payments over 5 months late and other soldiers had been overpaid. Seven soldiers did not receive their $225 per month HALO. pay until over a month after mobilization, and 18 other soldiers received combat diver pay and HALo pay to which they were not entitled. The soldiers in C Company attended a soldier readiness program at their unit armory. This program was intended to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents. Army soldiers’ pay issues. When pay technicians at the West Virginia USPFO attempted to help take care of some of the National Guard soldiers' pay problems, they were told by personnel at DFAS-Indianapolis not to get involved. Eventually, the sergeant was ordered to travel to the finance office at Camp Doha, Kuwait, to get its assistance in fixing the pay problems. This trip, during which a soldier had to set aside his in-theatre duties to attempt to resolve Army Guard pay issues, proved to be not only a major inconvenience, but also life-threatening. Oman and returned safely to Uzbekistan. While guidance that permits both Army Guard and active Army military pay personnel to enter transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers provides flexibility in serving the soldiers, we found indications that it also contributed to soldiers being passed between the active Army and Army Guard servicing locations. For example, at another of our case study locations, we were told that several mobilized soldiers sought help in resolving active duty pay problems from theactive Army’s mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox. spent significant amounts of time and effort trying to correct the pay problems while deployed on critical mission operations in Afghanistan and surrounding areas. For example, as discussed in greater detail in our West Virginia case study summary, a soldier from that unit took several days away from his unit to get location-based pay started for both the West Virginia and Colorado special forces units. We were also told that some members of the unit used their satellite radios to attempt to resolve their pay issues while deployed in Afghanistan. The sergeant delivered a box of supporting documents used to input data into the system. He worked with the finance office personnel at Camp Doha to enter the pertinent data on each member of his battalion into DJMS-RC. The total travel time was 16 hours. On his flight between Oman and Uzbekistan, the sergeant’s plane took enemy fire and was forced to return to Oman. No injuries were reported. The next day, he left the Kuwait International Airport and flew to Camp Snoopy in Qatar. The local finance office in Uzbekistan correctly entered transactions to start C Company’s hardship duty pay for designated areas into the DJMS-RC pay system. However, finance personnel at Fort Bragg incorrectly initiated a recurring certain places hardship duty payment for soldiers in C Company. For some soldiers, payments continued until May 31, 2002 and for others the payments continue until the end of their tour of active duty on December 4, 2002. In addition, because DJ MS-RC processing capability limitations required the designated areas payment to be manually entered every month the unit was in the designated area, the in-theater finance office failed to consistently enter the monthly designated area payments. The West Virginia National Guard Special Forces unit was stationed in Uzbekistan with the rest of his unit, which was experiencing numerous pay problems. The local finance office in Uzbekistani did not have the systems up and ready, nor available personnel who were familiar with DJMS-RC. According to the sergeant, the active Army finance personnel were only taking care of the in-theater finance office. DFAS policy clearly states that it is the active army that is responsible for location-based pays. Pays started for all the companies under the battalion, including C Company. On the return flight from the sergeant’s mission in Kuwait, his plane encountered enemy fire and was forced to return to a safe airport until the next day. The failure by active Army personnel at the finance office in Uzbekistan to enter the transactions necessary to start location-based pays for the unit delayed payments to some soldiers for up to 9 months. Per DOD FMR, volume 7A, chapter 10, soldiers who perform duty in hostile fire zones are entitled to hostile pay. were unsuccessful because finance personnel at that location were not familiar with DJMS-RC’s transaction processing requirements for starting these types of pay. Two soldiers were ordered to travel to Camp Snoopy, Qatar, where another Army finance office was located. After attempts by the unit administrator and the Uzbekistan finance office failed to initiate the payments, a sergeant in C Company was ordered toTravel to Camp Doha, Kuwait, to have the unit's location-based pays started. One of the soldiers told us that they flew to Kuwait because they were advised that the finance unit at that active Army Finance office was more knowledgeable about how to enter the necessary transactions. Active Army in-theater finance offices did not always know which units they were dealing with. Soldiers experienced problems in receiving the full amounts of their entitled HALO pay. Army Guard soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to hardship duty pay, special duty assignment pay, and, to a lesser extent, hostile fire pay and basic pay. The pay problems could be attributed, in part, to the active Army servicing finance office’s lack of knowledge about how to process transactions through the Defense Joint Military Pay System. active Army mobilization stations and in-theater servicing finance offices with respect to responsibility for entering transactions while in the theater. For example, at one of our case study locations, this broad authority for entering changes to soldiers’ pay records enabled almost simultaneous attempts by two different pay offices to enter pay transactions into DJMS-RC for the same soldier. At another case study location we found that, in part because of confusion over responsibility for starting location-based payments, two pay offices tried to enter the same transaction. The unit stayed at Fort Campbell to perform post security duties until June 2002. The E-4 specialist received a "general" discharge order for a drug-related offense. He continued to receive active duty pay, totaling approximately $9,400, until September 2002. Although the discharge information was promptly entered into the soldier's personnel records, it was not into the pay system for almost 4 months. This problem was caused by weaknesses in the processes designed to work around the lack of integrated pay and pay systems. USPFO did not enter transactions for the promotions until several months later, resulting in late promotion pay to the affected soldiers. Delays by the unit in submitting the promotion paperwork or by the state personnel office caused these problems. However, supporting documents were not available to enable us to determine the specific cause of the delays. After leaving the unit’s home station, the 114th Military Police Company traveled to Fort Campbell, its active Army mobilization station. As required by Army guidance, Fort Campbell personnel conducted a second soldier readiness program intended, The unit mobilized in Clinton, Mississippi, and departed for Fort Campbell, Kentucky, on January 6, 2002. The unit in-processed at Fort Campbell and for the next 5 months performed military police duties. On June 10, 2002, the 114th Military Police Company deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to perform base security and guard duties for Taliban and al Qaeda prisoners. After guarding detainees in Cuba for approximately 6 months, the unit returned to Fort Campbell in late November 2002. At Fort Campbell the unit out- Processed and returned to Clinton, Miss., and was released from active duty. Fort Campbell finance personnel performed only a perfunctory review of each soldier’s pay record. At this point, because the soldiers had only recently mobilized and had not received their first paychecks, they were unaware of pay problems. Failure to follow requirements for finance verification at Fort Campbell caused pay problems to persist past the mobilization stage. In addition, we were unable to determine specific causes for certain pay problems at the base. The Army is investigating the incident and will release a report in the coming months. The soldier was promoted to Sgt.First Class at the end of May, but the pay system did not reflect the promotion until October. The delay caused the soldier to be paid at her old rank for 5 months. According to DFAS guidance, when a change occurs in a soldier’s pay, the on-site Army finance office should input the change. In cases where personnel changes occurred that affected pay, either the soldiers failed to submit documents or personnel at Fort Campbell failed to input the changes. The majority of soldiers from Colorado’s B Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, all 62 soldiers with the company had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization. Soldiers told us their ability to identify and correct pay problems while deployed was impaired by limited access to telephones, faxes, e-mail, and their current Leave and Earnings Statements. Failure to stop location-based and other active duty pays and allowances for the unit's soldiers resulted in. 39 of the unit’s 62 soldiers continued to receive active duty pay and allowances, some until February 14, 2003. Instead of demobilizing on schedule with their unit, these five soldiers demobilized individually earlier due to various reasons. According to DFAS procedures, the finance office at the servicing demobilization station is to conduct a finance out-processing, which would include identifying and stopping any active duty pays. However, when these individual soldiers were released from active duty, Fort Campbell processed discharge orders but Fort Campbell’S finance office failed to stop their pay. We identified a number of pay problems associated with four types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment while on active duty. While at Fort Campbell, eight soldiers experienced problems resulting from delays in entering changes in the family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions. For example, one soldier was promoted to the rank of Private. The unit remobilized in February 2003, and unit administrative personnel did not retain payroll source documents relating to the prior mobilization. The sergeant’s mobilization orders called him to active duty for 730 days and not the 365 days that he was actually mobilized. The Army area servicing finance office at the demobilization station, Fort Campbell, did not enter the release from active duty date into DJMS-RC. The sergeant continued to improperly receive payments, as if he were still on active duty, for 2 and a half months totaling over $8,000. He was one of 34 soldiers in the company whose pay continued after their release. Some soldiers received extra hardship duty payments, while others were only paid sporadically. Only 9 of the 100 soldiers who deployed to Guantanamo Bay with the 114th Military Police Company received the correctly computed hardship duty pay. While in Cuba, the soldiers were either underpaid, or were late in receiving their entitled hardship duty pays. The soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to the location-based payment for soldiers located at designated hardship duty locations. Most of the unit’s soldiers were mistakenly provided both types of hardshipduty pay while deployed to Cuba. Bay finance office correctly entered transactions to start hardship duty pay for the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers into DJMS-RC. For 11 soldiers, the finance office inadvertently overlooked entering one or more monthly hardship duty payments. The combination of erroneous certain places duty early resulted in overpayments to 88 enlisted soldiers. According to the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, soldiers are entitled to receive hardship duty. pay only while they are stationed in a hardship duty location. payments, along with sporadic payments of hardship duty designated area pays caused confusion for the soldiers who were performing a stressful mission in Cuba. The 114th Military Police Company returned to Fort Campbell on November 23, 2002, to begin the demobilization process. Soldiers continued to experience pay problems. As summarized in table 19, overpayment problems consisted of improper continuation of hardshipduty pay following the unit’s return from Cuba and failure to stop active duty pay and allowances to soldiers who had been discharged or returned from active duty. While deployed to Cuba, the three soldiers were mistakenly paid the old type of hardship duty pay. The 200th Military Police Company returned to Fort Eustis around the end of August 2002 to begin the demobilization process. The soldiers did not receive all their entitled hardship duty pays. Furthermore, the hardshipduty pays they did receive were more than 30 days late. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case and that the soldiers were paid as part of the Army’s regular hardship pay program. Soldier’s spouse had to obtain a grant from the Colorado National Guard to pay bills while her husband was in Afghanistan. Some soldiers did not receive payments for up to 6 months after mobilization and others still had not received certain payments by the conclusion of our audit work. Ninety-one of 100 members of a Mississippi National Guard military police unit that was deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, did not get the correct amount of Hardship Duty Pay. One soldier from the Mississippi unit was paid $9,400 in active duty pay during the 3 months following an promotion. The USPFO did process a number of transactions to start entitled active duty pays and allowances for the unit’s soldiers. Such pays were started more than 30 days after the date they were entitled to receive such pays. In one case, a soldier's spouse had to obtain a $500 grant from the Colorado National Guard in order to pay bills while her husband was on active duty. As summarized in table 5, we identified pay problems associated with the hostile fire pay, and identified ways to fix them. For the six units we audited, we found significant pay problems involving over one million dollars in errors. These problems consisted of underpayments, overpayments and late payments that occurred during all three phases of Army Guard mobilization to active duty. Overall, for the 18- month period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, we discovered more than $1 million in errors in the Army Guard pay system. The Army Guard was responsible for providing security at the Pentagon shortly after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. December 19, 2002, directed mobilization site finance offices to use transaction codes that resulted in soldiers receiving a prior type of hardship duty pay that was eliminated in the December 2001 revisions. 91 of 100 Mississippi military police unit soldiers deployed to Cuba to guard al Qaeda prisoners were paid incorrect amounts. Army Regulation 37-104-4, dated September 1994, was still in effect at the end of our case study locations. We found that because the active Army finance office followed the outdated DFAS guidance for starting hardship duty pays. An administrative clerk’s review of this report while the unit was mobilized in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, resulted in action to stop active duty pay and allowances to a soldier who was previously demobilized. While these reconciliations are an important after-the-fact detective control, they are limited because they can only detect situations in which payroll and personnel records do not agree. A number of pay errors we identified resulted from the fact that neither personnel nor pay records were updated. Soldiers returning from deployments earlier than their units. did not identify any pay issues associated with the unit’s soldiers who were released from active duty on September 30, 2002. However, as shown in table 23, we did identify three soldiers who continued to receive active duty pay after their early release. Specifically, the three soldiers from the unit returned from Cuba, demobilized at Fort Stewart, and were released on July 10, 2002, while their original orders showed a September 30,. 2002, release date. They continued to receiving active duty Pay. Some soldiers in B Company left Afghanistan during August and September 2002. Most of the unit returned to Fort Bragg in when the soldier leaves the hostile fire/combat zone. Overpayments to B Company soldiers occurred during demobilization because the in-theater finance office continued to make hostile fire and hardship duty pays after soldiers left Afghanistan in October 2002. We found that 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. Also, we found that 57 of 64Soldiers eligible for hardship duty pay are overpaid at least part of the time. Fort Bragg processed October and November 2002 special duty assignment duty payments for 24 of the unit’s soldiers in December 2002. The Army finance office personnel at Fort Bragg were not aware that these payments were still being made after the soldiers had returned to the United States. Four members of Virginia’S B Company, who were injured while deployed in Afghanistan, requested medical extensions to their active duty tours so they could continue to receive active duty pay and medical benefits until they recovered. One of the members of B Company was injured in Afghanistan. detailed analysis of soldiers’ long-standing pay problems. This sergeant performed these pay-related tasks in addition to his mission- related duties as a professional engineer. After leaving the unit’s home station, B Company traveled to Fort Bragg, its active Army mobilization station. According to USPFO officials and active Army finance office officials, problems with jump pay have been a problem for the unit since January 2002 for the majority of their mobilization. The unit is currently deployed in Afghanistan. The in- theater finance office for Virginia’s B Company, located in Kuwait, did not start these pays as required. We were told that this occurred because finance personnel in Kuwait did not know that B Company had arrived in Afghanistan. Finally, at Kuwait the appropriate in-theater pays were activated and the two soldiers returned to Afghanistan. Despite this costly, time-consuming, and risky procedure to start location-based pays for the unit, 63 of 63 of the unit's soldiers were paid. Virginia’s B Company soldiers, who became eligible for hardship duty pay in May 2002, not receive their location-based pay entitlements until July 2002. Problems with special duty assignment pay also occurred during the unit's deployment. We found that both underpayments and overpayments of this type of pay were made as a result of confusion about who was responsible for making the manual monthly transactions necessary for entitled soldiers in the unit to receive these pays. For example, 10 soldiers in B Company did not receive at least 1 month of entitled special duty assignments pay. 66 of C Company’s 94 soldiers experienced pay problems associated with their demobilization from active duty. In October 2002, eligible soldiers in the unit were entitled to a special duty assignment pay increase from $110 per month to $220 per month. To initiate this higher pay rate, the West Virginia Army National Guard military personnel office was required to cut new special duty assignments pay orders for all soldiers. All of the unit had returned from overseas and was demobilized on December 4, 2002. the variable housing allowance. The act also replaced foreign duty pay with hardship duty pay. Yet, chapter 8 of Army Regulation 37-104-4 (Military Pay and Allowances Policy and Procedures – Active Component) still refers to foreign dutypay. Further, current DFAS and Army mobilization procedural guidance directs active Army finance units to use transaction codes to start soldiers’ hardship duty pays that are incorrect. However, DOD amended FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, to establish a new “designated area” hardshipduty pay with rates of $50, $100, or $150 per month, depending on the area. Soldiers who perform duties in designated areas for over 30 days are entitled to the hardship duty pay incentive. Effective December 31, 2001, the regulation no longer permitted soldiers newly assigned to locations specified as “certain places” to begin receiving hardshipduty pay. The regulation specified Afghanistan and Uzbekistan as designated areas and provided for paying $100 a month to each soldier serving there. While deployed to Afghanistan or Uzbekistan, soldiers can receive $100 per month for up to three months. They can also receive up to $200 a month for the remainder of the year. for entering into DMO hardship duty pay, for deployed soldiers entitled to these types of pays and for which a performance certification is received from the respective unit commanders. Because pay transactions must be manually entered every month soldiers are entitled to receive these pays, it is often difficult to ensure that mobilized soldiers receive their entitled nonautomated pays and allowances. For example, we found a number of instances in which soldiers were underpaid their entitled jump, foreign language proficiency, special duty assignment, or hardship duty pays because pay technicians inadvertently omitted the monthly manual input. or all of the current manual monthly pays, including special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, hardship duty pay, and HALO pay. Evaluate the feasibility of using the JUSTIS warning screen to help eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. Evaluates the feasibility. of redesigning Leave and Earnings Statements to provide soldiers. with a clear explanation of all pay and. Earnings statements to. provide soldiers with aclear explanation ofAll pay and earnings statements. Evaluating the. feasibility of eliminating the use of the “other credits” for processing hardship duty (designated areas) and special duty assignments pay. The local servicing active Army finance office also has primary responsibility for entering transactions to stop hardship duty pay, hostile fire pay, and the combat zone tax exclusion. However, in this case, that office did not take action to stop these types of pay and allowances for many of the unit’s soldiers. For example, military pay personnel at Fort Campbell failed to deactivate hostileFire pay for 41 out of 62 B Company soldiers. With regard to hardship duty, the finance office has responsibility for stopping that pay and allowance when soldiers leave an authorized hostile fire/combat zone. fire pay as soon as they enter the zone. 45 soldiers in C Company did not have their hostile fire pay started until over 30 days after they were entitled to receive it. Some of C Company’s soldiers received retroactive payments over 2 months after they should have received their pay. 18 soldiers from the unit were not yet paid for 1 or more months that they were in the hostile fire zone. We also identified 40 soldiers who received hostileFire pay after they had been in the zone for over a month. combat zone tax exclusion, and hardship duty pay that unit soldiers were entitled to receive based on their deployment to Afghanistan and surrounding areas. Some soldiers in Colorado’s B Company received these pays sporadically, were not paid at all, were paid but for inexplicable dollar amounts, or were overpaid their entitled active duty pays and allowances while deployed. For example, 16 of the 62 soldiers in B Company. received the wrong type of hardship duty. pay, formerly called Foreign Duty Pay, in addition to the correct hardship duty location pay while they were deployed. C Company soldiers traveled to Uzbekistan and Afghanistan to perform special forces missions. Soldiers consistently experienced problems related to specific location-based payments such as hostile fire pay and hardship duty pay. In 78 cases, the payments were not started within 30 days from when the soldiers left the U.S. C Company soldiers consistently experienced issues with location- based payments. In 58 cases, they experienced problems with hostile firepay and hardshipduty pay. The problems were related to three different types of active duty pays related to the unit's deployment. In 60 cases, the soldiers were overpaid or payments were not stopped when they left the combat zones. In 22 other cases, we determined that soldiers had not received all location-based pays as of March 31, 2003. Due to the lack of supporting documents at the state, unit, and battalion-levels, dates for when each soldier entered and left combat zones were not always available. Consequently, there may have been other deployment-related pay problems for C Company that we were not able to identify. The pay problems experienced by Virginia’s B Company were the result of a number of factors, including late submission of required pay support documents. Of the estimated $25,000 in overpayments, we identified about $2,000 that was subsequently collected from the soldiers. We did not identify any collections related to overpayment for this unit. As summarized in table 13, several soldiers from C Company did not receive the hostile fire pay or other high-risk location pays they were entitled to receive based on their deployment. example, the military finance office in Kuwait, which was responsible for paying Virginia 20th Special Forces soldiers in the fall of 2002, did not stop hostile fire and hardship duty pays as required when these soldiers left Afghanistan. We found that 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. An Army National Guard Special Forces sergeant believed that he was not receiving certain active duty pays and allowances during his mobilization to active duty. The sergeant was correct. 64 of the 65 soldiers with the company experienced at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization. These pay problems included not receiving entitled pays and allowances at all; not receiving some entitled pay and allowances within 30 days; and for some, overpayments. In total, we identified estimated over pay of $17,000, underpayments of $1,300, and late payments of $67,000 associated with the pay problems we found. We found 31 soldiers did not receive certain pay and allowance entitlements at all, orWithin 30 days of their initial mobilization entitlement. The majority of soldiers from C Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, 86 of the 94 soldiers with the company experienced at least one pay problem associated with its mobilization. 36 soldiers were either overpaid, did not receive certain pay and allowance entitlements at all, or didn't receive pay within 30 days of their initial mobilization entitlement. 84 soldiers who were overpaid or didn’t receive certain entitlements were also underpaid or underpaid. with six different types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment while on active duty. These problems primarily resulted from a data entry error and inadequate document retention practices. For example, the USPFO paid one soldier her basic pay,basic allowance for subsistence, and basic allowance for housing nearly 4 months late. USPfo officials were unable to provide support explaining why five other soldiers continued to receive basic pay after the date available records show their active duty tours had ended. We identified the payments made to these five soldiers as overpayments. Late, under- and overpayments of foreign language proficiency pays to the unit’s soldiers primarily resulted from delayed or inadequate data entry. Late payment, underpayment, and overpayment of cost of living allowances resulted from the inability of DJMS-RC to pay certain active duty pays and allowances automatically, inaccurate data entry, and inadequate documentation retention practices. For example, our audit discovered that USPFO pay technicians failed to manually enter cost of Living Allowance transactions into DJ MS-RC in a timely manner. Transactions for nonautomated, month-to-month pay and allowance entitlements were not separately itemized on the soldiers’ leave and earnings statements in a user-friendly format. A significant number of soldiers were overpaid their entitled automated pays when they were demobilized from active duty. This occurred because pay technicians did not update the stop date in DJMS-RC, which is necessary to terminate the automated active duty pays when soldiers leave active duty early. For more on this story, visit CNN.com. left the country and were no longer entitled to receive such pays. These overpayments occurred primarily because hostile fire pay is an automatic recurring payment based on the start and stop date for the soldier’s mobilization. The active Army finance office in Uzbekistan did not amend the stop dates for automated active duty pays in DJMS-RC to reflect that C Company left the designated area before the stop date entered into DJms-RC. This resulted in overpayment of this pay to 40 soldiers. In February 2003, pay personnel at the Colorado USPFO created a transaction to cancel the tour instead of processing an adjustment to amend the stop date consistent with the date on the Release from Active Duty Order. When this occurred, DJMS-RC automatically processed a reversal of 11 months of the sergeant’s pay and allowances that he earned while mobilized from March 1, 2002, through February 4, 2003. This created a debt in the amount of $39,699 on the soldier's pay record. DJMS-RC was not designed to make active duty pays and exclude federal taxes in a single pay transaction. To compensate for this system constraint, DFAS established a workaround that requires two payment transactions over a 2-month payroll cycle to properly function. Such manual workarounds are inefficient and create additional labor-intensive, error- prone transaction processing, the authors say. The report was published by the Center for Military Readiness, a think tank based in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday. For more, go to www.militaryreadiness.org. DJMS-RC withholds federal taxes the first month, identifies the taxes to be refunded during end- of-month pay processing, and then makes a separate payment during the first pay update the following month to refund the taxes that should not have been withheld. Soldiers’ taxes could not be refunding the same month because the DJMS- RC refund process occurs only one time a month. Army Guard USPFO and in-theatre active Army area servicing finance office. exempt soldiers’ pay for the combat zone tax exclusion. we identified, we found several instances in our case studies in which soldiers received large lump sum payments, probably related to previous underpayments or other pay errors. Further, the lack of preventive controls over large payments poses an increased risk of fraudulent payments. DJMS-RC does have edits that prevent soldiers from (1) being paid for pay and allowances beyond the stop date for the active duty tour, or (2) beingpaid for more than one tour with overlapping dates. Each month, DFAS Indianapolis pay personnel receive an Electronic Fund. All pays and allowances and subsequent changes are documented in the Master Military Pay Account (MMPA)—the central pay record repository in DJMS-RC for each soldier. While deployed on active duty, there are several Army Guard (USPFO), active Army, and DFAS components involved in paying mobilized Army Guard personnel. The active Army servicing finance office, which may be within the United States or in a foreign country, is responsible for initiating pays earned while the soldier is deployed. Upon completion of an active duty tour, soldiers normally return to the same Army. DJMS-RC was originally designed to process payroll payments to Army Reserve and Army Guard personnel on weekend drills or on short periods of annual active duty. DFAS officials told us that the system is now stretched because it is being used to make payments and allowances that it was not structured for. Army finance office official told us handling two sets of pay transaction processing procedures is often confusing because they are often required to process a large number of both active and reserve personnel at the same time. While the Army Guard offers training for their military pay technicians, we found that there was no overall monitoring of Army Guard pay personnel training. DJMS-RC is not programmed to generate automatic payment of certain other types of pay and allowances. USPFO pay personnel are responsible for entering into JUSTIS special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, and high altitude low opening (HALO) pay, each month. Army area servicing finance offices are responsible. For more information on how to use DJMS- RC, visit the Army's official website, or call the Army Pay System on-line at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.armypaysystem.org. After soldiers complete their initial SRP and receive individual mobilization orders, they travel as a unit to a mobilization station. At the mobilization station, mobilized Army Guard personnel undergo a second SRP review. Mobilization pay technicians are required to promptly initiate pays that were not initiated during the first SRP. The mobilization station commander is required to certify that the unit is ready for mobilization, including ensuring that all authorized active duty pays are in place for the soldiers in the unit, at the end of this process. duty pays to mobilized Army Guard personnel. Pay technicians did not understand how to properly code data on the soldiers’ dependents status, which is used to determine housing allowances. Correcting these erroneous transactions required additional labor-intensive research and data entry by other more skilled pay technicians. We also found instances in which personnel pay-affecting changes such as changes in family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions, were not entered into the pay system promptly. DJMS-RC is an aging, COBOL/mainframe- based system. DFAS established a number of “workarounds’ to compensate for DJMS- RC processing limitations. The finance office lacked sufficient numbers of knowledgeable military pay staff to expeditiously enter the large volume of transactions necessary to start active duty pay entitlements for the 49th Military Police Company’s soldiers. One of the assigned pay technicians was not familiar with DJMS.RC and consequently entered the wrong transactions. In 1995, the Army decided to process pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers from the DJMS-RC system rather than the active Army payroll system. If the demobilization station did not take action to return a soldier to a demobilized status, the state USPFO has this responsibility. According to the then Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army (Financial Operations), this decision was made as an interim measure (pending the conversion to a single system to pay both active and reserve component soldiers) Audit work, provides that mobilized Army Guard soldiers are to be paid through the active Army pay system. This procedure, in effect during the mobilizations to support Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, was changed in 1995. In 1995, it was agreed that Army Guard personnel would no longer be moved to the active duty pay system, DJMS-AC, when mobilized to active duty. Maintaining such outdated references in current policies may have contributed to confusion by USPFO and active Army finance personnel regarding required actions. DJMS RC’s current monthly manual pays can be automated rapidly in the new commercial off the shelf based environment. Programming changes to DJMS-RC have been implemented to enhance the processes for special duty assignment pay and foreign language proficiency pay. However, monthly input is still required. Hardship duty pay is scheduled for implementation for April 2004. High altitude, low opening demonstrated that DJMS RC's current monthly Manual Pay System can be Automated rapidly. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. the personnel and order-writing systems, limitations in DJMS-RC processing capabilities, and ineffective system edits of payments and debts. DOD has a significant system enhancement project under way to improve military pay. Given that the effort has been under way for about 5 years and DOD has encountered challenges fielding the system, it is likely that the department will continue to operate with existing system constraints for at least several more years. Our findings related to weaknesses in the systems environment were consistent with issues raised by DOD in its June 2002 report to the Congress. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service to evaluate the feasibility of establishing an edit check. The DFAS has already updated its current input system (Defense MilPay Office) to provide a warning to field finance personnel concerning the debt impact of tour cancellation (vice modification) for Reserve/Guard members. DJMS-RC would require a small to medium system change to edit debts that are above a specified dollar amount. (p. 78/Draft Report) Joint Military Pay System - Reserve Component (DJMS-RC) to identify any demobilizing soldiers whose tours in the pay system were not adjusted to coincide with the demobilization date. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. For medical extensions, the Army published revised guidance on June 10, 2003, reinforcing procedures on this process. Included were the requirements for publishing orders, including the requirement for publishing medical extension orders. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army to clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders. Transfer Excess Dollar Listing after the electronic fund transfer payment has been processed. DJMS-RC does not contain edit checks to reject payments over the threshold amounts. 76 other payroll-related payments during the period October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, of over $7,000 (net) each were paid by the unit. Our case studies identified individuals who received debt notices in excess of $30,000. For example, one soldier received an erroneous electronic payment totaling $20,110 without prior approval. DJMS-RC lacks effective edits to reject large proposed net pays over $4,000 at midmonth and over $7,000 before their final processing. DOD established these thresholds to monitor and detect abnormally large payments. We interviewed officials from the National Guard Bureau, State USPFOs, Army and DOD military pay offices, as well as unit commanders. We obtained documentation and performed walk-throughs associated with pay status/active duty change transactions, such as those to ensure that tour start and stop dates match MMPA dates. We found significant pay problems at the six Army Guard units we audited. These problems related to processes, human capital, and systems. The six units included three special forces and three military police units. The units were as follows: Special forces units Colorado B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces Virginia B Company. Military police units Mississippi 114th Military Police Company, West Virginia C Company, 2nd Battalion, 3rd Battalion, 20th Special Armed Forces West Virginia, C Company. We used DJMS-RC pay transaction extracts to identify pay problems associated with our case study units. We did not perform an exact calculation of the net pay soldiers should have received. Rather, we used available documentation and follow-up follow-ups. The information provides further insight into some of the pay experiences of selected Army Guard soldiers who were mobilized under Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. These data collection instruments is not representative of the views of the Army Guard members in these units nor of those of Army Guard member overall. Automated improvements could be used to proactively alert USPFOs of certain pay-impacting transactions that are created in SIDPERS. In our case studies, we found instances in which mobilization order data were either not entered into DJMS-RC for several months after the personnel action or were entered inconsistently. At the case study locations we audited, several Army Guard soldiers received amended or revoked orders that were entered into SidPERS but were not entered in DJMS. the stop date that was entered into DJMS-RC. We also obtained documentation on and walk-throughs of the personnel-to-pay system interface process. We held interviews with officials from the Army National Guard Readiness Center, the National Guard Bureau, and DFAS Indianapolis and Denver. Because our preliminary assessment determined that current operations used to pay mobilized Army Guard soldiers relied extensively on error- prone manual transactions entry into multiple, nonintegrated systems, we did not statistically test current processes. process large numbers of pay transactions without sufficient numbers of knowledgeable personnel. Lack of personnel undermines the ability of the USPFO pay functions to carry out established control procedures. For example, our audits at several of the six case study units showed that there were no independent reviews of proposed pay transactions before they were submitted for processing. Such independent supervisory reviews are required by DJMS-RC operating procedures. However, an official told us that because of a limited number of pay technicians available to process pay transactions, such reviews are not carried out. In 2002, DOD estimated that integrated personnel and pay functions of DIMHRS would be fully deployed by fiscal year 2007. By the end of fiscal year 2003, DOD reporting shows that it will have invested over 5 years and about $360 million in conceptualizing and planning the system. Part of the requested funding for fiscal year 2004 was to acquire a payroll module, Forward Compatible Payroll. According to program officials, this module, in conjunction with a translation module and a Web services component, is to replace DJMS-RC by March 2006. DOD has a major system enhancement effort under way in this area. The Defense Integrated Military Human Resources System (DIMHRS) is described as the largest personnel and pay system in the world in both scope and number of people served. One of the major benefits expected with DIMH RS is “service members receiving accurate and timely pay and benefits.” Begun in 1998, it is ultimately intended to replace more than 80 legacy systems (including DJMS-RC) and integrate all pay, personnel, training and manpower. The DFAS is working with the Army DIMHRS Office to document existing workflow and roles and responsibilities. The program is still in the very early stages of determining when and how integrated processes and workflows will be incorporated into the D IMHRS based operational concept. The current plan is to integrate the DFAS system into the operational concept in the DIMhRS environment. The DFAS program is funded by the Department of Defense’s Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and the Defense Logistics Agency. allowances received so that they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled pays. Evaluate the feasibility of establishing an edit check and requiring approval before processing any debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. As part of the effort currently under way to reform DOD’s pay and personnel systems—referred to as DIMHRS—incorporate a complete understanding of the Army Guard pay problems as documented in this report into the requirements development for this system. In developing D IMHRS, consider the need for an Army Guard edit check. exceeded an established threshold or required approval. Secondary manual processing would be required to start the collection process or delete the debts. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The DFAS has already begun the process of collecting the debts and will continue to do so until the debt is paid off. The Army Guard pay problems as documented in this report will be incorporated into the requirements development for this system. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD responds by saying it has already started the process. The toll free number for this center as well as the myPay internet address will be incorporated in the flyer discussed in response to recommendation 13. Until the implementation of DIMHRS, with full integration of pay and personnel, the processing of pay transactions will still require the movement of some entitlement information/authorization from units and personnel to finance via paper. As such, a network of finance support activities is required to geographically align with deployed combat and supporting personnel units. As always, pay is still pay. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics.. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. GAO e-mails this list to you every afternoon. The list contains links to the full-text document files. Go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mail alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading. For more information on the GAO’s work, visit its website at: http://www.gaO.gov/gao-news. For the latest in GAO news, visit: www.GAO.site daily. The General Accounting Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core mission: “To improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American people.” The agency was founded in 1947 and is based in Washington, DC. system that was not designed to handle the intricacies of active duty pay and allowances, would result in significant pay problems. While it is likely that DOD will be required to rely on existing systems for a number of years, a complete and lasting solution to the pay problems we identified will only be achieved through a complete reengineering. However, immediate actions can be taken in these areas to improve the timeliness and accuracy of pay and allowance payments to activated service members and their families. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. a complete reengineering of the processes and controls and ensure that this reengineering effort deals not only with the systems aspect of the problems we identified, but also with the human capital and process aspects. In its written comments, DOD concurred with our recommendations and identified actions to address the identified deficiencies. DOD’s response outlined some actions already taken, others that are underway, and further planned actions with respect to our recommendations. If effectively implemented, these actions should substantially resolve the deficiencies pointed out in our report. of clarity in existing procedural requirements in this area, we found that several of the locations we visited had established standard but undocumented reconciliation practices. Several of the case study locations we audited established a standard, but undocumented, practice of reconciling roughly a third of the common data elements every month. We found that although all the USPFOs told us they received monthly SIDPERS and DJMS-RC mismatch reports, they did not always fully reconcile and make all necessary system corrections each month. to “…initially mirror the existing ‘As-Is’ structure until the new capability has been fielded and risk factors/ requirements have been clearly identified. A determination of what additional skills and expertise are required for operators of a knowledge-based personnel community must be made after the capabilities of the commercial off the shelf product are fully known.” Staff making key contributions to this report include: Paul S. Begnaud, Ronald A. Bergman, James D. Berry, Jr., Amy C. Chang, Mary E. Chervenic.  DFAS Indianapolis is the central site for all Army military pay and is responsible for maintaining over 1 million MMPAs for the Army. Each MMPA contains a soldier’s pay-related personnel, entitlement, and performance data. Personnel data contained in the MMPA are generated from SIDPERS—a personnel database maintained and used by the Army Guard at the 54 state-level personnel offices to capture data on personnel-related actions (e.g. discharge, promotion, demotion actions) USPFO pay technicians use JUSTIS to access and record data in DJMS-RC. The unit commander is responsible for ensuring that all personnel data for each soldier under their command are current. By entering the soldier’s Social Security number and mobilization order number into JUSTIS, the pay technician can view the pay data for that soldier. The Army Guard pay technicians are responsible for initiating basic pay and allowances by manually entering the start and stop dates for the active duty tour that appears on each soldier's mobilization order. DMO is the pay input subsystem used by active Army finance offices and the DOD military pay offices to update DJMS-RC. DMO can be used to create transactions for military pay and allowances that are not reported at the time of mobilization for upload. Additional data needed to create pay transactions associated with active duty pay and allowance must be entered manually into JUSTIS from hard copies of mobilization orders. JustIS and DMO share the same operating system platform and certain database tables. For more information on how to use JUSTIS, visit: www.justis.org.  JUSTIS is the pay input subsystem used by the 54 state-level Army Guard commands, including the USPFOs. This subsystem processes transactions for submission to DJMS-RC to create payments for Army National Guard soldiers. JUSTIS receives certain pay-affecting personnel data from SIDPERS. It also receives a limited amount of mobilization order data directly from AFCOS. These systems are decentralized in that each of the 54 sites owns and maintains its own JUSTIS database. It is used for file transfer transactions, online queries of MMPAs, and downloads of data files. (1) requires manual review and acceptance by USPFO pay personnel of the transactions created in SIDPERS. (2) does not create pay and allowance transactions to update a soldier’s pay records. For example, when Army Guard soldiers change from inactive drilling status to active duty status, state personnel offices create personnel-related transactions in SIDs. USPfo pay personnel are not aware that a pay-related transaction is needed until they receive documentation from the soldier, the soldier's unit commander, or the monthly personnel/pay mismatch report. USPFO pay personnel had a procedure in place to help prevent inadvertently omitting month-to-month entry of nonautomated pays for entitled soldiers. Pay personnel at the USPFO in Maryland used a warning screen within JUSTIS as a mechanism to alert them that soldiers were eligible to receive that particular pay component that month. Although this does not alleviate the problem of month- to-month manual entry, the warning screen could be used to help preclude some of the pay problems we found. operate JUSTIS when she was assigned to the job. Instead, she stated, she has learned how to operate the system through on-the-job training and many phone calls to system support personnel in Indianapolis. She estimated that she was not fully comfortable with all the required transaction processing procedures until she had been on the job for about 7 years. U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, Reserve Component Unit Commander’s Handbook (July 15, 1999) requires unit commanders to (1) annually review and update pay.  warning messages will appear when a transaction is entered to cancel or amend a tour of duty. The new warnings will advise that the transaction will or could result in a collection action and will ask the pay technician to confirm that is their intent. While we did not verify the effectiveness of this change, it has the potential to reduce pay problems associated with errors made in amending orders. Required time frames for processing pay transactions. Written requirements did not exist with respect to the maximum amount of time that should be spent processing transactions. processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers were not integrated. Lacking either an integrated or effectively interfaced set of personnel and pay systems, DOD must rely on error-prone, manual entry of data from the same source documents into multiple systems. With an effectively integrated system, changes to personnel records automatically update related payroll records from a single source of data input. Without an effective interface, an automatic personnel-to-payroll system interface can also reduce errors caused by independent, manual entries. between the personnel and pay systems, we found instances in which pay-affecting information did not get entered. We found that an existing interface could be used to help alert military pay personnel to take action when mobilization transactions are entered into the personnel system. Army Guard state personnel offices used an already existing interface between SIDPERS and JUSTIS to transmit data on certain personnel transactions (i.e., transfers, promotions, demotions, and address changes) to the 54 USPFOs to update the soldier’s pay records. writing system—AFCOS. Currently, certain personnel and order information entered and stored in the AFCOS database is automatically filled in the JUSTIS input screens. This auto-fill functionality eliminates the need for some error-prone, manual reentry of data into JUSTIS. However, currently, manual entry of data from a hard copy of the soldier’s orders and other documentation is required to initiate the soldier's pay and allowances. This procedure defeats the purpose of an effective interface. end of active duty tour date documented on the soldier’s mobilization orders. This automated feature is intended to prevent erroneous payments to soldiers beyond their authorized active duty status. A change in dependent status, such as marriage or divorce, a promotion, jump pay disqualification, or being demobilized before a tour ends would change or eliminate some of the pays and allowances a soldier would be entitled to receive. However, human intervention is required when a pay or allowance error is detected or an event occurs that requires a change in the soldier's pay and personnel file. units we audited, USPFO pay personnel had to manually enter the soldier’s active duty tour start and stop dates into JUSTIS from a hard copy of the actual mobilization order. When we brought this to the attention of NGB officials, they stated that providing the auto-fill functionality to the mobilization input screens would require minimal programming changes. N GB officials stated that they planned to release a programming software change to all 54USPFOs that would allow the start andstop dates to be automatically filled into the mobilization screens. The financial portion of the SRP is conducted by one of the 54 United States Property and Fiscal Offices (USPFO) If documentation, such as birth certificates for dependents or parachute jumping certifications, is missing, soldiers have a few days to obtain the necessary documentation. The SRP also verifies the accuracy of pay records for each soldier and to make changes to pay records based on appropriate supporting documentation for the pays and allowances that the soldiers will be entitled to receive when initially mobilized. receive at least 1 month of their special duty assignment pay. According to DFAS procedures, the unit’s Army Guard USPFO should have initiated these pays. In addition, these problems could have been minimized if they were identified and corrected by the Army mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox during the soldier readiness processing at that location. In essence, under Department of Defense (DOD) guidance, the active Army mobilization stations are to act as the primary source of payment for special duty soldiers. were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. Soldiers not submitting the correct paperwork at the time of the Soldier Readiness Program caused some payments to be late. For example, according to the USPFO, one soldier did not submit the proper paperwork for his family separation allowance. The delay in submission caused his first payment to be over 3 months late. Another problem with the unit’s mobilization related to soldiers’ pay records in DJMS-RC. The unit was ordered to report back to the U.S. base in Charleston, West Virginia. as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. The purpose of this review was to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents and were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. Mississippi USPFO personnel, who conducted the finance portion of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldier readiness program, were required to verify soldiers’ supporting financial documentation. Not submitting the complete and current paperwork at the time of the mobilization was a violation of the FMR. The US Army Reserve Command (USARC) has expanded training programs on DJMS-RC. Over 35 training events have occurred since February 2002 in support of deploying units and mobilization/demobilization sites. The Army finance school is working with USARC to develop an exportable training package on DJ MS-RC, which should be available within the next 6 months. Additionally, DFAS and the Army are sending a joint training team to Kuwait and Iraq to train soldiers on the JUMPS system. For the midterm (6 months to 2 years), the training on reserve component pay input for soldiers in finance battalions and garrison support units will be evaluated to determine how best to expand the training. The Army finance school is already evaluating the expansion of the current instruction on mobilized reserve componentpay in the training curriculum for the finance advanced individual training course. In light of the planned integration of reserve and active component pay processing into a single system, the training will be expanded in the coming months and years. locations from which they were mobilized for demobilization out-processing before returning to their home units. Demobilization personnel, employed by the active Army or Army Guard, are required to provide each soldier with a Release from Active Duty (REFRAD) order and a Form DD 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from active duty. At this time, the supporting USPFO is responsible for discontinuing monthly input of all nonautomated pays and allowances. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. 57 soldiers continued to receive pays to which they were no longer entitled because they left Afghanistan. These include hostile fire pay, hardship duty pay, or both. According to DOD mobilization procedures, the finance office at the servicing demobilization station is to conduct a finance out-processing. In addition, according to DOD’s Financial Management Regulation (FMR), Volume 7A, chapters 10 and 17, location-based pays must be terminated. The finance office is responsible for inputting transactions to stop certain location- based pays.  DFAS-Indianapolis guidance did not clearly specify how to carry out assigned responsibilities for soldiers who return from active duty earlier than their units. DFAS, in cooperation with the Army, will reinforce existing procedures on responsibilities for stopping active duty pays. This will be part of the revised guidance identified in response to recommendation one. In addition, mechanisms have been established to perform automated comparisons of personnel demobilization records and the Defense Department. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Colorado’s B Company demobilization was complicated by the fact that the unit did not demobilize through the same active Army location used to mobilize the unit. Some soldiers in the unit told us that upon their return from overseas deployments, they were informed that they should have corrected these problems while in- theater. DFAS procedures provide that Army Guard soldiers are to demobilized and have their active duty pays stopped by the installation from which they originally mobilized. However, the unit received orders to dem mobilize. to ensure that resources are available to provide appropriately skilled pay personnel at mobilization stations to support surge processing. No such contingency staffing plan exists for the USPFOs. To support surge requirements, the National Guard could use additional National Guard soldiers being brought on active duty in a Temporary Tour of Active Duty status. The additional requirement and funding will need to be found. (p. 76/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to determine whether issues. concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations. exist at all 54 USPfos. support surge processing at mobilization and demobilization sites. provide additional resources to support surge processing for pay start and stop transaction requirements at Army Guard home stations during initial soldier readiness programs. Modify existing training policies. Determine whether issues concerning relatively low-graded military pay technicians exist at all 54 USPFOs, and if so, take appropriate actions to address these issues. If so, implement a plan to address the issues by the end of the year. If not, implement an alternative plan to meet the needs of the U.S. Army. their units. Clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders, including medical extensions. Require Army Guard commands and unit commanders to carry out complete monthly pay and personnel records reconciliations. Update policies to reflect current legal and DOD administrative requirements with respect to active duty pays and allowances for mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Consider expanding the scope of the existing memorandum of understanding between DFAS and the Army concerning the provision of resources to conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) identify any pay problems for this unit in the demobilization phase. To obtain an understanding and assess the processes, personnel (human capital), and systems used to provide assurance that mobilized Army Guard soldiers were paid accurately and timely. We reviewed applicable policies, procedures, and program guidance; observed pay processing operations; and interviewed cognizant agency officials. We applied the policies and procedures prescribed in these documents to the observed and documented procedures and practices followed by the various DOD components involved in providing active duty pays. A joint task force has been established to review existing procedural guidance, lessons learned to date, and available metrics. As a first step, expanded central guidance will be published within the next 30 days. This breakout of responsibilities will also be provided in a simple matrix form to visually reinforce this guidance. Within approximately 60 days, the Army and DFAS will begin compliance with the new guidance. The Army will then begin the process of implementing this guidance in a phased manner, starting with the mobilization/demobilization stations. reviews of the mobilization/demobilization stations to ensure adherence to published guidance and to provide any further assistance these offices may require. Within the next 3 to 6 months, the task force will build upon the existing guidance to provide comprehensive procedures and related standards, down to the individual technician level. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to establish performance measures for obtaining supporting documentation and. processing pay transactions. will prepare a standard information flyer to be given to all mobilizing reservists. The flyer will address entitlements as well as sources of pay support. It will be published via Army Knowledge Online and incorporated into the overall revision to procedural guidance addressed in response to recommendation one. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. The need for such actions is increasingly imperative in light of the current extended deployment of Army Guard soldiers in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Immediate steps to at least mitigate the most serious of the problems we identified are needed to help ensure that the Army Guard can continue to successfully fulfill its vital role in our national defense. We recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Army, to take steps to mitigate the problems. The Army Guard is a vital part of the U.S. military. prior to the end date of the current active duty tour. The Army and DFAS have implemented changes to the input systems to warn the operator processing a tour cancellation when the correct input should be a tour curtailment. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to require Army Guard commands and unit commanders. to carry out complete monthly pay and personnel records. reconciliations and take necessary actions to correct the problem. The importance of conducting annual pay support documentation reviews and monthly reconciliations will be incorporated into precommand courses at the company level for the National Guard by the end of Fiscal Year 2004. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to identify and evaluate options for improving. customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers by providing improved. procedures for informing soldiers of their pay and allowance entitlements throughout their active duty mobilization. correct any pay and personnel record mismatches found each month. Within 60 days, the Army will reinforce to all reserve commands the importance of this requirement. As noted by the GAO, this requirement is already included in US Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, Unit Commander’s Handbook. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. within 60 days. ( p. 75 / Draft Report) The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to update policies and procedures to reflect current legal. and DoD administrative requirements with Enclosure respect to active duty pays and allowances. GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of using the. personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of. actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Within the next 6 months, we will evaluate the viability of using this interface. (p. 77/Draft Report) addressed by the supplemental provided to Army. Normal manning at the USPFO, Military Pay Section is based on Full Time Support authorized state strength levels. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to determine whether concerns over relatively low graded. military pay technicians exist at all 54 USPfos. (p. 76/Draft Report) Enclosure grade levels in the US PFOs’ Comptroller sections and the current grade levels for military. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to establish an ongoing mechanism to monitor the quality and completion of training for both pay and finance personnel and unit commanders. (p. 76/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The National Guard currently reviews the training status of military pay technicians at the USPFOs as part of the ongoing quality assurance review program. The appropriate mechanism for monitoring the training of unit commanders and finance battalion personnel is dependent on the location of that training in the overall Army training infrastructure. remains essentially a command responsibility. For dependents of deployed soldiers, the single source for finance, or any administrative issues, is either the rear detachment of the soldiers’ deployed unit or, for the National Guard, the applicable State Family Assistance Coordinator. The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to review the pay problems we. identified at our six bases. The pay problems. we identified at six bases are now under review by the Department of Defense. pay is scheduled for automation in April 2004. We will also recommend inclusion of automation of high altitude, low opening jump pay in FCP. We acknowledge that the information available to the member is inadequate in today’s system. This has already been addressed in the FCP requirements. For the future, FCP is being designed with an easily understandable leave and earnings statement as one of the main requirements. FCP will also resolve pay systems capability related problems described in this report. and effective immediately, provide the finance battalions/Defense Military Pay Offices with the National Guard newsletter.  DFAS has recognized the urgency of improving the military pay system capabilities supporting our Service members. A study was conducted of improvement alternatives in the fall of 2002, which concluded that a new commercial off the shelf based payroll capability (“Forward Compatible Payroll” (FCP) was the best option to expeditiously improve our system payroll services. FCP is currently prototyping military entitlements and deductions and has already been used by the military. The small volume of members entitled to this pay has not justified nor provided an adequate return on investment for this automation. GAO: Standards for the timeliness of processing pay transactions are currently in place for units, finance offices, and central site. These standards are focused on the full range of transactions and associated unit level data is generated based on the normal permanent/home station relationship with a Reserve Component Pay Support Office. Within the next 6 months, DFAS and the Army will jointly review how these existing mechanisms can be used to more succinctly capture data specifically related to mobilized soldiers and units. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. FCP will resolve pay systems capability related problems described in this report. Until such time FCP has been implemented, we will ensure that these certain pays paid under “other credits” are included in the flyer addressed in response to recommendation 13. DFAS will update the DFAS Reserve Component Mobilization Procedures to mandate a remark be entered on the service member’s leave and earnings statement for pays paidUnder “Other Credits” to inform the service members exactly what entitlement(s) they have paid. their families to access for customer service for any pay problems. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The existing centralized information sources on individual soldiers pay will be expanded. DFAS is developing a separate view-only Personal Identification Number capability which soldiers will be able to give their dependents so they can see the Leave and Earning Statement without being able to change anything on the pay record. This enhancement is scheduled for August 2004. The DFAS also operates a central customer service center for pay. Having out-of-date requirements in current regulations may contribute to confusion and customer service issues. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998 replaced the basic allowance for quarters and the variable housing allowance. However, volume 7A, chapter 27 of the DOD FMR, dated February 2002, still refers to the basic Allowance for Quarters and variable Housing Allowance. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Army finance personnel while stationed at the Pentagon during the period of December 15, 2001, through December 31, 2001. Prior to this period, the soldiers were stationed at Fort Stewart and were not provided lodging or mess. When the unit was redeployed to the Pentagon, mess facilities became available. However, active Army finance personnel did not reduce the unit’s subsistence allowance rate to reflect the available mess facilities. According to DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 25, enlisted soldiers are not entitled to the full subsistence allowance when mess facilities are provided. against identified overpayments through March 31, 2003. We did not attempt to estimate payments received against identified underpayments. We provided the support for the pay problems we identified to appropriate officials, at each of our case study locations. We briefed DOD and Army officials, National Guard Bureau officials, DFAS officials, and USPFO officials in the selected states on the details of our audit, including our findings and their implications. On October 10, 2003, we requested comments on a draft report. GAO: We conducted our audit work from November 2002 through September 2003 in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. We received comments on November 5, 2003, and have summarized those comments in the “Agency Comments and Our Evaluation” section of this report. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix VIII.of this report, and are summarized in appendix VII. of the report. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS), in GAO-04-89. The National Guard will develop a JUSTIS table identifying all applicable soldiers in order to notify the USPFO technician of accounts requiring monthly entitlement input. This will be more efficient and effective than a pop-up warning screen, which would appear only if the individual soldier’s social security number were input. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur with the National Guard's plan to use the JUSTIS warning screen to eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. Defense Finance and Accounting Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of redesigning leave and earnings statement. Soldiers would have clear explanation of all pay and allowances received so that they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled pays. (p. 78/Draft Report) Enclosure understanding their leave and Earnings statement by reviewing and updating (as necessary) the information provided on our website(s); by providing independent leave andEarnings statement remarks for present and future changes; and by providing monthly newsletters. unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to interested congressional committees. We will make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at the following sites: www.cnn.com, www.dailymail.co.uk, and www.theguardian.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. We focused on 14 basic types of pays and allowances applicable to Army Guard units we selected for case studies. We categorized these 14 pay and allowance types into two groups: (1) pays, including basic pay, special duty assignment pay, parachute jumping and foreign language proficiency skill-based pays, and location-based hostile fire and hardship duty pays. (2) allowances, including allowances for housing, subsistence, family separation, and cost of living for the continental United States. In this case study, we focused on the basic pay and allowances. Army Guard soldiers may be eligible for tax advantages associated with their mobilization to active duty. mobilized Army Guard soldiers assigned to or working in a combat zone are entitled to exclude from taxable income certain military pay that would otherwise be taxable. There are three key phases associated with starting and stopping relevant pays and allowances. Army Guard units and state-level units can be mobilized at any time. The Army Guard is a joint service with the U.S. Department of Defense and the Department of the Treasury. such as guarding the Pentagon, airports, nuclear power plants, domestic water supplies, bridges, tunnels, and other military assets were conducted under Operation Noble Eagle. The Army Guard also supported federal peacekeeping operations in Southwest Asia with Operation Desert Spring and in Kosovo with Operation Joint Guardian under various other military operations. While on active duty, all Army Guard soldiers earn various statutorily authorized pays and allowances. The types of pay and allowances soldiers are eligible to receive vary depending upon rank and length of service, dependency status, skills and certifications acquired. enlist for 8 years and are entitled to a number of benefits while serving in the Army Guard. Army Guard members are required to attend one drill weekend each month and one annual training period (usually 2 weeks in the summer) each year. Initially, all nonprior service personnel are required. to attend initial entry training, also known as Basic Training. After Basic Training, soldiers go to their Advanced training. After their enlistment periods, former Army Guard member are entitled. to veterans’ benefits, such as health care and burial benefits. The Army Guard has armories and training facilities in more than 2,800 communities. The Army Guard is a partner with the active Army and the Army Reserves in fulfilling the country's military needs. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) assists the Army Guard in this partnership. NGB is a joint bureau of the Departments of the Army, the Air Force and is charged with overseeing the federal functions of the National Guard. For more information, visit the Army Guardsman's website or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.armyguard.org/. NGB helps the Army Guard and the Air Guard procure funding and administer policies. NGB also acts as a liaison between the Departments of the Army and Air Force and the states. All Army forces are integrated under DOD’s “total force” concept. Under this concept, active and reserve components are to be blended into a cohesive total force to meet a given need. The U.S. Army is the largest military service in the world, followed by the European Union and the United States. Reports to the governor of the state, or in the case of the District of Columbia, the mayor. At the state level, the governors have the ability, under the Constitution of the United States, to call up members of the Army Guard in times of domestic emergency or need. Army Guard units battle fires or help communities deal with floods, tornadoes, hurricanes, snowstorms, or other emergency situations. In times of civil unrest, the citizens of a state rely on the Army Guards to respond, if needed. The President has the authority to mobilize the Army Guard, putting them in federal duty status. While federalized, the units answer to the Combatant Commander of the theatre in which they are operating and, ultimately, to the President. Nonfederalized Army Guard members’ pay and allowances are paid with state funds while federalized Army Guards are paid for with federal funds. Even when notFederalized, The Army Guard has a federal mission to maintain properly trained and equipped units, available for prompt mobilization. The Army Guard is the oldest component of any of the uniformed services. It traces its roots to the colonial militia, and claims a “birth”of 1636. Today, the Army Guard exists in 54 locations that include all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and three territories: Guam, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. During peacetime, Army Guard units report to the adjutant generals of their states or territories, or in the case of the District, to the Commanding General. GAO’s Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government states that effective human capital practices are critical to establishing and maintaining a strong internal control environment. Management should take steps to ensure that its organization has the appropriate number of employees, GAO says. Our audit identified concerns with the numbers of knowledgeable personnel dedicated to entering and processing active duty pays and allowances to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Both active Army and Army Guard military pay personnel play key roles in the military pay system, the report says. Defense (Comptroller), to take the following actions to address the issues we found with respect to the existing processes, human capital, and automated systems relied on to pay activated Army Guard personnel. Establish a unified set of policies and procedures for all Army Guard, Army, and DFAS personnel to follow for ensuring active duty pays for Army Guard Personnel mobilized to active duty. Established performance measures for obtaining supporting documentation and processing pay transactions (for example, no more than 5 days would seem reasonable). Establish who is accountable for stopping active duty pay for soldiers who return home earlier than expected. Several organizations with key roles in payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers have issued their own implementing regulations, policies, and procedures. Existing written policies and procedures are voluminous. The DOD Financial Management Regulations (FMR) guidance on pay and allowance entitlements alone covers 65 chapters. As a result of their size, we found unwritten practices in place at some of the case study locations we audited. The Army Guard organization is responsible for providing guidance, training, and oversight and coordination for active duty pays to Army Guard personnel. We found instances in which unclear procedural requirements for processing active duty pays contributed to erroneous and late pays and allowances to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. A significant problem we found at the case study locations we audited concerned procedures that should be followed for amending active duty orders. We found existing policies and procedural guidance were unclear with respect to the following issues.may adversely affect the Army’s ability to retain these valuable personnel. In addition, these cumbersome policies and procedures contributed to the pay errors we identified. date—some of which still reflected practices in place in 1991 during Operation Desert Storm. We found that a substantial number of payment errors were caused, at least in part, by unclear procedural requirements for processing active duty pay and allowance entitlements to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Overall, as shown in figures 3, 4 and 5, we found that an extensive, cumbersome, and labor-intensive process has evolved to pay mobilized Army Guards for their active duty service. While figures 1, 2, and 3 show the number of payments made, figures 4, 5 and 6 show the total amount paid. and continually evolving nature as legal, procedural, and system requirements change. We found that policies and procedures were not well understood or consistently applied across the potentially hundreds of organizations and thousands of personnel involved in paying mobilized Army Guard personnel. These processes have been developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years to accommodate changing legislative requirements, DOD policies, and the unique operating practices of different DOD organizations and systems involved in these processes. As discussed in the following sections, these extensive and evolving policies were confusing both across various organizations and personnel involved. policies and procedures were unclear with respect to organizational responsibilities. Confusion centered principally around pay processing responsibility for Army Guard soldiers as they move from state control to federal control and back again. To be effective, current processes rely on close coordination and communication between state (Army Guard unit and state-level command organizations) and federal (active Army finance locations at mobilization/demobilization stations and at area servicing finance offices) We found a significant number of instances in which critical coordination requirements were not clearly defined. command support components, as well as active Army finance components and DFAS, have key roles in this process. In addition, there are five key computer systems involved in authorizing, entering, and processing active duty pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Army’s standard order writing system, Automated Fund Control Order System (AFCOS), is used to authorize, enter, and process active duty pay for the Army Guard. DFAS’ Army Guard and Reserve pay system, DJMS-RC, is used for Army Guard pay. implement an integrated military pay and personnel system. DOD’s report acknowledged that major deficiencies in the delivery of military personnel and pay services must be addressed by the envisioned system. The report indicated these deficiencies were the direct result of a myriad of current systems with multiple, complex interfaces to fully support current business process requirements. Figure 6 provides an overview of the five systems currently involved in processing Army Guard pay and Personnel information. The five key DOD systems involved in authorizing, entering, and authorizing Army Guard personnel information. Thousands of Army Guard (individual units and state-level organizations), active Army, and DFAS components may be involved in authorizing, processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers. An estimated 2,300 local Army Guard home units, unit commanders, and unit administrators that are involved in maintaining up-to-date soldier personnel and related pay records. 54 state- level Army Guard commands, including both USPFOs andState- level personnel offices involved in authorize and pay mobilized Army Guards. and personnel mismatch reports and unit commanders’ finance reports. Available documentation showed that these controls were either not done or were not done consistently or timely. The processing of Army Guard pay relies on systems that are not integrated or effectively interfaced. These after-the-fact detective controls are critical to detecting and correcting erroneous or fraudulent pays. To be effective, the 54 state-level Army Guard commands must individually reconcile common data elements in all54 state-operated personnel databases for Army Guard personnel at least monthly. Military pay technicians at both the USPFOs and active Army finance office locations made data coding errors when entering transaction codes into the pay systems. We were told that these errors occurred because military pay personnel were unfamiliar with the system’s pay processing requirements for active. soldiers.may have extensive experience and knowledge of pay processing. requirements for regular Army soldiers, but may not be well versed in the unique procedures and pay transaction entry requirements for Army Guard soldiers, the study found. The study was conducted by the U.S. Army Pay Office. risk associated with “Service issues with business process reengineering and data migration.” The department’s ability to effectively mitigate such risks is of particular concern given its poor track record in successfully designing and implementing major systems in the past. Army Guard soldiers will likely be required to rely on existing pay systems for at least several more years, the authors say. The review of the pay experiences of the soldiers in the Colorado Army Guard's 220th Military Police Company, which was mobilized to active duty, was limited. Army Guard pay technicians relied primarily on on-the-job-training and phone calls to determine how to process active duty pays to activated Army Guard personnel. The Army Guard began offering training on mobilization pays and transaction processing to the USPFO military pay technicians in fiscal year 2002. However, there is no requirement for USPfo pay technicians to attend these training courses. The National Guard has instituted mobilization specific training for pay technicians. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to modify existing training policies and procedures. fiscal year 2003 were canceled. Only two of the six case study locations we audited tracked the extent to which pay technicians have taken training in this area. We were told that few of the military pay technicians at the state Army Guard USPFOs had formal training on JUSTIS, DJMS-RC, or mobilization pay processing requirements and procedures. Throughout our case studies, we found numerous errors that involved some element of human capital. One payroll clerk told us that she had not received any formal training. pay eligibility or payroll processing requirements used to provide accurate and timely pays to Army Guard soldiers. There are no DOD or Army requirements for military pay personnel to receive training on pay entitlements and processing requirements associated with mobilized Army Guards. Neither Army Guard unit commanders nor active Army commanders were required to get training on the importance of the pay to on-board personnel reconciliations. We were told and procedures to require all USPFO and active Army pay and finance personnel responsible for entering pay transactions for mobilized soldiers to receive appropriate training upon assuming such duties. weaknesses include insufficient resources allocated to pay processing, inadequate training related to existing policies and procedures, and poor customer service. A sufficient number of well-trained military pay staff is particularly crucial given the extensive, cumbersome, and labor-intensive process requirements that have evolved to support active duty pay to Army personnel. The lack of sufficient numbers of military pay professionals can undermine the effectiveness of even a world-class integrated pay and personnel system.particularly in light of the extensive set of policies and Procedures now in effect in this area. pay sections of the USPFOs, (2) the relatively lower grade structure for nonsupervisory personnel in the military pay sections in comparison with the grades for similar positions in other sections, and (3) few military pay technicians on board at the six locations we audited had received formal training on pay eligibility and pay processing requirements for mobilized Army Guard personnel. NGB provides annual authorization for the overall staffing levels for each state. Within these overall staffingMilitary pay sections made it difficult to recruit and retain employees. authorizations, each state allocates positions to each of the sections within a USPFO. We compared the actual number of personnel on board to the NGB-authorized staffing level for the military pay sections. Two of the six case study locations had fewer military pay technicians on board than they were authorized. Officials at several of the case study units also stated that restrictions on rank/grade at which U.S.PFOs are allowed to hire personnel for their sections were not clearly spelled out. Army Guard operating procedures provide that the primary responsibility for administering Army Guard soldiers’ pay as they are mobilized to active duty rests with the 54 USPFOs. We identified concerns with (1) the number of staff on board in the military backlogs in processing pay start transactions during mobilization processing. We also identified instances in which the personnel at military pay offices did not appear to know the different aspects of the extensive paperwork associated with activating appropriate basic pays, entitlements, and special incentive pays. concerns at all three phases of the active duty tours and involving DFAS, active Army, and Army Guard servicing components. Consistent with the confusion we found among Army Guard and active Army finance components concerning responsibility for processing pay transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers, we found indications that the soldiers themselves were similarly confused. Many of the complaints we identified concerned confusion over whether Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty should be served by the USPFO or by the active Army because they were mobilized to federal service. starting active duty pay transactions; active Army finance offices or DOD Military Pay Offices at over 15 mobilization stations across the United States. 28 active Army area servicing finance offices at over 50 locations worldwide that are involved in servicing Army Guard soldiers’ location-based active duty pays. DFAS-Indianapolis—the central site for processing Army Guard soldier’s active duty payments; DF AS-Denver—theCentral site for maintaining the pay system used to pay Army Guard personnel. DF AS Cleveland—thecentral site for handling soldier military pay. active duty pays at the same time—this requirement was often not followed. The Chief of Payroll at one of our case study locations told us that because they were currently understaffed, staff members worked 12 to 14 hours a day and still had backlogs of pay start transactions to be entered into the pay system. We were also told that two of our other caseStudy locations experienced backlogs and errors in entering pay start. transactions when they were processing large numbers of Army Guard soldiers during initial mobilizations.