the CFO Act or FFMIA, the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002, requires DHS to prepare and have audited financial statements annually. The President’s Management Agenda recognized that an unqualified financial audit opinion is a basic prescription for any well-managed organization. Without sound internal control and accurate and timely financial information, it is not possible to accomplish the agenda and secure the best performance and highest performance, the White House said. The White House did not require DHS to comply with the CFO act. measure of accountability for the American people. Joint Financial Management Improvement Program (JFMIP) Principals have defined certain measures, in addition to receiving an unqualified financial statement opinion. These additional measures include being able to routinely provide timely, accurate, and useful financial and performance information, having neither material internal control weaknesses nor material noncompliance with laws and regulations. DHS obtained a consolidated financial audit for the 7-month period from March 1, 2003, to September 30, 2003. DHS received a qualified opinion from its independent auditors on its financial performance. subject to pending legislation. DHS is currently subject to most financial management improvement laws except for the CFO Act and FFMIA. DHS should not be the only cabinet-level department not covered by what is the cornerstone for pursuing and achieving the requisite financial management systems and capabilities in the federal government, the authors say. In view of the size of DHS and the importance of the C FO Act andFFMIA in improving financial management and its applicability to all other cabinet departments, we believe DHS should be a CFO act agency. and reporting of cost information, and the integration of accounting and budget information. The act also requires that the agency’s CFO be qualified, presidentially appointed, approved by the Senate, and report to the head of the agency. Although DHS is not currently subject to FFMIA, its auditors disclosed systems deficiencies in its financial management information systems, the application of accounting standards, and recording of financial transactions. Based on these weaknesses it is likely that DHS's systems would not have been in substantial compliance with the requirements of the CFO Act. includes defining, acquiring, and testing the planned solution. Phase II involves implementing the solution throughout DHS, and Phase III is ongoing maintenance of the solution. According to DHS, the eMergevendor selection to occur in April or May of 2004. However, vendor proposal requests were issued in June 2004 and selection is to be completed in July 2004. The Business Automation Initiative is an interim project to be developed by contractors during 2004. It will automate purchase requests for the department and to streamline the employee entry/exit process. Another interim initiative was considered by the department to integrate data mining and warehousing. However, instead of pursuing this interim solution, DHS plans to include it in the requirements of the eMerge initiative. A request for proposal (RFP) was issued by DHS for the e Merge initiative, but these documents were not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. Thus, we are not providing description, analysis, or evaluation of such information in this report, says the report. We have found that similar projects have proven challenging and costly for other federal agencies. NASA is on its third attempt in 12 years to modernize its financial management process and systems, and has spent about $180. We are unable to determine if DHS, through the RMTO, is developing a financial enterprise solution that will be in alignment with departmentwide information technology plans, many of which are still under development. We have reported on the efforts of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the District of Columbia Courts (DC Courts) to acquire new information systems. DC Courts began its system acquisition in 1998 and has struggled in its implementation. DC Courts struggled in developing requirements that contained the necessary specificity to ensure the system developed would meet its users’ needs. To avoid similar problems, it is important, among other things, that DHS ensure commitment and extensive involvement of key stakeholders. It is also important to ensure that DC Courts develops a system that meets the needs of its users, rather than just a set of requirements that the government develops for the sake of the system. The support of top officials at the department will be key in ensuring that the necessary resources are available to address the weaknesses. DHS expects the acquisition and implementation of the financial enterprise solution to take place over a 3-year time period and cost approximately $146 million. According to the strategic framework DHS provided to us, the development of an integratedfinancial enterprise solution will be accomplished in three phases. The acquisition is in the early stages, and continued focus and follow through, among other things, will be necessary for it to be successful. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise solution will meet the requirements of financial management laws it is currently not subject to. DHS has implemented a commercial-off-the-shelf tool called Dynamic Object Oriented Requirements System (DOORS) to track requirements of various laws, regulations, and circulars place on the development of the system. It would certainly make good business sense to do so given DHS's size and mission. It is also important that DHS be proactive and incorporate the requirement of the CFO Act and FFMIA. DHS estimated that several thousand compliance requirements will be tracked using DOORS once analysis is completed. After the repository is complete, requirements reports are to be printed directly from DOORS and attached to future RFPs to ensure that contractors are aware of the legislative requirements of the systems to be developed. A system to record, track, and link all legislative requirements as a financial management system is being developed is important. Also important is that DHS be statutorily required to develop an integrated financial system. After 9/11, responding to potential and real threats to homeland security became one of the federal government’s most significant challenges. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 merged 22 federal agencies and organizations into DHS, making it the department with the third largest budget. In January 2003, we designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors: (1) the implementation, (2) the funding, and (3) the political will of Congress. among other things, preventing terrorist attacks within the United States, reducing America’s vulnerability to terrorism, minimizing subsequent damage, and assisting in the recovery from attacks that do occur. To help accomplish this integrated homeland security mission, the various mission areas and associated programs of 22 federal agencies were merged, in whole or in part, into DHS. The department's organizational structure consists of eight major components, each of which is headed by an Under Secretary. The U.S. Coast Guard (Coast Guard), the U.s. Secret Service, the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), and five directorates are headed by Under Secretaries. relatively more significant than when considered in the context of the much larger consolidated operations of DHS as a whole. Resolving all previously reported internal control weaknesses, regardless of the current designation at DHS, is key to DHS’s ability to produce relevant and reliable financial information. The department is committed to resolving the remaining weaknesses and has developed a plan to do so. Along with developing corrective action plans, the CFO testified that DHS plans to implement a departmentwide tracking system to monitor the status of corrective actions. DHS has begun working with a contractor to design and implement a tracking system for outstanding weaknesses identified during the department’s independent financial audits. The system is not yet fully functional and does not include information on all reported weaknesses. Until such time that it does, it will provide limited oversight and information on the status of corrective actions to address weaknesses at DHS. Follow-through with planned corrective actions is paramount. The comments DHS provided to us are reprinted in appendix IV.actions. The original intent of our recommendation was to encourage DHS to track and resolve all auditor reported material weaknesses, reportable conditions, and observations and recommendations. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise solution will be able to meet the requirements of relevant financial management improvement laws. We did not complete audit procedures to determine if these reductions were positive or negative for the department. However, substantial documentation related to the eMerge initiative was not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. Thus, we did not include analysis or evaluation of such information in this report. We reviewed relevant laws and regulations, and relevant guidance related to financial. and transformation of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 states that DHS’s missions include, outstanding inherited weaknesses, as well as address the newly identified department-level weaknesses. Through the eMerge initiative, DHS has plans to integrate and consolidate its financial and business systems. But without such things as continued active oversight from top-level management and systematic approaches to this integration, DHS could find itself in the same position as other federal departments. We reviewed relevant DHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) reports and our January 2003 report on major management challenges at DHS. We also reviewed DHS’s Performance and Accountability Report for the 7 months ending September 30, 2003. We reviewed prior-period component agency annual financial statement audit reports when available. We looked at how such challenges are being addressed at the Department of Homeland Security. This report is based on the OIG reports and a January 2003 DHS report on big management challenges in the agency. the Congress may wish to consider the following action: Enact legislation to designate DHS as a CFO Act agency. We are making eight recommendations for executive action at DHS that will improve financial management at the department. We fully support DHS including all management-identified control weaknesses as well, and have updated our recommendation accordingly. We applaud the current leadership at DHS for voluntarily complying with some audit provisions. We continue to strongly support passage of legislation that would statutorily make DHS a C FO Act agency, and thus guarantee future requirements to adhere to important financial management legislation. Reports for the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Departments of Transportation, Justice, and Treasury. We reviewed testimony of DHS’s current and former Chief Financial Officer (CFO) We reviewed planned corrective actions developed by the department to address its fiscal years 2002 and 2003 material weaknesses and reportable conditions. Further, we conducted a walk-through to review the system DHS is developing to track planned corrective action. Finally, we interviewed officials from the OIG and the Office of the Chief Financial officer (OCFO) management, financial reporting, systems implementation, and requirements. We also interviewed the Director of the RMTO and other officials. We performed our review from October 2003 through June 2004 in Washington, DC. We have not reviewed system requirements or other recently developed plans because these were completed and obtained after our fieldwork was completed. We requested comments on this report from the Secretary of Homeland Security or his designee. Written comments were received from the department’s Chief Financial Officer and are reprinted in appendix IV. plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies of thisReport to interested congressional committees and subcommittees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report or wish to discuss it further, please contact me at (202) 512-6906. Each weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates.” The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through GAO’s Web site (www.gaO.gov) of accountability, integrity, and reliability. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Condition (In-bond Movement of Imported Goods) Observation & Recommendations to Management Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Immigration and Naturalization Service (as of February 28, 2003) Reportable Condition (Acceptance and Adjudication of Immigration and naturalization Applications) Reportability Condition (Accounts Payable and Undelivered Orders) Material Weaknesses (Financial Reporting) Materialweakness ( financial reporting) Material weakness (Intragovernmental Balances) The Government Accountability Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values, which are set out in the agency's mission statement. The agency's core values are: "Accountability, transparency, and accountability for the American people" CBP did not have a reliable process of monitoring the movement of ‘in-bond’ shipments. CBP lacked an effective compliance measurement program to compute an estimate of underpayment of related duties, taxes, and fees. The Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services’ (CIS) process for tracking and reporting the status of applications and related information was inconsistent and inefficient. Also, CIS did not prevent excessive drawback claims and payments. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) failed to adequately monitor the movements of “in- bond” shipments, which are merchandise that is not subject to duties until it reaches its destination. process was complex and labor-intensive. Several DHS bureaus lacked clearly documented procedures, making them vulnerable if key people leave the organization. The Coast Guard was unable to support the recorded value of $2.9 billion in PP&E due to insufficient documentation provided prior to the completion of audit procedures. The Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s (CBP) accounting system lacked automated controls to detect Drawback claims on duties, taxes, and fees. DHS lacked controls to verify that monthly financial reports and transferred balances from legacy agencies were accurate and complete. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) lacked a comprehensive property management system. Internal controls over physical counts of OM&S were not effective at the Coast Guard. The Secret Service did not record the.documentation to support its estimation methodology. The Coast Guard also had not recently reviewed its OM &S capitalization policy, leading to a material adjustment to its records when an analysis was performed. The TSA lacked adequate policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of its PP&E records. The auditors were unable to verify the recorded value of $497 million in OM & S. perform cycle counts of its work in process that would facilitate the accurate calculation of deferred revenue. Fund balance with Treasury (FBWT): The Coast Guard did not perform required reconciliations for FBWT accounts and lacked written standard operating procedures (SOP) to guide the process. Intragovernmental balances: Several large DHS bureaus had not developed and adopted effective SOPs or established systems to track, confirm, and reconcile intragovernmentals balances and transactions. Strategic National Stockpile (SNS): The SNS accounting process was fragmented and disconnected, largely due to operational challenges caused by the laws governing SNS. A $485 million upwards adjustment had to be made to value SNS in DHS’s records properly. CIS and the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), TSA, and the Coast Guard had weaknesses in their processes for accruing accounts payable or reporting accurate balances for undelivered orders. SNS had a Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Reportable Condition (Drawback Claims on Duties, Taxes, and Fees) FEMA’s auditors reported seven internal control weaknesses for fiscal year 2002. These weaknesses resulted in the need for extensive manual effort to compile financial information. FLETC not having adequate policies and procedures in place to ensure that funds obligated were proper and that costs for construction in progress were recorded properly. Many of these weaknesses specifically contributed to FEMA's systems’ failure to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA, according to the report. The report also found that FEMA had a lack of a process to evaluate the accuracy of a new claims estimation methodology. Many of these weaknesses lead to FLETC’s systems’ inability to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. Nine of the 30 internal control weaknesses identified in prior component financial statement audits have been closed as of September 30, 2003. The remaining 21 issues represent continuing weaknesses that have been reported in DHS’S first Performance and Accountability Report. To ensure financial accountability and establish an effective financial environment, DHS must address all of its internal control problems. Meeting these financial management improvement requirements will help produce timely and useful financial and business information. Within the Management Directorate is DHS’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) OCFO is assigned primary responsibility for functions, such as budget, finance and accounting, strategic planning and evaluation. OCFO also charged with ongoing integration of these functions within the department. The CFO Act requires the agency's CFO to develop and maintain an integrated accounting and financial management system that provides for complete, reliable, and timely financial information that facilitates the systematic measurement of performance at the agency. D.C.'s OCFO needs to establish financial reporting roles and responsibilities, assess critical needs, and establish standard operating procedures (SOP) for the department. The Coast Guard and the Strategic National Stockpile had weaknesses in financial oversight that have led to reporting problems. Key controls to ensure reporting integrity were not in place, and inefficiencies made the process more error prone. At the Coast Guard, the financial reporting was not in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to the 7 material weaknesses and 7 reportable conditions reported in DHS’s 2003 financial statement audit, DHS reported 12 additional weaknesses that affect the department's full compliance with certain objectives of 31 U.S.C. 3512(c), (d) (commonly known as the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA) Examples of the FMFIA weaknesses reported by DHS included deficient controls over laws and regulations regarding the border entry process and nonconformance related to system security. TSA is a relatively new agency formed after the September 11, 2001, terror attacks. TSA’s systems did not substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. weaknesses can result in uncontrolled spending of taxpayer dollars, misplaced or unaccounted for property, and challenges in producing financial statements. Finally, these weaknesses contributed to Customs’ systems inability to substantially complying with the FFMia requirements, according to the report. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office on February 28, 2003. Auditors had reported 30 reportable conditions, 18 of which were considered material internal control weaknesses. All four agencies’ systems were found not to be in substantial compliance with the requirements of FFMIA. Most of the 22 components that transferred to DHS had not been subjected to significant financial statement audit scrutiny prior to their transfer, so the extent of the problems is not known. The full report is available on the Department of Homeland Security’s web site, which can be found at: http://www.dhs.gov/. For fiscal year 2002 and prior to its transfer to DHS, Customs’ auditors reported nine internal control weaknesses. These weaknesses can result in inaccurate reporting of certain material elements of Customs' financial situation. System security weaknesses that could leave Customs' information vulnerable to unauthorized access, and the necessity of extensive manual procedures and controls. For the 7 months ending September 30, 2003. For fiscal year 2001 and 2002, Customs reported nineinternal control weaknesses, including weaknesses in its ability to monitor the effectiveness of its internal controls over entry duties and taxes. Newly identified weaknesses related to the Coast Guard were one of the main reasons that independent auditors issued a qualified opinion on DHS’s consolidated balance sheet. The lack of procedures at DHS to verify the accuracy and completeness of balances transferred on March 1, 2003, and significant weaknesses with the number of qualified financial management personnel employed by the department. The Coast Guard and Secret Service also found significant deficiencies that prevented them from being able to express an opinion on certain financial statements. In addition to the internal control weaknesses cited in its 2003 report, DHS also cited a number of other internal control deficiencies. consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2003. Auditors were unable to opine on the consolidated statements of net costs and changes in net position. The auditors reported 14 reportable conditions on internal control, 7 of which were considered to be material weaknesses. For 5 of the agencies that DHS was created in March 2003 and merged with 22 diverse agencies, there were many known financial management weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the inherited agencies. For five of the agency that were created, the auditors could not opine. for the combined statement of budgetary resources and consolidated statement of financing. as 3 material weaknesses, while 5 were reported as reportable conditions. The department’s independent auditors classified the remaining 7 weaknesses as lower level observations and recommendations. FEMA, Customs, and TSA each had weaknesses at the time of their transfer to DHS. However, in the 2003 audit report, these weaknesses were classified as observations and Recommendations, a much less serious classification. Lower classification within DHS does not mean that the issues are now somehow less severe, it merely refers to the materiality of a component within DHS. inherited from component agencies. For example, Customs had a previously identified weakness related to the effectiveness of its internal controls over accurate reporting of entry duties and taxes. FEMA’s accounts receivable processes were strengthened to ensure that accounts Receivable are determined and recorded on a timely basis. In the U.S. military, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is responsible for the protection of the nation's national security. The Department of the Homeland Security has responsibility for the security of the country's borders, airports, ports of entry and waterways.