2005 action modified the rate structure that was set in 1984. A second further notice of proposed rulemaking, issued on March 17, 2003, imposing additional requirements on third-party verification services became effective on July 21, 2003. The effectiveness of the new rules and their implementation is receiving continuing attention from Members of Congress, regulators, providers, and consumers. Since the development of competition in the provision of long distance telecommunications services, consumers have been able to select the carrier of their choice from among approximately 500 companies. Concern has been voiced by some that the consumer protections that were proposed were too extensive and may be overly burdensome and costly for smaller carriers. Mandatory third party verification is cited as an example of a proposal that would be costly for small carriers to implement. Proposals to require switchless resellers to post a "surety bond" with the FCC to pay for possible fines or penalties also came under criticism. The Telecommunications Resellers Association claims that such a provision not only discriminates against small businesses, but small businesses. the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, have chosen to take on this responsibility. Verification procedures used to confirm carrier switches are strengthened and extended to include a number of circumstances. These verification methods are applied to both inbound calls (that are usually a customer initiated call to a toll-free number) and those that are made via an Internet-based LOA (see " Additional Issues " below). The most common method of verification is a consumer signature on an authorization paper form (i.e., a Letter of Agency) The FCC has also applied verification procedures to the practice of implementing carrier freeze requests. The rules require that solicitations for such freezes be clear and that the consumer be informed as to how such a freeze may be lifted. Verification rules are also applied to changes in local as well as long distance carriers, but wireless carriers are exempt. The FCC also noted that these verification procedures do not preempt state law. These verification methods are to be used as a state minimum, the FCC said in a statement. contained in the E-Sign Act ( P.L. 106-229 ), thereby allowing carrier changes to be made by consumers via the Internet. retaining the three-way call as a verification method but requiring the carrier's sales representative to drop off the call once the connection has been established between the subscriber and the third party verifier. New complaint reporting requirements for carriers which require carriers to submit semiannual reports to the FCC's Enforcement Bureau containing, among other information, the number of slamming complaints they have received. S. 58 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee where no further action was taken. S. 1084 required the FCC, the Federal Trade Commission, and telecommunications carrier representatives to develop a code of practices to protect consumers from slamming. The code was required to contain, at a minimum, provisions that required companies to verify changes in a subscriber's service, restricted the use of "negative option marketing," and protected consumer's rights to use the PIC freeze option. (See section on " PIC Freeze Programs and Charges ", below.) the name of the person who authorized the switch, to the subscriber within 15 days. The use of negative option marketing, whereby a consumer must take some action to prevent a switch from occurring, was banned. The bill also strengthened the complaint procedure by requiring a company charged with slamming to resolve the complaint within 120 days. Any company that ignored a consumer's complaint was to be fined up to $1,000 and face up to three years in jail. The law also required the company to give the consumer a copy of the retained verification, information about how to pursue the complaint with the FCC, and all other available remedies. The FCC was required to establish a voluntary code of "Subscriber Protection Practices" within 180 days of enactment. Failure to comply with or withdrawal from the voluntary code would result in a carrier being subject to FCC regulation. H.R. 3888 also detailed specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into FCC-developed regulations for carriers not operating under the voluntaryCode. The bill was signed into law by President Barack Obama on June 14. The FCC was expected to review the code every two years to ensure that its requirements "adequately protect consumers" FCC rules currently require a long distance company to obtain a subscriber's authorization before a switch can occur. Authorization can be obtained in writing or can be confirmed orally. If a subscriber has been a victim of an unauthorized change, he/she is absolved of payment for up to 30 days; refunds of up to $1,000 are available. FCC rules protect consumers from paying potentially exorbitant rates.adopted its rules in response to the numerous complaints it received from state regulatory bodies, telecommunications carriers, and individual consumers. for the first 30-day period after an unauthorized switch. In cases where payment was made by the consumer, the unauthorized carrier must refund 150% of the charges to the authorized carrier. The authorized carrier is allowed to keep an amount equal to 100 percent of the consumer's bill with the remaining 50% returned to the consumer. Primary enforcement responsibility has been given to the states with the FCC assuming responsibility in those states unwilling or unable to undertake this role or if a complainant expressly indicates it wishes the FCC to resolve the matter. According to the FCC, 37 states, The court found that the requirement that the telecommunications carrier verify that the actual subscriber, and not just the person answering the line and claiming to have authority to authorize a carrier switch, authorize the switch exceeded the FCC's statutory authority. The court stated that the statue does not require actual authorization but only requires that the carrier get verification. Furthermore the court said that the FCC gives carriers "a virtually impossible task: guaranteeing that the person who answers the telephone is in fact authorized to make changes to that phone line" S. 1618 also applied to the unauthorized initiation of long distance service as well as unauthorized switching. The local telephone company was prohibited from changing a consumer's long distance provider unless the change is accompanied by a verbal, written, or electronic verification from the subscriber. The long distance company or reseller was required to send a written confirmation of the switch that includes the name of the new carrier, the date the switch was authorized, and the date of the change. Furthermore, the bill required that the verification be retained. The Competitive Telecommunications Association felt that the $5 PIC change charge safe harbor, that was established in 1984, exceeded the actual cost and hampers competition. The FCC concluded that "significant industry and market changes have occurred since the implementation of the $ 5.00 safe harbor in 1984" The FCC adopted a new fee structure that local exchange carriers may charge for interstate PIC changes in 2005. Under the new rules PICchange charges, which are borne by the customer, are lower. The FCC established safe harbors of $1.25 for electronically-processed PIC changes and $5.50 for manually processed PIC change. Local exchange carriers can charge more if they can document higher costs and less than the safe harbor rate if they choose. The FCC has no authority over charges set for intrastate carrier changes which fall under state jurisdiction; however, if a consumer switches intrastates long distance providers and interstate providers, they will be subject to a new safe harbor. The PIC charge for changing the interstate carrier is decreased by half, to 63 cents, for electronically processed changes. The possible misuse of the PIC freeze through the implementation of an illegal or unauthorized PIC Freeze by the customer's local exchange carrier has also been raised. In an October 14, 2005 action the FCC extended, for a second time, the effective date for the filing of revised P IC charge tariffs to be effective no later than January 1, 2006. The extension of thePIC freeze option, beyond the designation of the long PIC term, has been raised by the FCC. A PIC freeze is the freezing of a customer's primary interexchange (long distance) carrier, or PIC. It prohibits the switch of the customer's designated long distance carrier without his/her express approval. While most see the PIC Freeze as a viable option to prevent slamming in the long distance market, some concerns have been expressed over the potential for misuse of this option. Some see the potential to misuse this option as a way to make it easier for customers to switch carriers. Local exchange carriers defend the use of the PIC freeze, arguing that it is an appropriate method to protect consumers against the growing problem of slamming. They assert that there have been no widespread complaints about the manner in which the P IC freeze is implemented. They favor the establishment of an independent third party to administer and execute such changes. The FCC has encouraged carriers to take steps to help prevent slamming, they say. They also state that the manner of the program is implemented varies, and note that the way in which it is implemented is not uniform. distance carrier, to cover the designation of local exchange and intrastate long distance (toll call) carriers. Some feel that the PIC freeze is being misused to protect the local exchange carriers market share in the face of growing competition. Some support the elimination of local. exchange carriers and support the introduction of a national long-distance carrier. Some see the expanded use of the P IC freeze option as unnecessary and feel that it is being used to protect local exchange carrier market share. and, if needed, initiate a rulemaking, within 120 days after the completion of its report, to prohibit undesirable practices. The "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1998" ( H.R. 3888 ), passed the House by voice vote, with amendment, on October 12, 1998. The House-passed measure contained a different approach from its Senate counterpart to combat slamming. The bill called for the establishment of a voluntary code of conduct as an alternative to FCC rules. H.R. 3888 was passed by the House Commerce Committee and ultimately the full House. It gives state attorneys general enforcement authority under the federal legislation. The bill also gives subscribers credit for charges incurred when using the slamming carrier's service. It directs the Commerce Department's National Telecommunications and Information Administration to report to Congress on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party to administer a system to prevent slamming. It was significantly different from the subcommittee-passed version of the bill. The "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act of 1998" ( S. 1618 ), passed the Senate (99-0) with amendment, on May 12, 1998. This measure sought to combat the increase in slamming by strengthening safeguards to prevent slamming from occurring in the first place. Negotiations between the House and Senate to reconcile differences between the two measures continued through the waning days of the session. Despite such efforts, however, H.R. 3888 was not brought to the Senate floor. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced 11 bills to address this issue. Despite intense negotiations to resolve differences between the bills, the Congress adjourned before passing legislation. S. 1618 , the "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act," passed the Senate(99-0) with amendment, on May 12, 1998. H.R. 3888 passed the House, as amended, by voice vote, on October 12,1998. The House of Representatives passed the bill, but the Senate did not vote on it. Section 258 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 expands jurisdiction over, and creates a new penalty for, any telecommunications carrier. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from changing a subscriber's selection of both telephone exchange (local) and toll (long distance) service, unless the change complies with verification procedures prescribed by the FCC. The section expanded the FCC's authority over such activity to include local as well as long distance service. It was part of a major rewrite of the 1934 Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 151 et.seq). a company's revenue the more consumers it can slam without appearing to be a major offender. LCI recommends that the FCC calculate its slamming rate ratio by dividing the number of slamming complaints by theNumber of new long distance customers. H.R. 2112 (Franks) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to increase the forfeiture penalty for telephone service slamming and to require providers of such service to report slamming incidents, and for other purposes. Introduced July 8, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce. H.R. 4176 (Markey) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to protect consumers against 'spamming', 'slamming', and 'cramming' and for other purposes. S. 1051 (Campbell) To enhance protections against unauthorized changes of telephone service subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another. S 1740 (Collins) To improve protections against the unauthorized change of subscribers from. one telecommunications carriers to another, and forOther purposes. H. R. 105-801 passed House by voice vote, with amendment, October 12, 1998. A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to strengthen and expand the procedures for preventing the slamming of interstate telephone service subscribers. H.R. 3050 (Dingell) A measure to establish procedures and remedies for the prevention of fraudulent and deceptive practices in the solicitation of telephone service subscriber. S. 1618 (McCain) A bill to improve protections against telephone service "slamming" and provide protections against phone billing "cramming" S. 58 (Collins) A. bill to provide the Federal Trade Commission jurisdiction over unfair and deceptive trade practices of telecommunications carriers. H.R. 3888 (Tauzin) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced April 29, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Passed Telecommunications Subcommittee, as amended, by voice vote, August 6, 1998. Reported out of committee October 1, 1998, and passed the House of Representatives on September 24,1998, and the Senate on September 26, 1998,. and the House passed the bill on September 27, 1998., and the Senate passed it on September 28, 1998. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), (known at that time as the General Accounting Office), undertook an investigation into the general issue of slamming. This report, Telephone Slamming and Its Harmful Effects , was released in conjunction with testimony given at Subcommittee hearings. The Fletcher Companies, a long distance provider that has come under regulatory scrutiny, and has since had its license revoked, for slamming complaints. By changing their names, the companies were able to avoid scrutiny. The GAO report was released at the request of Senator Collins, then Chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. FCC Chairman Kennard was called to testify at the hearing. Kennard defended the FCC's actions stating that the tariff filing procedure was not developed as a deterrent to slamming. He also pointed to the severe punishment taken against Fletcher Companies to defend FCC actions. At the request of Senator Collins, the GAO undertook a second study examining the scope of and state and federal actions taken by the FCC. The GAO concluded that the FCC had taken the appropriate steps to combat slamming and that it was investigating the matter further. telephone line." On March 17, 2003, the FCC issued a second further notice of proposed rulemaking (CC Docket 94-129; FCC 03-42) strengthening requirements on third-party verification procedures. These rules became effective July 21, 2003. New initiatives are established to ease the filing of consumer complaints and speed their resolution. These include the establishment of a website to allow consumers to file complaints electronically and obtain on-line consumer protection information. The FCC also established a toll-free number at the FCC to enable consumers tofile complaints over the telephone. The FCC has also adopted rules that establish truth-in-billing and billing format principles. These rules establish requirements that are "intended to protect consumers against inaccurate and unfair billing practices" A number of issues not addressed in the April 13, 2000 reconsideration order were addressed in a subsequent FCC order adopted on July 21, 2000. These include permitting the use of Internet LOAs in compliance with provisions of the FCC rules. The rules went into effect on April 2, 2001, and are intended to improve the resolution of complaints. The FCC continues to take actions to enforce and further strengthen its slamming rules. The last of these new rules went into effect on November 28, 2000. Under these revised rules, states have the option of processing slamming complaints, and numerous states have opted to do so.been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. On March 14, 2002, the FCC initiated a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long distance) carrier (PIC) change charges. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has put forth proposals to stop this activity. The FCC currently has policies and rules to protect consumers from the unauthorized switching of their long distance carriers, and it enforces them through the investigation of individual complaints. State regulatory bodies and legislatures, and law enforcement officials, are also taking actions to stop the practice. However, a review of state-level activities regarding slamming is beyond the scope of this report. It is not known if the proposal will be introduced in the 109th Congress. Long distance service. State utility commissions are also permitted to enforce the procedures with respect to services within their state boundaries. Section 258(b) created a new penalty, in addition to already existing penalties contained in law. Any telecommunications carrier that violates those procedures and collects charges for such service is required to pay the subscriber's properly designated carrier all the charges collected from that subscriber since the change occurred. The requirement prevents violators from receiving financial rewards for the illegal switch. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 action (CC Docket No. 94-129), adopted new regulations in compliance with the 1996 Act. These rules, with the exception of the liability provisions, went into effect in April 1999. The liability provisions were stayed by the D.C. Court of Appeals. On May 3, 2000 the FCC issued revised slamming liability rules which met court approval and the stay was lifted on June 27, 2000. These revised liability rules have since been implemented, taking effect on November 28,2000. The rules absolve slammed consumers of liability for charges incurred by statute, versus FCC developed policies. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced many bills to address this issue, but adjourned without passing legislation. Two measures to further strengthen slamming regulations, S. 58 , and S. 1084 , were introduced in the 106 th Congress, but neither was enacted. The FCC has revised its rules with an eye to strengthening its regulations and increasing penalties for violators. No legislation addressing slamming was introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congress and none has local telecommunications services becomes more widespread. Industry initiatives, such as the ones discussed above, to support that position. Others support vigorous enforcement of current FCC regulations and continued consumer education to combat the increase in slamming complaints. The enactment of additional legislative measures prescribing new regulations is seen, by some, as an action that is unnecessary and that should be taken only as a last resort if the slamming problem continues. The extent and growth of the existing slamming problem is not yet known, but it is expected to grow over the next few years. problem, coupled with the potential for further abuse, make it necessary, supporters claim, to enact legislation to curb slamming. The release of a GAO report critical of current FCC efforts to reduce the occurrence of slamming gave supporters of legislation additional impetus in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses. It is up to the Congress, they state, to establish through law stronger measures and increased penalties to protect both consumers and suppliers of telecommunications services from slamming. Those in favor of enactment of legislation also state that FCC regulations directly supported slamming. Two measures, S. 58 and S. 1084, were introduced in the 106 th Congress relating to the slamming issue. Senator Susan Collins introduced the "Telephone Services Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Act of 1999" on January 19, 1999. While Senator Collins acknowledged recent FCC actions to strengthen slamming rules, to date no legislation has been introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congress nor in the 109 th Congress to date. The FCC's strengthened slamming rules and subsequent enforcement actions will be a sufficient deterrent to stop the practice of slamming. its regulations to deter slamming as "... a step in the right direction" she felt that "... we need to do more to protect consumers..." against slamming. Senator McCain introduced the "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1999" ( S. 1084 ) on May 19, 1999, one day after the court stay of FCC slamming liability rules. The issue of cramming, that is the practice of placing unauthorized, misleading, or deceptive charges on consumer's telephone bills goes beyond the scope of this report. th Congress to pass slamming legislation, court action to stay FCC liability rules (which has since been lifted), and his objection to the industry-proposed third party administrator. S. 58 attempted to further deter the practice of slamming by increasing consumer protections and strengthening enforcement at both the federal and state level. Included among the provisions to deter slamming contained in this measure were those that required extensive and written notification and verification requirements when a subscriber switches long distance carriers; specified that federal law does not preempt more restrictive state laws. providing services in 1997, during the FCC's investigation. This action was taken, according to the FCC, to ensure that none of these companies can resume operation and "engage in slamming or other conduct ... harmful to consumers" Provisions contained in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (see discussion below) expand the scope of FCC's authority to address the problem of unauthorized switches. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 order and subsequent reconsiderations, expanded upon and adopted more stringent rules to combat slamming. laws or regulations relating to slamming; authorized stiff penalties for those convicted of slamming. First time "willful violators" would have faced up to a year in prison for a first offense with repeat offenders up to five years. The bill extended FCC authority over violators beyond telecommunications carriers to include others such as billing agents; required local telephone companies to submit to the FCC, on a quarterly basis, a list of the number of slamming complaints received by service provider; be subject to a penalty for slamming. charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized carrier (100%) and the subscriber (50%) Carriers proven to be in violation of FCC rules are subject to fines and penalties. From April 1994 to the end of 1999, the FCC imposed final forfeitures against 8 companies for $10.3 million, entered into consent decrees with 12 carriers with combined payments of $2.7 million and proposed $7.6 million in proposed notices of apparent liability against 5 companies. The FCC continues to take enforcement actions against violators. AT&T v. FCC found that the FCC exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing certain of its slamming rules relating to customer verification. While not remanding the FCC's rules the court did vacate fines totaling $80,000 imposed on AT&T. But additional verification procedures may be adopted for intrastate carrier changes. The FCC had imposed a fine on AT & T for slamming when an unauthorized person, without the knowledge of the line subscriber, authorized to slam the phone. But the court found that this was not the case and vacated the fine. actions totaling nearly $30 million. FCC action in 2004 by the Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, on behalf of individual consumers, resolved about 3500 slamming complaints involving more than 300 carriers. In an April 21, 1998 action, the FCC levied its most severe penalty for slamming to date. For the first time, it revoked the operating authority of a telecommunications provider. In its first joint federal/state effort, the FEC filed on June 20, 2002, a $1.2 million fine against WebNet Communications Inc. of McLean, Va. Fletcher Companies, a group of long distance telephone companies, are barred from providing interstate telecommunications services without the prior consent of the FCC. The FCC assessed forfeitures totaling $5.7 million but has never been able to collect. According to the FCC, it received more than 1,400 complaints against the Fletcher Companies, the majority of them filed from mid-1996 through 1997. Although these companies stopped using slamming, the FCC has not been successful in collecting the forfeitures it was owed. subscribers could recover damages up to $500 from slammers. Those convicted of intentional slamming ("willful" slammers) would have been subject to criminal penalties. Switchless resellers were required to post a bond with the FCC before they were able to offer long distance services. The FCC was given the authority to prosecute those who refuse to pay their fines. The move was intended to ensure some degree of financial capability and that proceeds are used to pay for services that are needed by subscribers. would also cause an "anticompetitive effect" in the marketplace by decreasing consumer choice. Proposals to require slammers to pay fines to consumers they harm could result in the creation of the "wrong incentive structure..." according to AT&T. Provisions that give full reimbursement to consumers if they are slammed, instead of solely reimbursement of the overcharge, have generated concerns that it might possibly lead to consumers fraudulently claiming they have been slammed, to avoid paying any charges for long distance calls. Some have expressed concerns that fines and punishments not be levied against the long distance carrier in all cases. On the other hand, local exchange carriers have expressed some concerns that they should not be held liable for solely executing a change since short of confirming each switch, they cannot insure that each change is authorized by the consumer. One practice currently used to reward people who have been slammed instead of trying to discipline those who do the slamming, is to reward the person who slammed you instead of punishing you. "Slamming" is when a consumer's telephone service provider is changed without their knowledge or consent. This unauthorized change can occur for several reasons, ranging from computer or human error to unscrupulous or illegal marketing practices. Consumers often do not realize they have been slammed until they find unfamiliar names or charges on their telephone bills. For some who do not examine their bills, such changes can go undetected for months or even longer. According to data released by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), slamming continues to be a problem. The Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel) issued a statement that called for "zero tolerance" of intentional slamming. CompTel urged carriers to agree to investigate all slamming allegations, repay consumers who have been the victims of slamming, and terminate any employees or agents who "knowingly and willfully engaged in such practices" The statement also advocated uniformity in state and federal slamming requirements, to lessen consumer confusion, and called for the levying of fines, but solely in cases where it has been proven necessary. proven that the carrier "has engaged in willful and intentional slamming...." Although virtually no one supports the practice of intentional slamming, some concerns have been expressed over the approaches being taken to curb this practice. One concern has focused on the necessity for, or concern over specific provisions contained in, legislative proposals. Two other concerns addressed in legislation have also generated controversy: the implementation of primary interexchange carrier (PIC) freeze programs; and the methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics. from carrier to carrier and that many of the potential and perceived abuses, such as high charges or difficultly in switching, do not apply to most programs. Many local exchange carriers claim that they do not actively market the PIC freeze option but only offer it in response to customers who complain about slamming or who specifically inquire about it. The methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics has also been brought under question. The GAO criticized the methodology used to determine the list of top slamming offenders. GAO: FCC, states, and telecommunications industry have been effective in protecting the consumer from telephone slamming. GAO: Information provided by all long distance carriers in compliance with FCC-required tariff filing procedures, is not reviewed and is no deterrent to a slammer. The most effective action that consumers can take to eliminate the chance of intentional slamming is to have their local exchange carrier freeze their choice of long distance providers. The conclusions reached in the GAO report regarding FCC efforts to deter slamming were discussed during hearings held, on April 23, 1998, by the Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee. Slamming is the practice of placing unauthorized charges for services and products on a consumer's telephone bill. Cramming continues to be a significant problem for consumers, according to a 1999 report. State and federal regulations taken to protect consumers from such abuses, as well as industry initiatives taken to curb these abuses, are included in the report. The report was issued in July 1999 and focused on two abuses, slamming and cramming, and was based on data from 1996 through 1998. It also contains information on the number of complaints filed, state and federal actions taken to prevent such abuses. notification of any changes in service, and forbade the use of unfair and deceptive practices. Carriers were required to give subscribers who are victims of slamming credits for unauthorized charges and damages of $500. S. 1084 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee and received no further action. The bill required the FCC to compile and publish a report, every six months, listing slamming violations by carrier. Adherence to the code would have been voluntary, but those carriers that chose not to follow it would have to follow regulations prescribed by the FCC. "patterns and practices" of slamming. The FCC was required to submit a report to Congress, by October 31, 1998, identifying the "top ten" carriers that were the subject of the most slamming complaints. The bill also required the FCC to issue a report, within 180 days of the bill's enactment, on telemarketing practices used to solicit service provider changes by subscribers, and to identify the top ten carriers that had the highest number of slamming complaints in the previous year. The report was to be based on a ratio of the number of subscriber complaints to the total number of subscribers served. The FCC was also required to compile and publish a report, on a semiannual basis, ranking carriers by the percentage of verified complaints, excluding those generated by the carrier's unaffiliated resellers. Carriers listed among the five worst performers for three consecutive times were to be subject to FCC investigation. Carrier found in violation of the voluntary code or found willfully and repeatedly slamming were subject to a fine of up to $1 million. The FCC has not commented on the new rules, which are expected to be implemented in the coming months. The FCC compares slamming offenders by citing the ratio of the number of complaints per million dollars of company revenue. That methodology, according to the GAO, is flawed because it can lead to a severe understatement of the revenue-to-complaint ratio for the smaller companies, or resellers. This occurs because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC unless the revenue exceeds $109 million. To enable the FCC to make comparisons, to list the top slamming offenders, the FCC assumes that those resellers that have not provided revenue data, had revenues of $109 million. LCI International Inc., a long distance carrier in the United States, has also expressed concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates yearly slamming rates. Unlike the GAO, LCI claims that the FCC's current practice of dividing the number of slamming complaints by a company's annual telecommunications revenue favors larger carriers. This occurs,LCI states, because the larger the company, the more complaints it receives. The FCC's slamming team in 2004 resolved approximately 3,500 slamming complaints involving over 300 telephone carriers, resulting in consumer refunds totaling $800,000. The potential for slamming is expected to increase as competition in the provision of intrastate long distance and long-distance phone services increases. Over 50 million carrier selection changes are recorded each year, and it is assumed that filed complaints represent a subset of the actual problem. The number of slamming complaints rose to 36,220 inquiries and 1,932 complaints filed in 2005.