The Marine Corps did not have effective controls in place to support estimated obligations, referred to as “bulk obligations,” to record a payment liability. The Marine Corps estimates obligations in a bulk amount to record payment liabilities where it does not have a mechanism to identify authorizing documentation as a basis for recording the obligations. The auditors found ineffective controls over three major information technology systems used by the Marine Corps. The audit also found problems with the reliability of reported financial information. The investigation is ongoing. The Marine Corps did not develop an overall corrective action or remediation plan that includes key elements of a risk-based plan. Instead, its approach focuses on short-term corrective actions based on manually intensive efforts to produce reliable financial reporting at year-end. System interface controls are critical for ensuring the completeness and accuracy of data transferred between systems. Such efforts may not result in the desired results. The report also noted that the Marine Corps didn't develop a comprehensive corrective action plan for its financial reporting. not identify resources, roles and responsibilities, or include performance indicators to measure performance against action plan objectives. The Marine Corps reported that actions on 88 of the 139 recommendations were fully implemented. The completeness and effectiveness of most Marine Corps’ actions have not yet been tested. An effective remediation plan would help ensure that audit recommendations are fully addressed to deal with the short-term and long-term goals, the authors say. Because of the department’s complexity and magnitude, developing and developing such a plan is difficult. The Marine Corps’ Statement of Budgetary Resources audit effort can provide a roadmap to help other components better stage their audit readiness efforts. DOD components that have not yet received clean audit opinions are beginning to reap the benefits of strengthened controls and processes gained through ongoing efforts to improve their financial management operations and reporting capabilities. In August 2009, DOD’s Comptroller sought to further strengthen the financial management processes of the Marine Corps. The DOD Office of Inspector General, have achieved this goal and are working with other DOD components to strengthen their processes. The Marine Corps’ SBR Remediation Plan focused on individual initiatives to address 70 auditor Notices of Findings and Recommendations that included 139 recommendations. The plan did not assess risks, prioritize actions, or ensure that actions adequately responded to recommendations, the report found. The report found that the Marine Corps could routinely produce sound data on a timely basis for decision making. It also found that there was a need for improvements over the long term that would help ensure that the Corps produced sound data. The FIAR Guidance details the implementation of the methodology with an emphasis on internal controls and supporting documentation. The guidance directs the components to identify responsible organizations and personnel and establish effective and efficient financial management. It also provides the process for the components. to follow, through their individual Financial Improvement Plan (FIP), in assessing processes, controls, and systems; identifying and correcting weaknesses; assessing, validating, and sustaining corrective actions; and achieving full auditability. The FIAR guidance provides the. are changes at the senior leadership; therefore, it is paramount that the current initiative be institutionalized throughout the department. In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not establish a baseline of the department’s state of internal control and financial management weaknesses as its starting point. Such a baseline could be used to assess and plan for the necessary improvements and remediation to be used in measure incremental progress toward achieving estimated milestones for each DOD component and theDepartment. DOD currently is working on a plan to correct internal control weaknesses. reported, those efforts did not achieve their intended purpose of improving the department’s financial management operations. The FIAR Plan is in its sixth year and continues to evolve based on lessons learned, corrective actions, and policy changes that refine and build on the plan. The revised FIAR strategy is still in the early stages of implementation, and DOD has a long way and many long-standing challenges to go, the report says. The DOD Comptroller has expressed commitment to the FIAR goals, and established a focused approach, it says.  Problems with asset accountability can further complicate critical functions, such as planning for the current troop withdrawals. DOD introduced a new phased approach that divides progress toward achieving financial statement auditability into five waves (or phases) of concerted improvement activities. According to DOD, the components’ implementation of the methodology described in the 2010 FIAR Plan is essential to the success of the department’s efforts to ultimately achieve full financial statements auditability. To assist the components, DOD has developed a tool to help them implement the methodology. financial management improvement efforts. We currently have work in progress to assess implementation of the department’s FIAR strategy and efforts toward auditability. I would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the Subcommittee may have at this time. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Asif A. Khan, (202) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov. For more information on this hearing, please visit the GSA's website at: http://www.gsa.gov/. we found that weaknesses in the Navy and Air Force FIAR Plan implementation efforts indicate that the monitoring and oversight of such efforts have not been effective. For the two FIPs that we reviewed, neither individual officials nor the executive committees took sufficient action. As a result, the Navy concluded that its Civilian Pay was ready for audit, as did the Air Force with respect to its Military Equipment. The DOD Comptroller, who makes the final determination as to audit readiness, will make the final decision. necessary to align financial improvement and audit readiness efforts across the department. In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not have clear results-oriented whether an assessable unit is ready for audit. Both DOD and the components have established senior executive committees as well as designated officials at the appropriate levels to monitor and oversee their financial improvement efforts. Effective oversight and monitoring would also help ensure that lessons learned from recent efforts would be sufficiently disseminated throughout the department and applied to other financial improvement effort. metrics. DOD has taken action to begin defining results-oriented FIAR metrics. We have not yet had an opportunity to assess implementation of these metrics. Ensuring effective monitoring and oversight of progress will be key to bringing about effective implementation, through the components’ FIPs. However, as noted in our recent report, the components' control over the accuracy of supporting data is a key concern for us. We will continue to monitor the progress made by the components and provide updates as necessary. Long-standing and pervasive weaknesses in DOD’s financial management and related business processes and systems have left the department vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. GAO reported on this issue over 20 years ago, but the problems continue to persist. We have reported that continuing weaknesses in these business operations result in billions of dollars of wasted resources, reduced efficiency, ineffective performance, and inadequate accountability. In July 2010, we reported that although DOD and the military departments have efforts underway to begin addressing these financial management weaknesses, problems still exist. support of other business areas beyond the financial community before they could be fully addressed. DOD also requests billions of dollars each year to maintain its weapon systems. DOD has limited ability to identify, aggregate, and use financial management information for managing and controlling operating and support costs. Without timely, reliable, and useful financial information on cost, DOD management lacks information needed to accurately report on acquisition costs, allocate resources to programs, or evaluate program performance. In June 2010, we reported that the Army Budget Office lacked an adequate funds control process to provide it with ongoing funding. Before 1991, the military services and defense agencies independently managed their finance and accounting operations. According to DOD, these decentralized operations were highly inefficient and failed to produce reliable information. On November 26, 1990, DOD created the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) DFAS records these transactions in the accounting records, prepares thousands of reports used by managers throughout DOD and by the Congress. The military services play a vital role in that they authorize the expenditure of funds and are the source of most of the financial information needed by DFAS. travel- related expenses, paying contractors and vendors for goods and services, and collecting debts owed to DOD. In fiscal year 2010 DFAS processed approximately 198 million payment-related transactions and disbursed over $578 billion. DOD financial management was designated as a high-risk area by GAO in 1995. Pervasive deficiencies in financial management processes, according to the GAO, have led to DOD’s poor financial performance in the past. The DOD budget request for fiscal year 2012 calls for an increase in the number of DFAS employees to 5,000. implementing a comprehensive plan that identifies DOD’s internal control weaknesses will not be an easy task. It is a task that is critical to resolving the long-standing weaknesses and will require consistent management oversight and monitoring for it to be successful. Effective financial management in DOD will require a knowledgeable and skilled workforce that includes individuals who are trained and certified in accounting, well versed in government accounting practices and standards. Hiring and retaining such a skilled workforce is a challenge DOD must meet to succeed in its transformation. department had only discussed competency gap analyses for 3 mission-critical occupations. Financial management was not included in the department’s analysis. Until DOD analyzes personnel needs and gaps in the financial management area, it will not be in a position to develop an effective financial management recruitment, retention, and investment strategy. The department established a governance structure for the FIAR Plan, which includes review bodies for governance and oversight. The governance structure is intended to provide the vision and oversight for the plan. costs are basic financial management functions that are also key in analyzing areas for potential future savings. Without adequate financial management processes, systems, and controls, DOD components are at risk of reporting inaccurate, inconsistent, and unreliable data. The lack of effective internal controls hinders management’s ability to have reasonable assurance that their allocated resources are used effectively, properly, and in compliance with budget and appropriations law. Over the years, DOD has initiated several broad-based reform efforts to address its long-standing financial management weaknesses. budgetary information. To maintain accountability over the use of public funds, DOD must carry out financial management functions such as recording, tracking, and reporting its budgeted spending, actual spending, and the value of its assets and liabilities. DOD relies on a complex network of organizations and personnel to execute these functions. Also, its financial managers must work closely with other departmental personnel to ensure that transactions and events with financial consequences are properly monitored, controlled, and reported, in part, to ensure DOD does not misappropriate funds. focus efforts of the department and components, in order to achieve certain short- and long- term results. DOD revised its FIAR strategy and methodology to focus on the DOD Comptroller’s two priorities. Budgetary and asset information is widely used by DOD managers at all levels, so its reliability is important. GAO supports DOD's current approach of focusing and prioritizing efforts to achieve incremental progress in addressing weaknesses and making progress toward audit readiness. the Defense Logistics Agency, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force and the DefenseLogistics Agency are participating in the FIAR Plan. resource requirements for improvement work. In developing their plans, components use a standard template that comprises data fields aligned to the methodology. The consistent application of a standard methodology for assessing the components’ current financial management capabilities can help establish valid baselines against which to measure, sustain, and report progress. Improving the department’s financial management operations and thereby providing DOD management and the Congress more accurate and reliable information will not be an easy task. It is critical that the current initiatives being led by the DOD DCMO and the DOD Comptroller be successful. to ensure control over the valuation of new assets acquired. The existence and completeness of all mission assets are deemed effective on a go-forward basis. Given the lack of documentation to support the values of the department’s legacy assets, federal accounting standards allow for the use of alternative methods to provide reasonable estimates for the cost of these assets. The dual focus on budgetary and asset information offers the potential to obtain preliminary assessments regarding the effectiveness of current processes and controls and identify potential issues that may adversely impact subsequent waves. The financial transformation needed at DOD, and its removal from GAO’s high-risk list, is a long-term effort. Improving financial management will need to be a cross-functional endeavor; requiring improvements in some of DOD's other business operations. As acknowledged by DOD officials, sustained and active involvement of the department's CMO, DCMO, military departments’ CMOs, the DOD Comptroller, and other senior leaders is critical. Within every administration, there are successes and failures. The department is heading in the right direction and making progress, says GAO. Some of the most difficult challenges ahead lie in the effective implementation of the department’s strategy. GAO will continue to monitor the progress of and provide feedback on the status of DOD’S financial management efforts, the report says. The department and its military components are fully auditable, and DOD financial management is no longer considered high risk, says the report. The report says the department is making progress and is committed to improving its financial management. The department is facing near and long-term internal fiscal pressures. For more than a decade, DOD has dominated GAO’s list of federal programs and operations at high risk of being vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse. All of the DOD programs on the High-Risk List relate to business operations, including systems and processes related to management of contracts, finances, the supply chain, and other areas of the agency's operations. The department is trying to balance competing demands to support ongoing operations, rebuild readiness following extended military operations, and manage increasing personnel and health care costs. chief management officer (CMO) position and a comprehensive, enterprisewide business transformation plan. In May 2007, DOD designated the Deputy Secretary of Defense as the CMO. DOD financial managers are responsible for the functions of budgeting, financing, accounting for transactions and events, and reporting of financial and other activities. In addition, the National Defense Authorization Acts for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 contained provisions that codified the C MO and Deputy Chief Management Officer (DCMO) positions. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 directed DOD to develop a strategic plan to shape and improve the department’s civilian workforce. In developi the plan, the department identified financial management as one of its enterprisewide mission-critical occupations. Although some aspects of the legislative requirements were addressed, DOD still has significant work to do, the authors say. The plan included gap analyses related to the number of personnel needed for some of the mission- critical occupations, they say. We found that an obligation of $200 million in excess of available funds in the Army’s military personnel account violated the Antideficiency Act. The overobligation likely stemmed, in part, from lack of communication between Army Budget and program managers, we found. Army Budget did not know the actual amounts until it was too late to control the incurrence of excessive obligations in violation of the act. We found that at any given time in the fiscal year, Army Budget didn't know theactual amounts. obligation and expenditure levels of the account. Army Budget explained that it relies on estimated obligations. The lack of adequate process and system controls to maintain effective funds control impacted the Army’s ability to prevent, identify, correct, and report potential violations of the Antideficiency Act. In our February 2011 report on the Defense Centers of Excellence (DCOE), we found that TRICARE Management Activity (TMA) had misclassified $102.7 million of the nearly $112 million in DCOE advisory and assistance contract obligations. control and account for approximately $140 billion in annual spending. GFEBS is expected to be fully deployed during fiscal year 2012, is currently operational at 154 locations, including DFAS, and is being used by approximately 35,000 users. DEAMS is intended to provide the Air Force with the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities. It is expected. to maintain control and accountability for about $160 billion and is currently deployed at Scott Air Force Base and DFAS. The Air Force is currently using DEAMS at about 1,100 locations. reports are produced, the accuracy of those reports is questionable. The Army has plans to validate the audit readiness of GFEBS in a series of independent auditor examinations over the next several fiscal years. For DEAMS, the DOD Milestone Decision Authority has directed that the system is not to be deployed beyond Scott Air Force Base until the known system weaknesses have been corrected and the system has been independently tested to ensure that it is operating as intended. In closing, I am encouraged that the Army and Air Force have stated that they have plans to address these issues.  DFAS users have devised manual workarounds and several applications to obtain the information they need to perform their day-to-day tasks. The backlog of unresolved GFEBS trouble tickets has continued to increase from about 250 in September 2010 to approximately 400 in May 2011. According to Army officials, problems include issues with transactions or system performance that have not been resolved. To compensate, DFAS uses have devised several applications that provide information on how to use the systems to perform daily tasks. The Army and DFAS are taking steps to address issues raised by DFAS. Approximately two-thirds of invoice and receipt data must be manually entered into GFEBS from the invoicing and receiving system. DFAS personnel stated that manual data entry will eventually become infeasible due to increased quantities of data that will have to be manually entry. Army officials acknowledged that there is a need for the system to be updated to accommodate the growing number of users and transactions being processed by the system.  DFAS personnel stated that the problem is the result of a problem with the Wide Area Work Flow and GFEBS interface. Manual workarounds are needed to process certain accounts receivable transactions such as travel debts. The Army has recognized this limitation and is currently developing a system enhancement that they expect will better support the users’ needs. The Department of Defense is currently working with DFAS to resolve the problem, according to DFAS officials. The problem is believed to have been caused by an issue with the wide area work flow interface. of the data not being properly converted from the legacy systems to DEAMS. DFAS officials indicated that they were experiencing difficulty with some of the DEAMS system interfaces. For example, the interface problem with the Standard Procurement System has become so severe that the interface has been turned off, and the data must be manually entered into DeAMS. DEAMS does not provide the capability to produce ad hoc reports that can be used to perform the data analysis need to perform daily operations. They also noted that when some  implementation of an integrated, audit-ready systems environment underlies all of DOD’s financial improvement efforts. According to DOD, the successful implementation of the ERPs is not only critical for addressing long-standing weaknesses in financial management, but equally important for helping to resolve weaknesses in other high-risk areas. Successful implementation will support DOD by standardizing and streamlining its financial management and accounting systems. It will also integrate multiple logistics systems and finance processes, providing asset visibility for accountable items, and integrating personnel and pay systems. DOD has identified 10 ERPs as essential to its efforts to transform its business operations. We are currently reviewing the status of two of these ERPs. GFEBS is intended to support the Army’s standardized financial management and accounting practices for the general fund, except for funds related to the Army Corps of Engineers. The Army estimates that G FEBS will be used to deliver the promised capabilities on time and within budget. The Air Force is reviewing its Defense Enterprise Accounting and Management System (DEAMS) reported that the modernization program had spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an enterprise architecture and investment management structures that had limited value. Congress included provisions in the Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005 that were consistent with our recommendations. DOD continues to take steps to comply with the act’s provisions and to satisfy relevant system modernization management guidance. Until DOD fully implements these longstanding institutional modernization management controls its business systems modernization will likely remain a high-risk program, the report says. increased reprogramming thresholds granted to components that receive a positive audit opinion on their Statement of Budgetary Resources. Audit costs funded by the Office of the Secretary of Defense after a successful audit, and publicizing and rewarding components for successful audits. The challenge now is to evaluate and validate these and other incentives to determine their effectiveness and whether the right mix of incentives has been established. Well-defined enterprise architecture. For decades, DOD has been challenged in modernizing its timeworn business systems. Since 1995, we have designated DOD’s business systems modernization program as high risk. Long-standing challenges that we previously identified remain to be addressed. While DOD continues to release updates to its corporate enterprise architecture, the architecture has yet to be federated. In this regard, each of the military departments has made progress in managing its respective architecture program. There are still limitations in the scope and completeness, as well as the maturity of theMilitary departments’ architecture programs. For example, while each department has established or is in the process of establishing an executive committee with. Mission Critical Assets Existence and Completeness Audit focuses on ensuring that all assets that are recorded in the department’s accountable property systems of record exist. Wave 4—Full Audit Except for Legacy Asset Valuation includes the valuation assertion over new asset acquisitions. Wave 5—Full Financial Statement Audit focuses efforts on assessing and strengthening, as necessary, internal controls, processes, and business systems involved in supporting the valuations reported for legacy assets once efforts have been completed.include procure-to-pay, hire- to-retire, order-To-cash, and budget- To-Report. The first three waves focus on achieving the DOD Comptroller’s interim budgetary and asset accountability priorities, while the remaining two waves are intended to complete actions needed to achieve full financial statement auditability. Each wave focuses on assessing and strengthening internal controls and business systems. The department has not yet fully defined its strategy for completing waves 4 and 5. The next wave is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The Department of Defense is the largest taxpayer in the U.S., with a budget of more than $1 trillion. related to the stage of auditability addressed in the wave. Wave 1 focuses on the appropriations receipt and distribution process. Wave 2 focuses on supporting the budget-related data used for management decision making and reporting, including the Statement of Budgetary Resources. In addition to fund balance with Treasury reporting and reconciliation, other significant end-to-end business processes in this wave include budgeting, apportionment and sub-allotment activity within the department. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/government/audit/index.html#storylink=cpy. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.