The study concluded that without additional water management actions, a wide range of future imbalances in supply and demand are plausible. The completed Basin Studies also identified, with varying degrees of specificity, possible adaptation strategies to address the projected effects of climate change on water resources. The study noted that the purpose of identifying these strategies was not to select a single, best strategy, but rather to recognize that there are various ways to address projected water imbalancedances in the basin. Each approach has positive and negative implications that should be considered in future planning efforts. U.S. Global Change Research Program: Changes in the climate in the United States and its coastal waters have altered—and will continue to alter—the water cycle. Warming temperatures, changes in precipitation patterns, rising sea levels, and more frequent and intense storms affect water resources in a number of ways. Increased flooding in some areas and drought in others, and inundation and erosion in coastal areas. With aging water management infrastructure with limited funding for maintenance and construction. Precisely how and to when and how much water is available. navigation, and recreation; protecting life, health, and property in the face of risks posed by freshwater resources; and protecting coastal and ocean resources as rising sea levels and changes in storm frequency, intensity, and duration impact coastal infrastructure. Adaptation is defined by the National Research Council as adjustments in natural or human systems to a new or changing environment. It exploits beneficial opportunities or moderates negative effects, according to the council's definition of Adaptation. The National Institute of Standards and Technology has published a report on Adaptation to Climate Change. The report was published by the Institute of Science and Technology. Climate change has the potential to affect many aspects of the environment and society in which water resource management plays an active role. A 2011 federal interagency review of the potential impacts of climate change on water resources identified four interrelated areas of concern for water resource managers. Assuring an adequate water supply for multiple needs, such as drinking water, agriculture, energy production, industrial uses, is one of the areas of greatest concern to water managers. The U.S. Geological Survey says climate change is expected to continue and increase in intensity in some areas of the nation. need to be regularly monitored for effectiveness and plans need to incorporate new information about risks, lessons learned, and modified priorities. A 2009 study collaboratively produced by the Corps, NOAA, Reclamation, and USGS concluded that the options for responding to the effects of climate change will vary by location. evaluating options will likely require a partnership between federal, state, and local interests to attain consensus among water managers and users. In 2009, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers released a report on the state of the nation's water resources. training courses for federal and nonfederal resource management professionals. In 2012, the agencies implemented an online course on incorporating climate change into water resource planning. In 2013, the first two pilot residence courses were offered. The courses address climate impacts on surface hydrology and on water demand for irrigated crops. The online course was designed to provide students with waterresource planning knowledge, while the residence courses offer opportunities for gaining hands-on experience in applying that knowledge, according to the program’s website. The Corps, Reclamation, and others are collaborating in a number of efforts to incorporate climate science into water management tools. Reclamation is coleading two of Interior’s Landscape Conservation Cooperatives in the Colorado River Basin area. Interior is working to identify resources that are particularly vulnerable to climate change and implement coordinated adaptation responses for half of the nation by September 30, 2013. The Landscape conservation Cooperatives will provide products and services, such as climate change computer models and vulnerability assessments, to help resource managers put them into action on the ground. organizational culture, which are necessary elements for a collaborative working relationship. The Corps and Reclamation have made collaboration a key element of their adaptation policies and plans. The draft performance metrics for climate adaptation in the Corps’ 2013 Army Campaign Plan includes a target for the number of products developed in collaboration with other water resource agencies for adaptation planning and action. Under Interior’s 2013 Climate Change Adaptation Policy, Reclamation is to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its policies and practices by, among other actions. According to the website, these courses are collectively designed to provide a professional development and training series that will help managers assess climate change impacts across the spectrum of natural resources. The Corps and Reclamation have collaborated with each other and other agencies in a manner that is generally consistent with practices that we have previously identified as important to helping enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies. In 2005, we reported that collaboration—broadly defined as any joint activity that is intended to produce more public value than could be produced when organizations act. on its climate change adaptation pilots. Each study addresses a central question designed to help the Corps, officials say. For example, because the reliability of a planned flood reduction project could depend on how climate change affects future flooding, the Corps launched a pilot study. Based on the expert panel’s findings, the pilot team is integrating climate data into the Corps’ flood model to project future river conditions, they say. Corps officials told us that the information developed by the corps’ climate change climate change pilots is being incorporated into guidance. This pilot study’s results supports the Corps’ effort to design an approximately $1.8 billion flood risk reduction project on the Red River of the North. According to Corps officials, the pilot study successfully adapted existing tools and data to project future flooding. Corps officials told us that climate data indicated a trend of flooding consistent with climate change projections. In accordance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Flood Risk Reduction Program, the study was conducted on a pilot basis. The pilot study was designed to test existing guidance and contribute to the development of new guidance. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different methods and frameworks for adapting to climate change. Reclamation is conducting Basin Studies to develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. Both agencies have also begun integrating what they have learned into their Corps and Reclamation policies and program guidance. The Corps plans to initiate 1 additional pilot in 2013, according to the Corps’ September 2012 report. The agency’s goal is to create a policy and guidance framework that will support the implementation of practical, nationally consistent, legally justifiable, and cost-effective adaptation strategies. of climate change on the Corps’ business areas would likely be negative, positive, or a mix of both. The analysis found, for example, that increasing air temperatures may have an effect on glaciers that could negatively impact Corps business areas such as navigation, flood and coastal storm damage reduction, ecosystem restoration, and emergency management. As part of the high-level analysis, the Corps also identified a number of adaptation priorities. To address its priority of developing more refined policies, the Army Corps of Engineers has created a climate change action plan. specifically, policymakers are increasingly viewing adaptation as a risk-management strategy to protect vulnerable sectors and communities. Climate change adaptation planning frameworks generally consist of four key elements that are reviewed and revised as needed as new information emerges. These four elements are the following: Establish a mandate to address climate change with clearly articulated adaptation goals, objectives, and measures of success toward meeting goals. Assess and understand the risks, vulnerabilities, and opportunities posed by climate change by determining (1) what aspects of the climate are changing and over what periods. The Corps has constructed and continues to operate, maintain, and rehabilitate a large inventory and wide variety of water management infrastructure. Reclamation’s climate adaptation efforts fall within the larger effort by Interior to implement Executive Order 13514. In 2013, Interior adopted a policy directing the agency to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its operations, policies, programs, and planning. See appendix I for more information on the Corps’ and Reclamation's organization and infrastructure. and water supply, while reducing impacts of flood damages and other natural disasters. hoc responses, but other federal programs as well. As stated in a 2010 National Research Council report, increasing the nation’s ability to respond to a changing climate can be viewed as an insurance policy against climate change risks. Since 2009, as directed by executive order or required by law, the Corps and Reclamation have taken steps to assess water resource and infrastructure vulnerabilities. Officials from both agencies told us that as they develop the necessary guidance, they plan to implement specific adaptation strategies and share policies and program guidance. For over 230 years, the Corps has led the development and stewardship of much of the nation’s public water resources. The Corps’ Civil Works Program plans and manages water for transportation, recreation, energy, wildlife habitat, aquatic ecosystems, for climate change information and tools to support long-term planning for time scales of 5 years and more. The second document, published in 2013, described the data and tools needed to support short- term planning of less than 5 years. For both documents, the corps and Reclamation asked their water resource managers to identify the information and Tools most relevant to their programs. in the Interagency Climate Change Adaptation Task Force (Task Force), which was already developing a strategy for adaptation to climate change. In October 2010, the Task Force delivered a progress report to the President through the Council on Environmental Quality containing overarching policy goals to advance climate adaptation. The Task Force recommended the development of a national action plan to strengthen climate change adaptation for freshwater resources. Based on the work of the Task force, the Council of Environmental Quality was formed in October 2010. The Council ofEnvironmental Quality was established in November 2010. To address projected imbalances in supply and demand, the studies are to identify adaptation strategies. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way. Reclamation officials told us that they next intend to initiate feasibility studies for adaptation strategies identified in completed Basin Studies. See appendix II for additional information on the locations and results of Reclamation’s Basin Studies, as well as the results of the Basin Studies that have been conducted. agencies, including NOAA, USGS, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, to develop the plan. Reclamation policy officials stated that the Basin Study Program activities, including the WWCRAs and Basin Studies, are also contributing to the planning effort. A state water manager told us that a prior river basin planning effort had largely been unsuccessful due to the lack of involvement or opposition by environmental and tribal interests. These collaborative efforts can help ensure that the long-term water resource monitoring networks critical for detecting and quantifying climate change are established. adaptation pilots is also contributing to subsequent Corps studies. Climate change and modeling data for a pilot study of sediment impacts to Cochiti Dam and Lake in New Mexico is contributing to ongoing studies in the Corps’ Albuquerque District. Reclamation is partnering with nonfederal entities to conduct focused assessments, known as Basin Studies, to identify specific water resources. One is the Santa Clara Pueblo Watershed Assessment, which is studying observed climate trends and projected climate changes to address likely future changes to watershed hydrology. environmental and tribal interests, and several stakeholders commended Reclamation for working to ensure that the views of a wide range of stakeholders were considered in the Basin Studies. In addition to the individual named above, Elizabeth Erdmann, Assistant Director; Brad Dobbins; Richard Johnson; Mick Ray; Jeanette Soares; Lorelei St. James; and Sarah E. Veale made key contributions to this report. Nirmal Chaudhary, John Delicath, Cindy Gilbert, and Armetha Liles provided additional technical assistance. Reclamation reported to Congress in 2011 its assessments of the potential effects of climate change on water supplies in the major river basins in the West. Reclamation is now conducting WWCRAs that focus on future water demand. The combined assessments will be included in Reclamation’s next SECURE Water Act report that is due in 2016. These assessments will also be updated based on the latest climate science as water uses and conditions change, and they will be including in future reports that are due to Congress every 5 years. Reclamation intends to identify basin-wide water supply vulnerabilities, project climate change’s impacts on the performance of water infrastructure, and develop adaptation strategies. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way in western states. The studies will analyze how well existing water and power infrastructure are meeting current demands and then forecast their performance in light of projected water resources vulnerabilities. The SECURE Water Act requires Reclamation to consider and develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. Congress passed the SECURE Water Act, requiring Reclamation to establish a climate change adaptation program. To assess the effect of climate change, Reclamation must analyze the extent to which changes in water supply will impact several areas. Reclamation’s ability to deliver water to its customers, hydroelectric power generation, fish and wildlife habitat, and recreation are among the areas that will be affected by climate change. The law also requires the agency to assess specific risks to the water supply and develop strategies to address them. Congress and the Executive Office of the President have directed federal agencies to address the potential impacts of climate change. Reclamation has carried out its mission to manage, develop, and protect water and related resources in 17 western states. The agency has led or provided assistance in constructing most of the large dams and water diversion structures in the West for the purpose of developing water supplies for irrigation. In 2009, Reclamation directed its Office of Research and Development to take the lead in implementing the Responses to Climate Change Program. Corps’ infrastructure at acceptable levels of performance and efficiency. Most of Reclamation’s water infrastructure facilities are more than 50 years old. Despite the ongoing challenges of operating and maintaining aging infrastructure under budgetary constraints, it is important that the Corps and Reclamation address the challenge of managing climate change risk in order to limit the fiscal exposure of the federal government. As noted in our 2013 high-risk update, climate change is a significant threat to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. supply of each of its major river basins, including risks related to, among other things, changes in snow cover and the timing and quantity of runoff. To develop strategies to address impacts, the law requires Reclamation, in consultation with nonfederal stakeholders such as appropriate state water resource agencies, to consider and develop appropriate strategies to mitigate the impacts of water supply changes. Also in 2009, the President signed Executive Order 13514, Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance. nongovernmental stakeholders. Both agencies have already initiated cost-sharing and resource-leveraging measures. The agencies plan to continue such collaborative approaches going forward. In 2009, the Corps and Reclamation—with its CCAWWG partners NOAA and USGS—published a study, In 2009,. The Corps is leveraging resources for adaptation pilot studies with state, local, and nongovernmentally entities. Reclamation is splitting the cost of Basin Studies with state and local partners. For example, as required under the SECURE Water Act, Reclamation officials told us they intend to share the Cost of the feasibility studies for adaptation strategies equally with nonfederal partners. hours of energy per year. In 2011, Reclamation, estimated that the replacement value of its assets was approximately $90 billion. About two-thirds of the assets in Reclamation’s inventory are “transferred works’ The Corps is conducting pilot studies nationwide to support the development of adaptation guidance and guidance. The Corps was founded in 1864 and is based in San Francisco. It is now based in Los Angeles and has offices in San Diego, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. No structural or operational adaptation strategies have been implemented in response to the agency’s vulnerability assessments. Corps and Reclamation officials told us that because they are early in the adaptation process, the extent to which limited budgets and existing infrastructure maintenance backlogs will affect the implementation of adaptation strategies remains to be determined. The implementation ofadaptation strategies by both agencies will likely rely on collaborative sharing of costs and resources with federal, state, local, and and state agencies. The agency's efforts to update guidance will be informed by the adaptation strategy feasibility studies as they are completed. poses a significant financial risk to the federal government, including, but not limited to its role as the owner or operator of extensive infrastructure vulnerable to climate impacts. State and local authorities are responsible for planning and implementing many types of infrastructure projects. While implementing adaptive strategies to protect infrastructure may be costly, there is a growing recognition that the cost of inaction could be greater and more difficult to manage given expected budget pressures, which will constrain not just future projects but also present and future spending on infrastructure. Formal agreement to provide funding to USGS to operate stream gauges. This data is also available for use by all federal and state agencies, as well as others interested in water information. Reclamation policy officials told us, in response to a SECURE Water Act requirement to consult with federal and applicable state agencies to develop a monitoring plan for acquiring and maintaining water resources information. Agency staff are currently identifying information needs and plans to work collaboratively with data collecting, Reclamation officials tell us. same time the data collected and compiled by the water management agencies for a specific purpose can be used by the science agencies for alternative objectives. Outside of CCAWWG, as mentioned elsewhere in this report, the agencies have also followed key collaborative practices, such as the Corps leveraging resources to fund maintenance of the USGS’s stream- flow monitoring networks. Reclamation establishing joint strategies with state agencies and others to conduct Basin Studies. We provided a draft of this product for review and comment to the Departments of Defense and the Interior. need for observational data to support climate adaptation is increasing. In recent decades, maintenance of long-term monitoring networks has declined. USGS alone has deactivated or discontinued almost 1,700 surface-water stream gauges. Corps Civil Works officials told us that stream gauge data is extremely important to the Corps’ ongoing operations. To ensure the needed data is collected, the Corps has a to ensure that the neededData is collected. The data is used to produce the climate change information upon which the Corps bases its adaptation planning. The Corps-hosted Federal Support Toolbox is now publicly available online. According to Corps Civil Works officials, the website is a “one stop shop” for technical resources to support water programs and facilities. The Corps and NOAA are coleading actions to implement the Task Force recommendation to develop a federal Internet portal to provide current, relevant, and high-quality information on water resources and climate change data applications and tools for assessing the vulnerability of water programs to climate change. The portal is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The Corps and Reclamation are collaborating as coleaders in developing and implementing a training program as recommended by the Task Force’s National Action Plan: Priorities for Managing Freshwater Resources in a Changing Environment. The Toolbox is an evolving and comprehensive water resources data portal with direct links to valuable databases, innovative programs and initiatives, and state-of-the-art models and tools. These agencies—joined by NOAA, USGS, and the Environmental Protection Agency—are collaborating with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research and the Western Water Assessment. The Corps is engaged in collaborative efforts with external partners to integrate climate science into planning tools for water resource managers. For example, the Corps partnered with NOAA’s National Ocean Service to create an online sea level change calculator. The Corps Civil Works officials also told us that collaboration with the Federal Emergency Management Agency contributed to the development of a post-Superstorm Sandy sea level rise tool to be used in coastal projects. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is based in San Diego. In 2009, the CCAWWG partners jointly produced a preliminary assessment of how climate could impact federal water resources management. Large portions of the Corps’ water resources infrastructure were built over 50 years ago and are experiencing various stages of decay and disrepair. The report also found that federal funding over the past 20 years has consistently been inadequate to maintain the (referred to in this report as the C CAWWG study) This study identified several challenges that climate change poses for water resource managers. CCAWWG has clearly defined common objectives, including the development of working level relationships between federal water management and federal science agencies. The CCAWWG agencies also have mutually reinforcing strategies. For example, the operating needs of the Corps and Reclamation drive the direction of science inquiries by the science agencies, resulting in improved operations. USGS and NOAA will jointly prepare the companion documents, incorporating perspectives from other federal and nonfederal representatives of the scientific community. According to the 2009 CCA WWG study, at the same time as the for collaboration among agencies. Program is implemented through nine business areas that represent the diversity of the nation’s water resource management needs. These include Navigation, Flood and Coastal Storm Damage Reduction, Hydropower, Recreation, Emergency Management, Water Supply and Executive Direction and Management. The program also provides leadership, strategic planning and executive direction and management for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Army National Guard. For more information on the program, visit www.ArmyNavy.com. For information on how to get involved, visit ArmyNavyProgram.org or call 1-800-273-8255. The Corps has a large inventory and wide variety of water management infrastructure. As of September 2012, its inventory includes 702 reservoirs and 75 hydropower facilities. In the area of navigation, the Corps’ inventory includes 12,000 miles of commercial inland waterways, 193 lock sites with 239 chambers, and 926 harbors. For flood measurement.performance measurement, visit the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ website at: http://www.usace.org/flood. reduction, the Corps inventory includes 14,501 miles of levee systems. In 2012, the National Research Council reported that the Corps’ infrastructure had an estimated value of approximately $164 billion. The Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is, according to agency records, the nation's largest wholesale water supplier. The Bureau provides water to over 31 million people and irrigation water to one out of five western farmers on 10 million acres of farm land. which produce 60 percent of the nation’s vegetables and one-quarter of its fresh fruit and nut crops. Reclamation is also the second largest producer of hydropower in the United States. According to agency records as of 2011, Reclamation’'s asset inventory includes 476 dams and dikes, creating 337 reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 245 million acre-feet of water. These plants provide an average of more than 40 megawatt of power. To carry out its mission and operations, the agency is organized into five regions. vulnerability assessments, the Corps is currently undertaking coastal project vulnerability assessments. The Corps is developing and testing a methodology for nationwide, watershed-level vulnerability assessments of its inland missions, operations, programs, and projects. The agency officials expect to complete the first phase of screening assessments in 2013, with more refined assessments to come in future years. Ultimately, the corps plans to combine the coastal and inland assessments into a unified methodology. The nationwide vulnerability assessments will, according to Corps officials, help them make initial screening-level determinations of where adaptation strategies are needed or not needed. The 15 pilots are led by 13 different Corps districts and address project planning, engineering, operations, and maintenance for 6 different Corps business areas. Some of the pilots are being conducted collaboratively with federal, state, and university partners. Taken together, Corps officials expect the pilot projects to provide a body of knowledge and tested methods that will serve as the foundation for its guidance and future adaptation. For more information, visit the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' website or go to www.usace.org. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) is composed of four program areas including Civil Works, Military Construction, Real Estate, and Research and Development. To carry out its Civil Works missions nationwide, the program is organized into eight geographic divisions composed of 38 districts. Division and district geographic boundaries are generally aligned with watershed boundaries. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III.may be found on the last page of this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. alone—can be enhanced and sustained by engaging in eight key practices. These include defining and articulating a common outcome, establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies, and identifying and addressing needs by leveraging resources. Running throughout these practices are a number of factors, such as leadership, trust, and performance management systems, according to the authors of the book, "Collaboration: The Art of Collaboration in the 21st Century" The authors say these practices can be applied to a variety of fields, including business, education, health care, and government. were incorporated, as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretaries of Defense and the Interior; the appropriate congressional committees; and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841.