the upcoming 1996-97 program year, it is too early to determine their impact. Corporation award (adjusted) $12,071,004 $31,881,332 $3,470,008 $2,333,452 (Table notes on next page) The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check. For more information about this testimony, please call Wayne B. Upshaw at (202) 512-7006. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. The U.S. General Accounting Office is located at P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. of other program costs, including participant training, education, and uniforms. Staff salaries, travel, transportation, supplies, and equipment; and program evaluation and administrative costs. If participants leave the program during the year, the Corporation may either allow the program to redirect participant stipend and benefit funds to other program expenses or take back any unused portion of the grant. To ensure that federal Corporation dollars are used to leverage other resources for program support, grantees must also obtain support from non-Corporation sources. program operating costs from 25 to 33 percent for grants awarded for the 1996-97 program year. The Corporation’s revised grant guidelines also seek to reduce costs by encouraging a program requesting increased funding to add additional participants, thereby reducing its cost per participant. The guidelines also encourage programs to seek additional funding only for education awards. It means cash and in-kind contributions that pay participants’ living allowances, social security taxes, health insurance, child care, and the education awards they earn in exchange for their service. a state or local government source, with the split between cash and in-kind contributions being about 43 percent ( about $57 million) and 26 percent (about $34 million), respectively. The remaining 31 percent of matching resources were from private sources. Nonfederal AmeriCorps*USA grantees received resources of less than $800. Non-Corporation federal funds accounted for about 50 percent of total resources available to federal grantees. This amounted to about $16 per service hour or in- Kind contributions from sources other than the Corporation. to help pay for the program. This support, which can be cash or in-kind contributions, may come from other federal sources as well as state and local governments, and private sources. Some federal agencies received grants during the initial 2 program years to support AmeriCorps*USA participants who performed work furthering the agencies’ missions. Since we completed our review, the Congress and the Corporation have undertaken a number of measures that are intended to reduce the costs of Ameri corps. about $20 per direct service hour, assuming 20 percent of the 1,700 hours of total service was nondirect service time. Because most AmeriCorps*USA programs were still implementing their first year of operations, actual cost could not be determined. We calculated available resources per participant on a full-time-equivalent (FTE) basis. It is important not to equate our funding information with cost data. These figures represent resources available for all program expenses and are not the equivalent of annual salaries or hourly wages for participants.  Selection of participants is not based on financial need. Corporation used about $149 million of its fiscal year 1994 appropriations to make about 300 grants to nonprofit organizations and federal, state, and local government agencies. Most of the Corporation’s funding for AmeriCorps*USA projects went to providing operating grants and education awards. About 69 percent of all matching resources came from either a federal or state or local government source, according to the program's website. The program is funded by donations from individuals, corporations, foundations, foundations and individuals. Congress also mandated that GAO further study the Corporation’s operations. The Corporation has revised its grant application guidelines for programs receiving funding in the upcoming 1996-97 program year. In response to congressional concerns over the cost of mandating the purchase and use of uniforms, the AmeriCorps*USA uniform package (t-shirt, sweatshirt, button, and so on) is no longer a program requirement. The corporation also has directed grantees exceeding a program year 1995-96 cost per participant of $13,800 to reduce their proposed program year1996-97 per-participant costs by an overall average of 10 percent. reduced tuition. Half of the participants have chosen to do so. A second program allowed participants to earn 36 credit hours toward an associate’s degree in the natural sciences through their service, which can lead to state certification as an environmental restoration technician. On the legislative side, the Congress mandated new funding restrictions for the Corporation. The Corporation, after consulting with Members of Congress, has revised its grant guidelines. These new measures will only apply to AmeriCorps members who have completed their service. per participant from non-Corporation federal sources, or about 3 percent of their total resources. The appendix contains more detailed program resource information by sponsoring agency. AmeriCorps*USA has also sponsored an evaluation of its own that summarized results at a sample of programs during their first 5 months of operation. The evaluation identified diverse achievements related to each service area. Participants renovating inner-city housing, assisting in the construction of new homes, and helping with other community service projects. They also helped with community clean-ups and clean-up efforts. Team built a community farm market and renovated a municipal stadium. Participants of several programs spanned a wide age range, from teenagers to retirees. Teams also showed diversity in educational, economic, and ethnic backgrounds. Participants said that a valuable aspect of the program was working with others with different backgrounds and benefiting from their strengths. Another of AmeriCorps*USA’s program objectives was to foster civic responsibility. The program is funded by the federal government. For more information on the Americorps* USA program, visit www.corps-usa.org. AmeriCorps’s legislation identified renewing the spirit of community as an objective. We observed several projects focused on rebuilding communities. For example, a multifamily house being renovated was formerly a congregating spot for drug dealers. Program officials believe that after completion, it will encourage other neighborhood improvements. Another project was maintaining and reestablishing native vegetation in a flood control area, analyzing neighborhood crime statistics to better target prevention measures, and developing a program in a community food bank for people with special dietary needs. We saw evidence of this at programs such as one where participants devoted half of each Friday to working on community service projects. Participants at another program, in which they organized meetings to establish relationships between at-risk youth and elderly people, commented that this work had taught them how to organize programs. Training periods included conflict resolution techniques and team-building skills. At the sites we visited, participants indicated that the education award was an important part of the program. education or job training. We hope to see more of these programs in the future. AmeriCorps*USA is the largest national and community service program since the Civilian Conservation Corps of the 1930s. Participants earn education awards to help pay for postsecondary education in exchange for performing community service that matches priorities established by the Corporation. A minimum of 1,700 hours of service within a year is required to earn the full $4,725 award. The Corporation requires that programs devote some portion of the award to community service. The award is for full-time service or half of that amount for part- time service. AmeriCorps*USA participants receive a living allowance stipend that is at least equal to, but no more than double, the average annual living allowance received by Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA) participants. Additional benefits include health insurance and child care assistance for participants who need them. Individuals can join a national service program before, during, or after postsecondary education. A participant must be a citizen, a national, or a lawful permanent resident of the United States. but no more than 20 percent, of participants’ service hours to nondirect service activities, such as training or studying for the equivalent of a high school diploma. To earn a part-time award, a participant must perform 900 hours of community service within 2 years. Individuals can serve more than two terms; however, they can only receive two education awards. The awards, which are held in trust by the U.S. Treasury, are paid directly to qualified postsecondary institutions or student loan lenders. of their decision to participate in AmeriCorps*USA. Programs also supported participants in obtaining high school diplomas or the equivalent. According to Corporation regulations, a full-time participant who does not have a high school diploma or its equivalent generally must agree to earn one or the other before using the education award. In one program, a general equivalency diploma (GED) candidate was receiving classroom instruction and individual tutoring. She had recently passed the preliminary GED test after failing the Ged test five times. larger program that recruited at-risk youth, most of whom do not have high school diplomas. Program officials said most of the participants are enrolled in high school equivalency courses. We also saw programs that offer participants the chance to get postsecondary academic credit. One such program, affiliated with a private college, offered participants the option of pursuing an environmental studies curriculum through which they can earn up to six upper-level credits at a college. The program is free and available to the public.