The 13 ERS airfields are located mostly in Europe and throughout the Pacific. Each is planned to be within an area 3,500 nautical miles from the U.S. and from the war zones. DOD selected the 13 bases according to their proximity to the anticipated war zones, the host nation’s willingness to allow the use of its bases, and other factors such as climate. The ERS also provides the capabilities needed to handle ongoing peacetime operations and requirements associated with smaller-scale contingency operations. Mobilization of U.S. forces for such conflicts requires a global system of integrated land, sea, and air resources. The fleet of civilian and military passenger and cargo aircraft and the En Route System (ERS) airfields provide the critical air component. ERS airfields are normally staffed for the peacetime flow of aircraft. Additional personnel and equipment would be brought in to handle the increased flow of Aircraft in the event of contingency operations or full-scale war.. According to DOD’s January 2001 estimate, the 13 ERS. airfields would not currently have enough capacity to move the required amounts of personnel and. strategic operations. Conflicts can and do occur. In the late 1980s, the European Command had planned to return U.S. facilities at two ERS airfields to the host nations. Transportation Command officials believed the airfields were needed for mobilizations to the Middle East. The airfield facilities were ultimately retained. Overall management of a particular E RS airfield is shared between the command with responsibility for that geographical area and the military service that operates the airfield on a daily basis. The ERS airfields are in Europe, but their purpose is to act as a conduit for aircraft headed to war zones in the Middle East. While the unified commands have some management responsibilities for the airfields, they have no funding programs for base operations and construction. The military services and the Defense Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. For example, the Air Force provides funds for the operation of its E RS airfield in Fairford, England. If the base command is in charge of the airfield, it may act as an advocate for it. Operation of the ERS airfields is shared between the host nation, which owns the airfield, and a number of DOD organizations. Host nation responsibilities vary and are documented in the Status of Forces Agreement for each country. U.S. organizations with responsibility for the airfields include the Air Force, who provides day-to-day operations for all but two of the air fields. According to officials, while space is sometimes shared, it is not shared with the host country and is usually owned by the host. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates the airfield in Rota, Spain; and the Marines operate the air field in Iwakuni, Japan. The airfields are located on bases owned by the host country, under agreements for support negotiated by the State Department. Each military service must operate theAirfield in accordance with its primary service mission. However, each service must also manage the Airfield in according with the policies set forth by the geographical command. These commands are responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests in their particular ERS-related areas. The Transportation Command has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System. However, it is not in charge of the ERS airfields and can provide only limited funding for repair and improvement projects. The needs of the geographical commands (such as the European, Central, and Pacific commands) take precedence over those of the functional commands. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization may also use the bases to assist in carrying out its war-fighting responsibilities. Both commands may act as advocates for the resource needs of ERS. region and for planning and maintaining war-fighting capabilities in the event of an outbreak of hostilities. They include component commands drawn from each of the military services to manage the support associated with each. These commands may act as an advocate for ERS needs consistent with their contribution to the commands’ mission of maintaining war fighting capabilities. In Europe, both the European Navy and U.S. Air Forces Europe provide support for their naval and air bases in the region. In the Pacific, the Navy’s Pacific Fleet, Marine Forces Pacific, and Pacific Air Forces provide similar support. Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials play some combination of three basic roles: owner/manager, funder, and/or advocate in support of various ERS needs. The Transportation Command has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System, with the airlift portion handled by its air component. The Air Mobility command uses the ERS airfields to help provide aerial refueling and airlift through its fleet of air tankers and cargo. It plans and coordinates movements through the overall transportation system. A formal, written strategic plan that lays out missions and goals, guiding principles and priorities, performance measures, and monitoring mechanisms is also needed. This plan would help ensure that ERS operations are governed by a coherent worldwide vision and not by limited regional or service notions and perspectives. Without the vision and order provided by a formal strategic plan, decisionmakers do not have the information they need to ensure ERS resources and operations are focused on the right goals and outcomes. Without a system for ongoing monitoring of key aspects of ERS Operations, decisionmaking does not take place. ERS needs a better management structure, report says. Some elements of ERS operations are individually managed by various organizations and processes. Report: “robust” management in one or even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated overall management structure. Our recommendation is intended to assign responsibility for overarching issues, such as development of an overall strategic plan, the authors say. The report recommends that ERS develop an overarching strategic plan for the future of the ERS organization and for all of its operations. ERS. Management of the ERS is fragmented among at least four unified commands and six subcommands, three services, host nations, and other organizations. No organization is responsible for formally coordinating and overseeing overall ERS operations. The growth in importance of the En Route System has not been matched by a commensurate improvement in its performance. The European and Pacific Commands established separate steering committees to provide a forum for coordination and resolution of ERS issues in each region. The Transportation Command co-chairs both steering committees. Establishing the European and Pacific steering committees was an important first step in organizing regional operations. While the war-fighting responsibilities and authorities of the geographical commands must be respected, one overarching organization with responsibility for strategic operations during peacetime is needed. Without such structure ERS operations are prone to a higher risk of inefficiency in the form of confusing and overlapping lines of authority and accountability for key decisions, the authors say. They also warn of a lack of coordination and duplication of effort among responsible organizations, and wasteful competition forinformation and management structures. Contributors are the Defense Logistics Agency and the Air Force Operation and Maintenance and Military Construction programs. It is unclear whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. According to Transportation Command officials, funding for the projects covered by U.S. programs has been formally requested through the DOD budget process. About 19 percent of funding was associated with projects that had either begun or completed work, compared to about 10 percent of host nation and allied funding. The ERS only recently has the ERS begun to receive high priority for funding. DOD infrastructure is grossly under funded, with facilities currently funded for replacement every 250 years. Projects planned in later years are more vulnerable to funding changes since they have not yet been spent. Officials also note that host nation involvement in funding can create some uncertainty in construction timetables. For example, DOD had to reassign fiscal year 2002 funding for construction projects at one ERS airfield in Europe to other DOD projects because of the host nation's involvement in the project. (See p. 18 for a discussion of DOD problems in infrastructure management.) U.S. Air Forces Europe would validate the project and request funding through the various programs available. The Defense Logistics Agency has responsibility for funding fuels projects across all services. In deciding whether to include a project in funding requests, the services and the Defense Logistic Agency assign their own priorities to the project. For more information, go to www.airfors Europe.org. In the U.S., call the National Air Force Foundation on 1-800-273-8255. DOD plans call for about 55 percent of the $2 billion in ERS construction funding to come from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and host nations. Japan has provided some $21 billion for projects under this program, which started in 1979 to ease the financial burden of stationing U.S. forces in Japan. The remaining 45 percent ($878 million) is expected toCome from a variety of U.s. programs (see table 1). The largest ERS project is the Air Force’s F/A-18 Super Hornet. Most (58 percent) of the costs are associated with bases in the Pacific region. Host nations and U.S. allies are expected to fund about 55 percent of the total. It is unclear whether all the projects will be completed as planned, as the projects must compete with each other and with other DOD projects for funding and face other uncertainties. Since the end of the.review in July 2000, the Pentagon has spent more than $1.2 trillion on military operations in the Middle East and Africa. of a 2- to 3-year delay in host government approval of funding requirements. According to officials, the host government was concerned about sovereignty issues involved in its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Formal approval has now been received for these projects, and funding has been shifted by about 1 year. Most of the projects have not yet started construction. As of October 2000, about 4 percent ($75.0 million) of total funding had been spent on completed projects with another 10 percent ($194.6 million) spent on projects in progress. The Airlift Flow Model only knows what cargo is available for pickup at the moment. An optimization model would be aware of all cargo available throughout the mission being modeled. In a situation where 10 tons of cargo are ready to be loaded right now and 40 more tons several hours in the future, the Airl lift Flow Model would schedule an aircraft to pick up the 10-ton cargo immediately since it is focused on current conditions. An optimized model would likely wait a few hours until an aircraft was loaded with all 50 tons before sending it off. A DOD-sponsored study predicted that by redistributing the existing ramp space and fuel, DOD could boost cargo deliveries by an estimated 12 to 13 percent. A second DOD- sponsored study used an optimization model to analyze the impact of proposed construction projects designed to increase the fuel handling capacity at ERS bases. The study concluded that the increase in throughput capacity provided by the projects would be small. However, a better distribution of ERS resources could significantly increase the flow of cargo compared with the flow predicted by the Airlift Flow Model. shortfall, the model DOD uses to simulate ERS operations could overestimate the size of the shortfall. Air Mobility Command officials acknowledge that the Airlift Flow Model, although designed to simulate or describe complex systems, does not necessarily identify the best or optimal solution to mobilization requirements. The model repeatedly simulates cargo movements until it reaches a solution to the identified mission, but the solution may or may not be the optimal one. There are other types of models, called optimization models, that officials say are designed to seek thebest or optimal solutions. labor intensive, making the models relatively inflexible and slow, and that it is difficult to introduce variables into analyses. Officials from the Office of the Secretary of Defense stated, however, that because optimization models show promise, DOD is continuing to sponsor projects to further develop their use. We were unable to quantify the overall impact of the Airlift Flow Model on the U.S. Air Force's ability to mobilize troops in the event of an emergency. The Air Mobility Command believes that by repeated analyses over time using their model, they were able to identify the best solutions for mobilization missions. DOD officials believe that optimization models have promise, but also believe that they have drawbacks. They did not use them to analyze the ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005. optimization models can come to unrealistic conclusions because they cannot simulate random events. They may use information (such as longer-range plans for an entire mobilization) that may not be available to commanders early in the mobilization. Using existing resources more effectively may be the best way to increase fuel deliveries. Officials further state that loading data into optimized models can be very difficult. real time, readily available information needed to quickly identify and correct problems. DOD also needs to develop an overall cost-benefit study of its construction plans for the ERS. DOD’s annual requests for funds contain no evidence that projects are prioritized by importance, the authors say. DOD disagreed with our recommendation to include information on ERS limitations in its annual performance plan and report, they say. The authors say DOD needs to ensure that the guiding principles and rationales at play in allocating scarce funding dollars are not lost in the budget process. Despite concerns about aging and deteriorating facilities and equipment, the ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide data on deterioration and failure rates. DOD believes the guidance it provides through the planning and budgeting process is sufficient to optimize the list of construction projects to be funded. We disagree. We understand that developing a formal cost-benefit analysis of the overall ERS infrastructure is difficult. However, our experience has shown that it is possible to do a formal study of the entire ERS and its infrastructure. the European and Pacific Steering committees and the Inspector General. We obtained lists of construction projects at each ERS airfield and analyzed them from a number of different perspectives. To determine whether the ERS has the information and organizational structure needed to ensure that its operations are carried out efficiently and effectively, we analyzed data and reports on a variety of basic management issues. We identified all organizations with information gaps and discussed information gaps with DOD officials. We also discussed the total costs by base, by region, and systemwide. gaps in DOD’s overall strategic planning processes that have led to difficulties in assessing performance in a variety of areas. As a result, we have classified DOD strategic planning as a major management challenge. DOD has reduced force structure since the end of the Cold War, but has not achieved similar reductions in infrastructure costs. DOD acknowledges that it has not been spending enough money to offset the growing backlog of facilities maintenance and repair. We also classified DOD management of support infrastructure as aMajor Management Challenge. Mobility Requirements Study 2005 is identified as the ERS “Infrastructure Analysis,” not as a strategic plan. It is simply an analysis of current shortfalls in capacity and whether planned construction projects will remedy those shortfalls by 2005. The analysis does not include many of the elements needed for sound strategic plans, which need to lay out missions and goals, necessary resources, assigned responsibilities for accomplishing goals, priorities and strategies to be followed, and performance measures for gauging progress toward identified goals. In addition, the analysis doesn't identify the expected cost to remedy the capacity. shortfalls, or the organizational or procedural responsibilities for achieving ERS goals. The analysis does not identify priorities between regions, bases, or projects to help identify strategies to be followed in case of funding or other problems. It simply assumes that projects will be completed on schedule without any measures of actual progress. In fact, during our review Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials could not tell us how many projects were under way. The U.S. Air Force is the world's largest air force. DOD officials say the process was focused on satisfying mission war-fighting requirements while attempting to minimize costs where possible. An overall cost-benefit analysis was not done, they said, because the ERS evolved over many years in response to changing military and political conditions. Officials stated that they attempted to make cost-effective decisions by, for example, using different combinations of bases. The planned $2 billion in projects represent the best solutions for correcting the shortfall, officials said. It is not known if any of the planned projects will be completed. performance report gives an incomplete and misleading view of strategic mobility capabilities. DOD also disagreed with our description of the growth in estimated costs for improving the ERS. DOD stated that the different cost estimates we were provided are not directly comparable because they were produced several years apart and were premised on different sets of bases and analytical methodologies. Our report clearly lays out these differences. DOD further claimed that we were using the comparison to point to “unexplained” cost growth. Whether DOD was aware of the reasons behind the increased estimate was not the primary point we made. long-term plans and strategies, guiding policies, and operating priorities for the ERS. DOD does not include information on ERS shortfalls in its reports on the performance of the overall strategic mobility system. DOD needs to ensure that ERS problems and issues receive a visibility consistent with their critical strategic importance. Efforts to reduce shortages of DOD cargo aircraft will have to be stepped up, the authors say. The study would also serve as a useful review of ERS construction plans and projects in light of the ongoing review of the National Military Strategy. cost-benefit study, and monitoring system—to one organization to help provide a clear, coordinated, and comprehensive management structure for all ERS operations. DOD said it would nevertheless try to improve the integration, presentation, and documentation of the plan to help with its integration and documentation. DOD partially agreed with our recommendation to develop an overall ERS strategic plan and monitoring System. It stated that the recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005 already includes a strategic plan for the ERS. It should be noted that during our review this recommendation received strong support from officials at organizations currently involved in ERS Operations. outside organizations understand its provisions. We disagree that the January 2001 Mobility Requirements Study 2005 contains a strategic plan for the ERS. There seems to be some confusion in DOD over this issue. During the course of our review we asked repeatedly for copies of any strategic plan and DOD officials repeatedly told us that no formal strategic plan existed. In fact, during our formal closeout meeting in April 2001 officials told usthat a formal strategicPlan was being developed as a result of ourreview. The document cited by DOD in the 2001 January 2001 document is not the one cited in the 2005 document. DOD has no formal strategic plan for the ERS. Without such a plan, DOD does not have the information or management structure needed to ensure the success of the program. Sound strategic planning is crucial to achieving program success, the authors say. Over the years, they say, they have noted similar problems with the U.S. intelligence community's research into the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq and Afghanistan. The authors: ISIL's mission and goals should be clearly laid out in a strategic plan. Cold War, many U.S. military locations overseas have been closed and their personnel relocated to bases in the continental United States. Transportation Command officials state that with this drawdown in the 1990s, the ERS lost many of its facilities and much of its flexibility. Today, ERS has access to only 13 locations, compared with 45 in the early 1990s. As a result, the remaining bases have become much more important as the only airfield options available for en- route mobilization support. Air Mobility Command leaders realized how critical the airfields were. To publicize the problem and obtain higher priority, the Air Mobility Command proclaimed 1997 the “Year of the En Route System” However, even with the increased priority, officials told us that it still takes many years to move projects through the budget. The U.S. Air Force has more than 2,000 airfields across the world. The Air Force is home to more than 100,000 military personnel, including more than 1,000 Air Force families. example, choosing to repair or improve existing bases rather than building new ones. Because of the age of the facilities, many of the planned projects had already been identified and justified in the military construction budgeting process. Despite concerns about aging and deteriorating facilities, Transportation Command officials also told us that they could not provide data on deterioration and failure rates. The ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide readily available, up-to-date data on the condition and readiness of the airfields, officials said. were trying to make. DOD did not know how much it would cost to bring ERS capacity up to requirements because it does not monitor overall costs. Air Mobility Command officials had to make a special query to all the commands to find out what the current costs were and whether they had changed over previous estimates. We believe that the lack of a strategy or system for monitoring contributed to the delay in providing an updated estimate late in our review. Officials responded that obtaining such an update would be very labor intensive and time consuming. ERS capacity was about $1.2 billion for fiscal years 1997 through 2006. Shortly after that the estimate was changed to $2.0 billion. The increase reflects changes in the bases making up the ERS since the mid-1990s. Transportation Command officials told us that most ERS airfields were built during or immediately after World War II, and most were built in the 1940s and 1950s. The Air Mobility Command agreed to query all of the various commands involved to determine the current cost to eliminate the shortfall. The $2 billion will fund repairs and improvements to fuel systems, runways, ramp space, and other base elements. The largest construction cost category is associated with fuel system repair and improvement. According to Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials, the standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were designed and built during the early 1950s and had an estimated life span of 30 to 40 years. At some bases refueling must be carried out by trucks, rather than airplanes. Some components were built by host nations even earlier. by more modern pipeline and hydrant systems. At other bases, hydrants are antiquated or have deteriorating lines that slow and sometimes interrupt fueling operations altogether. Bases in the Pacific region total about $1.14 billion (58 percent) compared to about $825 million (42 percent) for the European bases. Officials emphasize that the proposed projects are intended largely to replace capability lost due to deterioration or base closures. In fact, only 25 of the 516 projects provide additional capacity. equipment to the war zones in the time required (the specific requirements and capacities are classified) DOD expects the shortfall to be largely eliminated by 2005. But the assumptions and modeling approach DOD uses in its calculations raise some uncertainty about the precise size of the shortfall. Some study assumptions tend to underestimate the shortfall, while the modeling approach used could overestimate it. The net effect of these factors on estimates of ERS capacity in 2005 is unclear.. DOD’s latest estimate of. ERS construction to eliminate the shortfall consists of 516 projects and costs about $2 billion. Some of the study’s assumptions tend to underestimate the size of the shortfall. Despite concerns about their old age and deteriorating condition, DOD assumes that ERS airfields would operate without breaking down. Capacity requirements for the ERS could be raised even higher if other ongoing missions (such as peacekeeping) were added. A similar strategy is being considered for the Pacific, but it has not yet been approved. The study at least partially offsets these assumptions by calculating the capacity of ERS bases in Europe. The Congress may wish to consider directing the Secretary of Defense to implement the recommendations. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD generally disagreed with our conclusions and recommendations. DOD stated that our report asserted that the approach it used is “flawed” and overestimates the shortfalls. DOD believes that it has applied the best tools available and that it will continue to refine its capabilities, as new modeling tools become available. The Congress may want to report on DOD’s progress to ensure that these prudent improvements to ERS management are carried out. have misunderstood our point. Our report does not assert that the modeling approach was flawed or that it overstated the shortfall. We state that the assumptions and modeling approaches DOD used could underestimate or overestimate the size of the shortfall, but that we could not measure the precise effect of these factors on DOD’s estimate. We point out the uncertainties of both approaches—including DOD officials’ comments on the pros and cons of each—so that the reader can clearly understand the degree of precision in DOD's estimate. is important to fully consider all options in such analyses to ensure that, should an optimal solution be available, it is identified. DOD also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the Honorable Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defense. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (757) 552-8100 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. limited impact if those aircraft do not have adequate airfields to land on. To improve the visibility of the ERS and reduce the risk of management problems and inefficiencies, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense: make one organization responsible for strategic management and coordination of overall ERS operations during peacetime. develop a formal strategic plan and monitoring system for the E RS. develop an overall cost-benefit study to document the rationales for plans to repair and improve the EARS, and include information on ERS limitations in DOD’s performance plan and report. the project in terms of its relative contribution to their own missions, as well as its contribution to the overall Department of Defense mission. To determine whether the ERS airfields have the capacity needed to meet the requirements of the National Military Strategy, we obtained briefings, reviewed documents, and interviewed officials at the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the RAND Corporation, and the Naval Postgraduate School. Much of our analysis was focused on the U.S. Transportation Command, the European Command and the Central Command. responsibility for or management duties at ERS airfields and reviewed the scope of their individual responsibilities with DOD officials. We conducted our review from July 2000 through April 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to those named above, Katherine Chenault, Lawrence E. Dixon, Richard G. Payne, Stefano Petrucci, and Gregory J. Symons, made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. DOD does not include data on ERS shortfalls in the report, despite the major effect such shortfalls have on airlift capacity. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up the funding needed to ensure that critical assets such as the ERS airfields are adequately funded. Omitting ERS information from the key annual report would be a mistake, the authors say. The ERS is an integral aspect of strategic mobility, they say. In fact, Air Mobility Command reports cite ERS infrastructure as the top limiting factor in deployment operations.  requirements could raise airlift capacity requirements by about 7 percent. The ability of the ERS to handle this extra requirement, however, is unclear. Officials were unsure when this issue would be tackled. We did not independently verify DOD’s estimate of system capacity. We reviewed the processes DOD used to identify deficiencies and corrective actions and discussed them with officials at the offices identified above, as well as at DOD”s Office of the Inspector General.i.com: Do you know a hero? Nominations are open for 2013 CNN Heroes. recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005, which estimated the mobility assets and supporting infrastructure needed to deploy for the two-war scenario. The study concluded that current capacity is significantly short of requirements but that improvements to the ERS would largely eliminate the shortfall by 2005. According to DOD officials, the effect of the shortfall would be that required military forces and equipment would arrive in the war zones later than planned, increasing the risk of operations not being executed as planned and of higher casualties. It is estimated the shortfall will be less than $1 billion.