GAO: The federal government’s system for providing assistance to low- income people is highly fragmented. Each federal assistance program usually has its own eligibility criteria, application, documentation requirements, and time frames. A review of federally assisted transportation services for “transportation- disadvantaged” seniors found that 5 federal agencies administer 15 programs. Service providers told GAO that certain characteristics of federal programs can impede the implementation of practices that enhance senior mobility, the report says.. The report concludes that agencies often face the range of barriers to coordination that they often face. Section 502 Rural Housing Loans (Direct) Section 502 Direct Housing Natural Disaster Loans Section 502 Guaranteed Rural Housing loans Section 504 Rural Housing Repair and Rehabilitation Loans Section 515 Rural Rental Housing Loans. Section 521 Rural Rented Assistance (Section 8 and Rent Supplement) (inactive) Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation (in active) Section 207 Mortgage Insurance for Manufactured Home Parks Section 207/223(f) mortgage Insurance for Existing Multifamily Properties. Section 213 Mortgage insurance for Cooperatives Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market Below- market. Before fiscal year 1992, the Section 202 program also supported the development of housing for the disabled. The Section 515 program’s Congregate Housing subprogram requires properties to provide supportive services. Section 221(d)(3) Mortgage Insurance Section 236 Mortgage Insurance and Interest Reduction Payments (inactive) Section 236 (d)(4) mortgage insurance and interest reduction payments (in active) Section 221 (d) mortgage Insurance and interest Reduction Payments ($1,000 to $1,500) ($2,500 to $5,000) Housing developments can be assisted by multiple programs. In general, both HUD and USDA programs target families at lower income levels. HUD has specific goals for increasing housing opportunities for the elderly. Only 4 of 23 housing assistance programs require property owners to provide supportive services to the elderly, according to HUD’s 2004 Annual Performance Plan. It is the only federal housing program that targets all of its rental units for elderly households with very low incomes.. It subsidizes the development and operating costs of multifamily properties for elderly Households with Very Low Incomes.  HUD administers four service-related programs that can be used in conjunction with subsidized housing programs. The Congregate Housing Services Program provides grants for the delivery of meals and nonmedical supportive services to elderly and disabled residents of public and multifamily housing. The Neighborhood Networks program encourages property owners, managers, and residents to provide supportive services or ensure appropriate services are available in the community. While HUD provides up to 40 percent of the cost of supportive services, grantees must pay at least 50 percent. according to the type of facility. USDA’s Section 515 Program, which provides loans to construct or to purchase and substantially rehabilitate multifamily rental or cooperative housing and recreational facilities in rural communities. Tenants eligible to live in program properties may also receive rental assistance through HUD or USDA programs. The Congregate Housing subprogram funds the development of assisted, group living environments that must provide meals, transportation, housekeeping, personal services and recreational and social activities. Generally, HUD and USDA do not provide funding for the services required under these housing programs.  HUD’s Assisted Living Conversion Program provides private nonprofit owners of eligible properties with grants to convert some or all of their units into assisted living facilities for the frail elderly. Applicants for Section 202 funding must demonstrate that services will be available at the development or in the community where new construction is proposed. The facilities must provide supportive services such as personal care, transportation, meals, housekeeping, and laundry. The reconfigured facilities must include enough community space to accommodate a central kitchen or dining area, lounges, and recreation. of HUD-insured and -assisted housing to develop computer centers. HUD does not fund each center’s planned costs but encourages property owners to seek cash grants, in-kind support, and donations from sources such as state and local governments, educational institutions, private foundations, and corporations. The ROSS grant program links public housing residents with appropriate services. This program differs from the Service Coordinator Program in that it is designed specifically for public housingResidents. The program is free and open to the public. In Plain City, Ohio, residents of a Section 515 property receive meals five times a week in the community’s senior center. A local hospital donates the food and a nursing home facility prepares it. The senior center uses the funds collected from the lunch for its activities. In Carolina, Dolan Manor, a Section 202 housing development, has established a relationship with a volunteer group from a local church. The volunteer group provides a variety of services such as transportation for the residents. Guthrie Properties, also a Section 515 property, has established a relationship with the local Area Agency on Aging. The agency assists residents of Guthrie Properties in obtaining a variety of services, including meals and transportation to a senior center. Some elderly residents of public and federally subsidized housing may also obtain health-related services through programs run by HHS. For example, HHS’s Public Housing Primary Care Program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health care. The United Way provides most of the funding for the senior center in Guthrie. the Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) Waiver Program, which is administered by HHS’s Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. HUD has identified these waivers as an innovative model for assisting the frail elderly in public housing. In addition, eligible elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may receive health care through the Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) Like the HCBS waiver program, this program, like PACE, is also administered by the CDC. enables eligible elderly individuals to obtain needed services without having to live in an institutional setting. The program integrates Medicare and Medicaid financing to provide comprehensive, coordinated care to older adults eligible for nursing homes. Figure 1 provides information on the housing assistance programs that can use federally funded supportive services programs that assist the elderly. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions at this time. For further information on this testimony, please contact David G. Wood at (202) 512-8678. Mortgage Insurance Program provides mortgage insurance for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of nursing homes, intermediate care facilities, board and care homes. All insured facilities must provide supportive services, but these services vary. All facilities must be designed for frail elderly persons who need assistance with at least 3 activities of daily living. The program is funded by the U.S. Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Association (FHLM). FHLM is the largest mortgage insurer in the United States, with $1.2 trillion in insured mortgages. increasing the number of elderly households living in privately owned, federally assisted multifamily housing served by a service coordinator. (4) increasing elderly families’ satisfaction with their Section 202 units. USDA does not have specific goals related to the elderly in its fiscal year 2004 Annual Performance Plan. As GAO has previously reported, virtually all the results that the federal government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of two or more agencies. This shared responsibility is an outgrowth of several factors, including the piecemeal evolution of federal programs and service delivery efforts. owners and local organizations and through programs provided by HHS. For example, property owners can establish relationships with local nonprofit organizations, including churches, to ensure that residents have access to the services that they need. In Greensboro, North Carolina, we found several examples of such partnerships. At their discretion, propertyOwners may establish relationships that give the elderly access to meals, transportation, and housekeeping and personal care services. Although GAO did not obtain data on the extent to which such services are made available at all public and federally subsidized multifamily housing, in site visits to HUD and USDA multifamily properties, we find several examples. ROSS program has five funding categories, including Resident Service Delivery Models for the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities. Resident Services funds can be used to hire a project coordinator and assess residents’ needs for supportive services. The Elderly/Disabled Service Coordinator Program has not provided new grants since 1995 but still services existing grants. The Service coordinator program provides funding for managers of multifamily properties designated for the elderly and disabled. The program is funded by federal, state, and local assistance programs. to hire coordinators to assist residents in obtaining supportive services from community agencies. Service coordinators can be funded through competitive grant funds, residual receipts (excess income from a property), or rent increases. According to HUD’s fiscal year 2003 Performance and Accountability Report, service coordinators were serving more than 111,000 units in elderly properties. Elderly residents of public and federally subsidized multifamily housing can also receive supportive services through partnerships between property owners and community agencies, according to HUD. The program awards grants to public and nonprofit private entities to establish the clinics. The organizations must work with public housing authorities to obtain the physical space for the clinics and to establish relationships with residents. Currently, there are 35 grantees, 3 of which are in rural areas. According to a program administrator, although clinics are not specifically geared toward public housing designated for the elderly, they can be established at such properties. Elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the program's assistance.