to impose a new recordkeeping requirement (continued) Names and addresses of persons arrested Information specifically not required unless otherwise provided by law: names of persons reporting, victims, witnesses, or uncharged suspects or other information related to investigation. Information may be withheld upon certification of need to protect the investigation, but in no event after the arrest. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are available for purchase at www.gao.gov/gao-report. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. $2 each. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) the law in 1990, the Department issued various policy guidance documents on campus security to help colleges meet the law’s requirements. Most of the guidance was issued as Department letters. Final implementing regulations took effect in July 1994. The Department supplemented its policy guidance with technical assistance provided upon request by its Customer Support Branch. To help colleges achieve compliance, the Dept. emphasizes providing such assistance, rather than imposing sanctions. Under Department policy, the Secretary imposes sanctions only if a college flagrantly or intentionally violates the regulations. Department has yet to issue guidance for independent auditors who conduct federally required annual audits of all colleges participating in title IV programs. As of August 1996, only six audits had documented noncompliance on security matters since the act took effect. Most auditors participating in training sessions held in regional Inspector General offices were unaware of campus security reporting requirements. Department plans to issue an updated audit guide that will explicitly refer to campus security compliance and instruct auditors to ensure that campus security reports are prepared and distributed according to federal requirements. Most of the nearly 2,800 title IV program reviews conducted between September 1992 and May 1996 found noncompliance. Only 24 of these reviews identified campus security violations. Department officials told us that monitoring had generally been limited to checking whether colleges published a campus security report and had procedures for its distribution. Since no review of campus security was conducted, no guidance was issued on how to monitor campus security in title IV programs. 1996. Department’s program reviewers had not emphasized monitoring campus security reports in their title IV reviews. compliance, including more thoroughly examining the statistics and, if warranted, taking formal administrative action. As of January 1997, the Department had received five complaints of noncompliance. One precipitated an in-depth campus security compliance review; the other four complaints are still being investigated. Reasons for the difficulty include reviewers’ limited experience in dealing with law enforcement matters, uncertainties about how to interpret certain definitions of reportable crimes, and differences among campuses that make evaluation difficult under a single set of program. Eight states require public access to campus police or security department records on reported crimes. In all but Minnesota, the laws in general apply to all institutions of higher education, public and private. Three of the eight states have laws specifically requiring campus safety authorities to maintain daily logs open to public inspection. The remaining five, while not prescribing the log format, require disclosure of information similar to that required to make arrests. The law applies only to public colleges, while Minnesota’s law applies to public universities. state statutes and spoke with representatives of campus safety and other interest groups as well as faculty specializing in criminal justice. Names and addresses of arrested persons and charges against them Exempts from disclosure incidents involving certain types of handicapped persons, which are to be separately maintained. Public and private campuses (under the state’s Campus Security Act, private colleges’ police departments are public agencies for the limited purpose of crime enforcement) Records must be open, if kept; the intent is not. Congress would have required more detailed and current campus security records to be made accessible to the public. Although a hearing was held in the House, no further action was taken before the session’s end. Had the bills been enacted, they would have applied to colleges with police or security departments and required the colleges to maintain open-to-the-public, easily understood daily logs. The bills were modeled after a law that has been in effect in Tennessee since the 1990s, when the state passed a similar law. be kept in the logs. Many prohibit publication of the names of victims or of victims of sex-related crimes. Many also include some type of provision protecting witnesses, informants, or information that might jeopardize an ongoing investigation. California, Pennsylvania, and Oklahoma specifically provide for penalties for failing to keep logs in order to protect victims. The laws also differ in a number of other respects, such as the following: Florida, New Jersey, New York, New Mexico, Oregon, and Texas. All 50 states have open records or "sunshine" laws, most of which require public institutions' records to be open to the public unless they are specifically exempted. For example, Colorado’s open records law declares that it is public policy that all state records be open for inspection, including all writings made, maintained, or kept by the state. These laws generally provide that if records are kept, they must be open; the laws are not intended to impose a new recordkeeping requirement.  Campus law enforcement officials differ as to whether their reported statistics must include crimes reported to them by other campus authorities. For example, according to comments the Department received during rulemaking, students are sometimes more comfortable reporting incidents through academic rather than law enforcement channels. Even incidents reported to campus authorities other thanlaw enforcement officials may be included in the campus crime statistics as long as information identifying the persons involved is not disclosed. But reporting such incidents in the statistics is not required under a Department interpretation of the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act. According to that interpretation, colleges may exclude from their statistics those incidents that campus law enforcement Officials cannot cannot. For three crime categories, the law requires statistics on the number of arrests. Uniformity of statistics can be affected to some degree by school policies. Three law enforcement officials told us that offenses are less likely to result in arrests on campuses that do not have security departments with security departments. For example, one campus security report we reviewed contained a footnote to the effect that liquor-law violations were frequently adjudicated through campus judicial procedures and, therefore, would not be included in the arrest statistics. In contrast, six reports indicated that incidents reported to local police were included. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act requires that crime statistics include on-campus occurrences reported to local police. Of the 25 reports we reviewed, 1 specifically stated that it did not include incidents reported to police. The fact that the incidents need not be reported is reflected by variations in campus security reports. Some reports excluded information from non-law-enforcement sources for which no personally identifiable information was provided. The data may have been incomplete or incompatible because of differences in safety officials’ access to information, insistence on verifiable data, or both. Of the reports we reviewed, 15 incorrectly categorized offenses. Colleges are not required to distinguish between forcible and nonforcible offenses. Seven of the reports labeled incidents resulting in death as homicides, but the law requires the term “murders.” Because homicide is not as specific a term, the use of this broader category could obscure the actual number of murders. The Department’s regulations for the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act require colleges to report statistics on murders and forcible rapes. had occurred, had been properly classified, or had been counted only once. At some colleges, security officials do not receive even unverifiable statistics from counselors. Officials at five colleges said counselors are not required to or generally do not report incidents to them. Although colleges’ statistical reports included most of the prescribed criminal reporting categories, reporting officials appeared to have difficulty principally with two categories: sex offenses and murder. In 60 percent of the cases, the crimes were not reported to the proper office. noncompliance; the other states do not specify penalties. Only California includes a specific reference to occurrences involving hate; in fact, California’s law requires inclusion of noncriminal hate-related incidents. For more information on the eight laws, see appendix II. We also agreed to determine whether any legal challenges had been raised to state open campus crime log laws and whether the effectiveness of such laws had been studied. We did not find any reported cases challenging these laws or any studies of their positive or negative effects. We interviewed officials at 27 colleges selected from a judgmental sample of colleges from the following four groups. Members of the International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators (IACLEA)—Ten Colleges. Chief law enforcement officials at eight member colleges, one in each of the eight states with open campus. One chief law enforcement official at eight IACLEa member colleges. One law enforcement officer at one member college, one from each state with open campuses. One police officer at the University of Delaware, also a past president of IacLEA. police log laws. We spoke to heads of campus security at eight non-IACLEA colleges. All eight colleges had an enrollment exceeding 1,000 students. We randomly selected colleges, with enrollments exceeding 1,.000 students, that participated in title IV programs from the Department’s Integrated Integrated Programs. We selected six 4-year and two 2-year colleges representing all eight states with open log laws and spoke to their heads of security. We also selected seven colleges in States Without Open Log Laws. technical assistance to implement the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act. We received statistical reports from 25 colleges and evaluated them to determine the extent to which the reports conformed to crime reporting requirements prescribed in the act. We did not trace the numbers to source documents to check their accuracy or completeness. We also searched the literature and reported case law to determine whether any studies had been done on the effects of or legal challenges to state open log laws. Although a federal open crime log law could offer more timely access result of a crime statistic complaint. to information on campus crime and a means of verifying the accuracy of schools’ statistical reports. Such logs would continue to reflect the inherent differences among colleges apparent in the summary statistics currently required by the act. For example, such logs might not include off-campus incidents or, without an amendment to FERPA, incidents that students report through non-law-enforcement channels. The Department of Education generally agreed with our basic conclusions and provided us a number of technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. 1994. Department implementation of the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act’s reporting requirements has included issuing regulations and disseminating policy guidance to colleges. Department was late in issuing a required report to the Congress. Under the new monitoring guidance, program reviewers must check a college’S crime report for all required information and should attempt to evaluate the procedures used to collect crime data. The accuracy of crime statistics need not be verified unless it becomes apparent from a complaint or some other source that the security report may be incomplete or inaccurate. Of the 25 reports we reviewed, only 2 provided information in all the prescribed Postsecondary Education Data System, stratified by type of college and geographic region. The chiefs of campus security at these seven colleges composed the third group of officials interviewed. We included two other colleges for information on complaints regarding crime statistics. The Department plans to evaluate whether additional actions are needed at the federal level. We include the first of these because a complaint had been lodged against that college. we included the second college because it was subject to the same state crime reporting system as another college. The consistency and completeness of campus crime reporting envisioned under the act have been difficult to attain for two primary reasons. The differing characteristics of colleges, such as their location in an urban or other setting,affect the colleges’ ability to provide a complete and consistent picture of incidents that occur on their campuses. Some confusion exists about reporting requirements, particularly about how certain categories of crimes are to be classified. The Department originally relied mostly on its regulations, letters to colleges, and other sources. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act of 1990 and its implementing regulations require colleges to publish and distribute an annual security report. The law also requires colleges to provide timely warning to the campus community about crimes that are considered to represent a threat to other students and employees. According to a 1996 publication of the Student Press Law Center, 11 states have laws requiring schools to compile and release statistics on campus crime. Two bills—H.R. 2416 and S. 2065—introduced in the 104th Congress. We interviewed officials at the Department’s headquarters and regional offices. We analyzed pertinent regulations, policy guidance, and other documents. To determine the actions the Department of Education has taken to implement and monitor compliance with the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act, we interviewed officials. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Education, appropriate congressional committees and other interested parties. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-7014 or Joseph J. Eglin, Jr., Assistant Director.