length of the closeout process can vary with the extent of oversight performed by the agency during the period of performance and the contract type. CMS officials told us that during fiscal year 2008, OAGM closed 581 contracts and reduced the overdue backlog to 400 contracts (from 407 reported at the end of fiscal year 2007) Yet O AGM officials could not provide support for these closures or a list of the contracts overdue for closeout. As of July 29, 2009, the total backlog of contracts eligible forCloseout was 1,611, with 594 overdue based and overdue for Closeout. CMS did not timely perform contract closeout procedures resulting in a backlog of 1,300 contracts, of which 407 were overdue for closeout as of September 30, 2007. We recommended that CMS develop a plan to reduce the number of contracts in the backlog. CMS did not provide us a closeout plan for fiscal year 2008 and the fiscal year 2009 plan was insufficient. Specifically, the plan did not include a comprehensive strategy to reduction the backlog of 4,000 contracts. Further training on invoice review procedures will be necessary. Since September 30, 2007, the number of contracts eligible for closeout has increased by 24 percent. Contract file document checklist employed by CMS at the time of our review identified key documents that may be included in a contract file. This checklist is usually completed by either the contract specialist or the contract manager. The contract file checklist was used to identify key documents for inclusion in the contract file for the first time in 2007. The document checklist was last used in 2007 and was used again in 2009. For more information, visit www.cms.gov. contracts that are eligible and overdue for closeout nor did it contain a workload analysis. The FAR establishes time standards for closing out a contract after the work is physically completed. The closeout process is an important internal control, in part, because it is generally the last opportunity for the government to detect and recover any improper payments. This is a substantial increase over the balances at the end of fiscal year 2007. Also, the total contract value of contracts eligible for closeouts has increased from $3 billion to at least $3.8 billion. The contract life cycle includes many acquisition and administrative activities. Prior to award, an agency identifies a need; develops a requirements package; determines the method of contracting. After contract award, the agency performs contract administration and contract closeout. Contract administration involves monitoring the contractor’s performance as well as reviewing and approving (or disapproving) the contractors’ request to be awarded a contract. It also involves monitoring and approving the contractor's request to work on a project for the federal government. The contract closeout process involves verifying that the goods or services were provided and that administrative matters are completed. Other tasks may include audits or reviews of the contractor’s costs and compliance with CAS. Agencies may choose among different contract types to acquire goods and services. This choice is the principal means that agencies have for allocating risk between the government and the contractor. Contract types can be grouped into three broad categories: fixed price contracts, fixed-price contracts, and long-term contracts. CMS reported total obligations for CMS contracts in fiscal year 2008 were $3.6 billion. This amount includes obligations against contracts that process Medicare claims. As of September 1, 2009, 19 contracts have been awarded to Medicare Administrative Contractors, totaling about $1 billion in obligations to date. Obligations for other- than-claims processing activities, such as the year 2007, have decreased approximately 16 percent since 1998. CMS is required to complete Medicare contracting reform by 2011, and is responsible for developing policy and regulations. the FAR, to the FAR environment through the award of contracts to Medicare Administrative Contractors. CMS projected that the transition, referred to as Medicare contracting reform, would produce administrative cost savings due to the effects of competition and contract consolidation. The transition would subject millions of dollars of CMS acquisitions to the rules, standards, and requirements for the award, administration, and termination of government contracts in the FAR. Obligations to the new Medicare administrative Contractors were first made in fiscal year 2009-10. 1-800 help line, information technology and financial management initiatives, and program management and consulting services, have increased 466 percent. These trends may be explained in part by recent changes to the Medicare program. MMA required CMS to transition its Medicare claims processing contracts, which generally did not follow Medicare claims. These specialized contractors, such as beneficiary contact center contractors and enterprise data center contractors, are categorized below as other-than-claims processing contractors, as shown in figure 1. services such as data centers, and certain financial management activities, have moved from fiscal intermediaries and carriers to specialized contractors. Health and Human Services, Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and interested congressional committees. Copies will also be available to others on request. Report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9095 or dalykl@gao,gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs are found on the last page of this report. of this magnitude. Audits and inquiries into the issues we identified in our report should be made as soon as possible. We acknowledge that the time frames for implementing the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 added schedule pressures for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) At the same time, the compressed time frames and resulting contracting practices added risk to the contracting process. Many of the findings in the November 2007 report were a result of the 2003 Act. and Phil McIntyre (Assistant Directors) Sharon Byrd, Richard Cambosos, Abe Dymond, Patrick Frey, Jason Kelly, John Lopez, Ron Schwenn, Omar Torres, Ruth Walk, and Danietta Williams are also on the board of directors. The board includes members of the New York City Council, the City Council of New York, and the New Jersey City Council. The Board of Directors is made up of seven members, including the mayor, the city council president, the mayor's wife, the deputy mayor and the vice mayor. a streamlined set of audits and reviews, thereby enabling them to receive and perform government contracts. Develop policies and procedures that clearly assign roles and responsibilities for the timely fulfillment of CFA duties, and that include the preparation of and periodic update of a list of contractors for which the department is the CFA. In written comments on a draft of this report (reprinted in their entirety in appendix III), CMS and HHS agreed with each of our 10 new recommendations and described steps planned to address them. CFA duties were not clear among HHS and its components, including CMS. NIH was assigned responsibility to establish indirect rates for the contractors under HHS’s cognizance. HHS officials said that they did not have a process to identify the contractors for which HHS would be the CFA. Without a list that is periodically updated, HHS does not know which contractors need CFA oversight, the report says. The report also says that HHS components and contracting officers are responsible for other CFA duties. when NIH can not perform the reviews within the needed time frames to make timely contract awards, CMS’s cost/price team establishes the rates. The confusion over roles and responsibilities increases the risk that CFA responsibilities are not being timely performed, if at all. Without effective coordination, contractors may not receive the necessary oversight and the government may not be positioned to protect itself from the risk of improper payments or waste. The risks of not performing CFA duties are exacerbated by the fact that other federal agencies that use the same contractors rely on the oversight. to meet the government’s needs within a ceiling price. A T&M contract may be used only if the contracting officer prepares a determination and findings that no other contract type is suitable. In addition, since these contracts provide no positive profit incentive for the contractor to control costs or use labor efficiently, the government must conduct appropriate surveillance of contractor performance to ensure efficient methods and effective cost controls are being used. The FAR defines cognizant federal agency (CFA) as the agency responsible for the pre-award contract activities that we identified as needing improvement, nor does it delineate the roles and responsibilities of the different staff involved in the contracting process. The deficiencies identified in this report, especially those associated with FAR requirements unique to specific contract types, further highlight the need for additional guidance for contracting officers. Roles and responsibilities for implementation of CFA responsibilities not clearly defined. The FAR requires that CFAs perform certain oversight and monitoring activities. The CFA concept provides an efficient way for contractors to receive contracts. of improper payments or waste before they occur. A key concept introduced in our standards is that control activities selected for implementation be cost beneficial. A control activity can be preventive, detective, or both based on when the control occurs in the contract life cycle. We found pervasive deficiencies in internal control over contracting and payments to contractors. The internal control deficiencies occurred throughout the contracting process, that is both pre- and post-award, and increase the risk of improper payments. These deficiencies were due in part to The high percentage of deficiencies indicates a serious failure of control procedures over FAR-based acquisitions. This creates a heightened risk of making improper payments or waste. We determined a control to be “key” based on our review of the standards for internal control as well as the FAR, HHSAR, and agency policies. We also took into consideration prior audit findings and the contract types CMS most frequently used. See appendix I for additional details on the controls we tested and the statistical sample results. one instance in which a key control was not adequately implemented. Many contract actions had more than one deficiency. At least 37.2 percent of FAR-based contract actions made in fiscal year 2008 had three or more instances of not being implemented. The controls ranged from ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of a cost reimbursement contract to certifying invoices for payment. The U.S. Air Force is one of the largest military contractors in the world, with more than 1,000 employees. a cost reimbursement contract to certifying invoices for payment. We selected controls to test based on our review of GAO’s standards for internal control, the Federal Acquisition Regulation requirements, and agency policies and procedures. The controls we tested are key to effective administration of the contract in that the lack of implementation would significantly increase the risk of improper payments or waste. To test internal control procedures over contract actions, we selected a stratified random sample of 102 contract actions totaling $140.7 million in fiscal year 2008. all the contract actions in the sample frame, including those that were not selected. Results from this statistical sample were projected to the population of contract actions made from October 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. We also obtained information from agency officials regarding contract closeout, cognizant federal agency responsibilities, audit funding, and staff resources. See table 2 for specific details related to contract actions selected in the Sample. sample item. Table 3 provides further details on the control procedures we tested and the criteria or source for the procedure. of the contract action for the purpose of providing a basis for informed decisions at each step in the acquisition process, and providing information for reviews and investigations. Incomplete or inadequate contract files and documentation hinder the ability of the contracting officers to perform their oversight duties, especially those who assume responsibility for contracts that have changed hands. Clearly documenting the history of a contract action is an important tool that provides management with assurance that the agency has complied with applicable regulations and has made well-informed decisions for efficient contract management. of its FAR-based contracting operations, including the number of certain contract types awarded, the extent of competition achieved, and total contract value. Standards for internal control provide that for an agency to manage its operations, it must have relevant, reliable, and timely information relating to the extent and nature of its operations. Both operational and financial data should be recorded and communicated to management and others within the agency who need it and in a form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their internal control and operational responsibilities. OFM does not review purchase card transactions for fraud or inappropriate use, but instead pays the purchase card invoice based on the authorizing official’s approval. Standards for internal control call for transactions and other significant events to be clearly documented, and the documentation should be readily available for examination. In addition, the FAR provides that the documentation in the contract files shall be sufficient to constitute a complete history. During the tests of control procedures, we observed that the contracts did not always contain all required documentation to support the contract actions we reviewed. internal controls that are and can be instituted by agencies to help safeguard assets, prevent and detect fraud and errors. As described in appendix I, we selected 11 controls that we determined to be “key” based on GAO’s standards for internal control, the FAR and HHSAR. CMS stated its belief that “virtually all” of the errors we identified related to “perceived documentation deficiencies.” “Virtually all,” is the key word. CMS stated it was encouraged that the errors we found did not involve more substantive departures from the FAR or HHSAR. A number of the findings we identified during the testing of a statistically valid sample of contract files involved the lack of documentation that the controls were performed. Lack of documentation reduces management’s ability to ascertain whether these important controls were appropriately implemented. The internal controls we tested are key to ensuring that contracting activities, both pre and post-award, mitigate risks to the federal government. OAGM management’s downplaying of the overall message of the report—that control deficiencies are pervasive—further illustrates the weak internal control environment. Setting an appropriate control environment, especially “tone at the top,” is key to ensuring that staff take all appropriate steps to mitigate risk and protect tax dollars from fraud, waste, and abuse. CMS also stated that a reasonable amount of time had not yet elapsed since the issuance of our November 2007 report to allow for corrective actions to have taken place. A significant number of our current report findings, including weaknesses in the system, are a serious internal control deficiency. of this report. The historical obligation amounts presented in the background section of the report come primarily from CMS’s PRISM database. We requested comments on a draft of this report from HHS and CMS. We received written comments on October 2, 2009, and have summarized those comments in the Agency Comments and Our Evaluation section ofthis report. Our response to certain specific CMS comments appears in the GAO Comments section of appendix III. We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, Government provide framework for establishing and maintaining internal control. Management should establish both a supportive overall control environment and specific control activities. A positive control environment provides discipline and structure as well as a climate supportive of quality internal control, and includes an assessment of the risks of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. It also includes an environment that sets a positive and supportive attitude towards control and conscientious management. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.  control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that enforce management’s directives and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. The standards provide that information should be recorded and communicated to management and oversight officials in a form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their responsibilities. An entity should have internal control monitoring activities in place to assess the quality of performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved. Control activities include both external and internal sources. preventive and detective controls. Preventive controls are controls designed to prevent errors, improper payments, or waste. Detective controls are designed to identify errors or improper payments after the payment is made. A sound system of internal control contains a balance of both preventive and Detective controls that is appropriate for the agency’s operations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. sign a determination and finding that no other contract type is suitable for the acquisition. The justification is required to set forth enough facts and circumstances to clearly and convincingly justify the specific determination made. In cases when the justification memorandum was prepared, contracting officers merely quoted language from the FAR but did not set forth clear and convincing findings for why other contract types could not be used. We found that the determination andFinding was either not documented or insufficient in six T&M contract awards we reviewed. We also found that in some cases, the justification was not prepared at all. When the contracting officer does not clearly and convincingly document the findings that support using a T&M contract type, OAGM does not have assurance that the appropriate contract type was used. For three of the contract actions, the contract specialist told us that the actions the document listed to mitigate the risk were not performed. Because CMS did not carry out the stated mitigation strategies, it increased its exposure to the risk of improper payments or waste. We estimate that for at least at least two years, the risk will remain. that designated the extent to which the contract was competed, for example, full and open competition or not competed as a result of being a logical follow-on to a previous contract. We determined that the award type field in PRISM did not capture consistent information. For example, the field had prepopulated options associated with both award type (basic ordering agreement, delivery order, letter contract, etc.) and contract type (cost reimbursement, fixed price, and T&M). Combining these options into one data field prevents CMS from determining the total number of each award type and each contract type. obligations from a population of 2,441 contract actions totaling $2.5 billion in fiscal year 2008 obligations. We stratified the contract actions by type of action, namely contract awards and contract modifications, recorded in CMS’s PRISM database from October 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. With this probability sample, each contract action in the sample frame had a non- zero probability of being included and that probability could be computed from any contract action. Each stratum was subsequently weighted in the analysis to account statistically for. The V&V plan lacks key elements and controls to ensure that the resolution of potential errors is properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. OAGM officials could not determine if all errors identified during the file reviews were properly resolved and the appropriate adjustments to DCIS were made. While staff training was provided in January 2008, the DCIS data entry instructions were later modified with new information. In one instance, we noted that the data entered into DCIS was later modified to reflect a new set of information. that the DCIS preparer and the reviewer were using different versions of the instructions resulting in confusion over what would be the appropriate DCIS entry. OAGM officials provided us with the results for the V&V plan for 2008, which showed that 23 of the total 2,031 contract actions entered into DCIS in 2008 were reviewed for accuracy. As of July 22, 2009, CMS management had not taken substantial actions to address our prior recommendations to improve internal control in the contracting process. Only two of GAO's nine 2007 recommendations had been fully addressed. the Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) do not include procedures that would ensure that the resolution of potential errors are properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. We further found that OAGM was not fully implementing its policy because it reviewed every 88th action, rather than every 50th as provided for in the plan. However, we are encouraged by the recent initiatives described in CMS’s comments, such as the scorecard, and O AGM’S commitment to review current policies and procedures. CMS did not have quality assurance activities, such as formal data entry reviews or database training, over the data contained in the DCIS database. In December 2007, OAGM established a Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy. For example, CMS entered codes for “potato farming” and “tortilla manufacturing” in the industry code field for two contract actions. The data analysis on the population of fiscal year 2008 contract actions identified that certain required fields such as contract type and competition were not in DCIS. to accurately determine CMS’s contracting trends. OAGM officials told us that the data entered into PRISM are not subjected to a secondary review. We estimate that for at least 54.2 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, DCIS contained at least one error in the selected critical fields we reviewed.DCIS contained errors in current contract value and ultimate contract value fields, as well as the extent of competition, contract type, and award type fields. Further, 11 sample items, or approximately 10 percent of the sample, contained errors. basis for our evaluation of CMS’s contract management control environment. We determined that only basic contract information maintained in the PRISM database, such as vendor name and obligation amount, was reliable for purposes of this study. We used a statistically random sample selected to test the application of controls to also test the accuracy of the data in the systems. We assessed the reliability of the databases by performing electronic testing of required data elements and interviewing both CMS and HHS officials on quality assurance activities performed on the databases. are due in part to a lack of sufficient quality assurance activities over the data entered into the acquisition databases. Without accurate data, CMS program managers do not have adequate information to identify and monitor areas that pose a high risk of improper payments or waste. inaccurate or incomplete data hinder CMS’s ability to mitigate through additional policies or enhanced oversight any high-risk areas, such as the frequent use of cost reimbursement contracts, that would be identified based on reports or analysis of the databases. The errors in DCIS, including the unrecorded actions, also impact governmentwide reporting. HHS submits DCIS data to the FDPS-NG, which feeds into OMB’s publicly available database at www.usaspending.gov. We estimate that for at least 34.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, PRISM contained at least one error in the selected critical fields we reviewed. In particular, we found that PRISM. contained 16 errors in a field we reviewed, including one in which the error occurred in the procurement field of “procurement.” The PRISM database contains basic information such as contract number, vendor name, and amount obligated. The Enhanced Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) is used for department-level acquisition management. DCIS collects and forwards information to the Federal Procurement Data System Next Generation (FPDS-NG), which is a publicly available database of governmentwide acquisition information. Likewise, FPDS- NG feeds into www.usaspending.gov, a Web site created by the Department of Homeland Security. did not perform required audits and reviews of CMS purchase cards to identify fraud or waste. As of July 15, 2009, OAGM’s purchase card program had issued 123 cards with 20 percent having monthly spending limits of at least $50,000. Eight card holders had monthly spending limit of $100,000, the highest spending limit authorized by CMS. Without sufficient oversight, CMS does not have assurance that only allowable transactions are procured through purchase cards and that the purchase cards are not being used to circumvent FAR competition requirements. or guidance were developed, because in CMS’s view, policies and criteria are already established in the FAR and HHSAR. While the FAR provides requirements for federal acquisitions, it is up to the agencies to develop and provide their contracting workforce with specific policies and day-to-day procedures that guide them in implementing those requirements. Agency-specific policy may include guidance on applicable approval levels, time frames, agency forms, and routing processes. Also, while the HHSAR provides additional guidance and policies specific to HHS, the HHS AR does not specifically address all of these issues. implemented the Acquisition Career Management Information System (ACMIS) ACMIS is a centralized tracking mechanism that maintains training records for the personnel assigned to contract activities. HHS’s implementation of the centralized system to track training addressed our recommendation. Actions insufficient. HHS reported that CMS developed a plan to reduce the backlog of contracts overdue awaiting closeout and that CMS reduced this backlog by the end of fiscal year 2007 from 581 to 407 contracts. CMS provided its fiscal year 2009 contract closeout plan; however, the plan did not include a comprehensive strategy for reducing the backlog. for acquisitions awarded through other than full and open competition, was implemented in April 2008. We applied these approval levels only to the awards and modifications in our sample that were made after the policy was implemented. CMS disagreed with our determination that their actions to address five of the seven prior recommendations were not sufficient. These prior recommendationswere aimed at improving preventive controls. Preventive controls, such as policies and criteria for pre-award activities and a sound invoice, are important to CMS’s control environment. increased risk together with inadequate compensating controls to mitigate risk. The Virtual Acquisition Office can be a useful tool for contracting officers, specialists, and the Office of Acquisition and Grants Management. But it does not represent the agency- specific policies and criteria we recommended that CMS implement for pre-award activities. Agency-specific policies provide guidance on how CMS staff are expected to perform their day-to-day duties. As such, CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented effective internal control procedures over contract actions. We focused on contracts that were generally subjected to the Federal Acquisition Regulation. We interviewed senior management of CMS’s Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM), contracting officers and specialists, and cost/price team members. We selected 11 internal controls over contracting and payments to contractors to test for this report, ranging from ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of them. reviewed and changes would be made as appropriate, and (c) certain pre-award activities, such as the need for adequate accounting systems for cost reimbursement contracts, would be reviewed with staff at internal training sessions. While the Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM) did conduct internal training, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service’s (CMS) actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. OAGM still has not developed policies and criteria that provide clear procedures for staff to follow. We conducted our audit work in Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, Maryland from July 2008 through September 2009. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) reported that the policy and criteria for pre-award contracting activities are already established in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Health & Human Services Acquisition Regulation. There was no action taken on this issue. identify and fix deficiencies in the contract administration process and to improve internal controls may be missed. In addition to the deficiencies in contract-level control procedures, CMS’s FAR-based contract management was impaired by a weak control environment. CMS officials told us that incurred cost audits are not performed annually primarily due to insufficient resources. A shortage of financial and human resources creates an environment that introduces vulnerabilities to the contracting process, hinders management’S ability to sustain an effective overall control environment, and ultimately increases risk. a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives were met. CMS also did not take appropriate steps to. ensure that existing policies were properly implemented nor maintain. adequate documentation in its contract files. The Contract Review Board was not effective in ensuring proper contract award actions. These internal control deficiencies are a manifestation of CMS’s weak overall control environment, which is discussed later. As a result of our work, we estimate that at least 84.3 percent of FAR- based contract actions made by CMS in fiscal year 2008 contained at least. at least one of these deficiencies. The seven substantially unresolved recommendations represent a lack of action on the part of CMS management to resolve key control deficiencies. CMS management has made limited progress in substantively addressing most of the broad-based recommendations from our 2007 report. We found that many of our findings in this review could be, at least in part, attributed to CMS management’s lack of attention given to resolving the control deficiencies, we found. We are reiterating our previous recommendations to develop policies for pre-award contracting activities, to help ensure CFA responsibilities are performed. will continue to pose significant risk of improper payments, waste, and mismanagement. Further, the deficiencies we identified are likely to be exacerbated by the rise in obligations for non-claims processing contract awards. It is imperative that CMS take immediate action to address its serious contract-level control deficiencies and take action on our previous recommendations to improve contract- level and overall environment controls. We make the following nine recommendations to help CMS address these deficiencies. The recommendations include the following: The agency must improve its contract controls to prevent fraud, waste or mismanagement of taxpayer dollars. for its contracting function. CMS also expressed concerns about the scope and timing of our work with respect to our November 2007 recommendations. We address the concerns CMS raised in its comment letter below and include additional information at the end of appendix III. In its comments, CMS stated its belief that the 11 internal controls we reviewed did not provide a complete picture of its internal controls over contract management activities. We acknowledge that there are many internal controls that need to be improved, and we are working on them. be signed by the contract negotiator. However, negotiation memorandums were not always prepared for actions in which they were clearly required, according to HHSAR. While many negotiation Memorandums we reviewed had signature blocks for both the contract specialist and the contracting officer (generally the preparer and reviewer, respectively), the memorandum was not always signed. CMS’s OAGM established the Contract Review Board (CRB) reviews as a key control procedure to help ensure contract award actions are in conformance with law. Specify what constitutes timely performance of (or request for) audits of contractors’ statements of incurred cost for cost reimbursement and T&M contracts. Specify circumstances under which negotiation memorandums should be used and the content of such, in light of HHSAR requirements and current OAGM practice.Specify Contract Review Board review documentation to include, at a minimum, documentation of the number of contracts reviewed each year, the issues identified by the CRB reviewer(s), and resolution of issues identified during CRB review. policies and procedures, and sound business practices. Our review of the CRB process found that the process had not been properly or fully implemented. For example, of the 22 contracts selected to be reviewed by theCRB in 2008, only 7 were actually reviewed. For fiscal year 2009, 22 contracts were selected but only 2 have been reviewed as of the end of the third quarter. Also, the contracting officer for the contract action being reviewed is neither required to reach consensus on the resolution of issues identified nor to document the resolution. managing and overseeing the growing value of contracting activities. A positive control environment sets the tone for the overall quality of an entity’s internal control. OAGM management has not analyzed its contract management workforce and related funding needs through a comprehensive, strategic acquisition workforce plan. Such a plan is critical to help manage the increasing acquisition workload and meet its contracting oversight needs. We reported in November 2007 that the agency had not developed a plan to manage and oversee the growing number of contracts it was taking on. the CRB reviews. Require Division Directors to periodically assess, document, and report to senior management on the results of their review of whether the contract files contain documentation that invoices were properly reviewed by both the project officer and contracting officer or specialist. Develop and implement a comprehensive strategic acquisition workforce plan. The plan should include, at a minimum, elements such as performance goals, time frames, implementation actions, and resource requirements. It should address issues such as OAGM workload, full time equivalents needed, and a workforce skills analysis. OAGM’s policies require that all contracts above $10 million be subjected to the CRB. CMS confirmed that only contracts nominated by division directors are reviewed. CMS policies do not require issues to be resolved and documented and because CMS is not fully implementing theCRB, opportunities to resolve CRB issues may be missed. If used correctly, the CRb can be an effective tool for risk-based quality assurance and for reviewing the internal controls throughout the contract award and administration process. in the control environment, were based on observations and interviews with OAGM officials and reviews of related documentation such as policies and strategic plans. Our current review was completed in September 2009, nearly 2 years after the issuance of our November 2007 report. While CMS also stated that the contract actions we reviewed took place in fiscal year 2008, it is important to note that we considered the timing of CMS’s corrective actions when evaluating the controls we tested. For example, CMS�s Acquisition Policy 02-03, which identifies level of approvals required by agency officials based on the estimated dollar value. and evaluation findings strengthens the control environment in part because it can help assure management that the agency’s objectives are being met. It can also help management determine whether the entity is complying with applicable acquisition laws and regulations. Contract audits and evaluations can add significant value to an organization's oversight and accountability structure, but only if management ensures that the results of these audits are promptly investigated and resolved. During our review of the contract files, we noted that audits and. evaluations were requested of organizations such as CMS. as DCAA or performed by the CMS cost/price team identified questionable payments, accounting system deficiencies, and other significant weaknesses or deficiencies associated with certain CMS contractors. OAGM management confirmed that no action has been taken to investigate and recover the challenged costs. CMS has not established a formal procedure or system for tracking and pursuing the results of contract or contractor audits and evaluations. We found no evidence of any plans or procedures that would mitigate the identified risks. In another instance, the contracting officer deemed the contractor “risky” during the pre-award contract proposal evaluation process. The contracting officer awarded the cost reimbursement contract to this “ risky’ contractor. had not provided its contracting officers guidance or procedures for when to request the assistance of internal and external audit and evaluation services. OAGM did not provide direction on when (what stage(s) in the contract life cycle and under what circumstances) the contracting officer should utilize the service of the cost/price team or other contract auditors. By not timely acting on audit results or fully incorporating knowledge identified by cost/ price evaluations or other audits into award decisions, CMS is forgoing the potential benefits from those audits and evaluations. the government, specifically cost reimbursement contracts, as well as perform the activities required of a CFA. While officials told us they could use more audit funding, we found that OAGM management had yet to determine what an appropriate funding level should be. Without knowing for which contractors additional CFA oversight is needed, CMS does not know with certainty the number of audits and reviews that must be performed annually. Without this key information, CMS can not estimate an adequate level of audit funding that it needs. an estimate of the amount of resources OAGM needs to fulfill the audit and other FAR requirements for comprehensive oversight. Revise the Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy and Improvements policy to require all relevant errors be corrected and their resolution documented. Develop and implement policies and procedures for tracking contract audit requests, monitoring the results of contract audits and evaluations, and resolving the audit findings, to include roles and responsibilities of the contracting officer, specialist, and members of the cost/price team. OAGM has limited insight into appropriate solutions, such as the use of contractor support staff. Using contractors for contract administrative functions may increase the risk of unauthorized personal services contracts. According to its staff and management, OAGM is challenged to meet the various audit requirements necessary to ensure adequate oversight of contracts that pose more risk to the government. The use of contractors has in recent years become commonplace in the federal government. It is prohibited by FAR to use contractors for inherently governmental functions, both of which are prohibited. staff resources allocated to contract oversight had not kept pace with the increase in CMS contract awards. A similar trend continued into 2008. While the obligated amount of contract awards has increased 71 percent since 1998, OAGM staffing resources have increased 26 percent. This trend presents a major challenge to contract award and administration personnel who must deal with a significantly increased workload without additional support and resources. The CMS has data on its workforce changes since January 2007 (attritions and additions), documentation requesting additional FTEs for a specific project, and, in its fiscal year. of contract files, we were told by OAGM senior management and contracting officers and specialists that the first set of activities that the contracting officers tend to neglect under resource constraints was post-award administration and contract closeout. CMS staff told us they take shortcuts due to resource constraints. For example, one contract specialist told us she prepared the Independent Government Cost Estimate based on the winning contractor’s proposed costs instead of conducting her own independent research to do her own research to make a better estimate. 2010 budget, a request to hire contract support staff to help meet contract and grant administration needs. CMS has not yet determined the amount of total FTEs needed for the fiscal year and beyond. Documents did not contain information on CMS’s current FTE level, skill mix, or analysis of any skill. For example, the documentation did not. contain an analysis of the workload anticipated for the year, such as the total number of new awards, the number of active. contracts by contract type, or the number and type of audits needed. All but one of the key roles described below are managed centrally in OAGM. The last, project officers, are assigned from CMS program offices. Contracting officers are responsible for ensuring performance of all necessary actions for effective contracting. They are also responsible for overseeing contractor compliance with the terms of the contract, and safeguarding the interests of the government in its contractual relationships. The contracting officer is responsible for negotiating, award, administration, and termination of contracts. The contract officer is the person in charge of negotiating, awarding, and terminating contracts. training certificate for the project officer were not in the file. Also, a chronological list of contracting officers and their dates of responsibility was consistently absent. CMS’s use of negotiation memorandums was inconsistent, the report said. The HHSAR provides that the negotiation memorandum is a complete record of all actions leading to the award of a contract, according to the report. It should be in sufficient detail to explain and support the rationale, judgments, and authorities upon which all actions were predicated, it said. contract. CMS contract files did not always contain documentation necessary to support the action. In numerous instances, we determined that the letter delegating duties to the project officer and the project manager was not properly written. In addition, two contract files. did not maintain any information regarding the General Services Administration schedule contract. that was valid at the time of the award of the task order. We found a contract file was missing a statement of work and another file wasMissing a copy of the actual contract. FAR states that provisional indirect cost rates shall be used in reimbursing indirect costs such as fringe benefits or overhead costs under cost reimbursement contracts. These rates are generally established by the CFA, contracting officer, or auditor on the basis of reliable data or previous rate audits and should be set as close as possible to the anticipated final indirect cost rate. Final indirect cost Rates are generally negotiated by the government’s negotiating team. The amounts a contractor billed using provisional indirect Cost Rates are adjusted annually for final indirect Cost rates. establishing forward pricing rates, final indirect cost rates (when not accomplished by a designated contract auditor), and administering cost accounting standards for all contracts in a business unit. The CFA is the agency with the largest dollar amount of negotiated contracts, including options, with the contractor. In addition, the CFA may be responsible for establishing provisional indirect cost Rates (also known as “billing rates”) based on recent reviews, previous rate audits, experience, or similar reliable data. the CFA following an audit of a statement of incurred costs submitted by the contractor. CMS officials told us that they generally adjust for final indirect cost rates during contract closeout at the end of the contract performance rather than annually due to the cost and effort the adjustment takes. When CMS is not the CFA, CMS must wait on the C FA to perform the necessary audit work required to establish the final indirect Cost Rates. Not annually adjusting for final direct cost rates increases the risk that CMS will not be able to meet its obligations. of direct costs promptly performed or requested. Similar to the audit of indirect costs, audits of direct costs allow the government to verify that the costs billed by the contractor were allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the contract. The audit ofdirect costs is the responsibility of the contracting officer. The contracting officer may request, for a fee, that the CFA for the contractor perform the audit work. The FAR does not provide time frames or other requirements for when the audit should be performed except that such an audit may be necessary for closing out a contract. The FAR states that a cost reimbursement contract may be used only when the contractor’s accounting system is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract. Of the contract awards in our sample, we found 9 cases in which cost reimbursement contracts were used without first ensuring that the contractor had an adequate accounting system. In the case of the letter contract, the contract file did not contain the authorization for use of theletter contract, which is required by HHSAR. In one instance, the contracting officer was aware that a contractors had an inadequate accounting system resulting from numerous instances of noncompliance with CAS. cost reimbursement contracts, and time and materials (T&M) contracts. These contract types may be used to provide the flexibility needed by the government to acquire the large variety and volume of supplies and services it needs. For fixed price contracts, the government agrees to pay a set price for goods or services regardless of the is billing costs in accordance with the contract terms and applicable government regulations. For T&M contracts,. the government agree to pay fixed per-hour labor rates and to reimburse other costs directly related to the contract, such as materials, equipment, or travel, based on cost. A fixed price contract is ordinarily in the government’s interest when the risk involved is minimal or can be predicted with an acceptable degree of certainty. Under cost reimbursement contracts, the government agrees to pay those costs of the contractor that are allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the extent prescribed by the contract. The government assumes most of the cost risk because the contractor is only required to provide its best effort to meet contract objectives within the estimated cost to the contractor.actual cost of the project. Cost reimbursement contracts may be used only when the contractor’s accounting system is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract. If this cannot be done, the government can provide additional funds to complete the effort, decide not to provide extra funds, or terminate the contract, the federal government says. In order to determine if the contractor has efficient methods and effective cost controls, contracting officers and other contracting oversight personnel may perform a comprehensive review of contractor invoices. The government says appropriate government surveillance during performance will provide reasonable assurance that efficient methods are used. reviewing cost proposals, consultations about the allowability of costs billed on invoices, and assistance during contract closeout. According to OAGM invoice review policy, project officers review certain invoice elements, such as labor and direct costs. Based on his or her review, the project officer is then to approve the invoice for payment by signing a Payments and Progress Certification Form or disapprove by issuing a suspension notice. CMS utilizes two different databases of review each contractor invoice and recommend payment approval or disapproval to the contracting officer. officer is authorized to enter into, modify, and terminate contracts. Contract specialists represent and assist the contracting officers with the contract, but are generally not authorized to commit or bind the government. The cost/price team serves as an in-house consultant to others involved in the contracting process at CMS. By request, the team, which consists of four contract auditors, provides support for contract administration including contract administration, procurement and other areas of the government’s business. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. contractor billed, and CMS paid, this cost. Another contractor submitted invoices under its fixed price contract that were contrary to the payment schedule stipulated in the contract terms. CMS increases its risk of making improper payments when it does not properly review and approve invoiced prior to payment. OAGM also OAGm also found that the contractor submitted one invoice for the entire amount of the contract. The invoice was dated prior to the start date of the 1-year performance period of performance. value of the contract through January 2009 was about $64 million. After the project officer’s review, the contracting officer or specialist is also required to review invoices for critical elements. Based on a cursory review of the fiscal year 2008 invoiced submitted for payment, we found instances in which the contracting officers did not identify items that were inconsistent with the terms of thecontract. For example, facilities capital cost of money is generally disallowed by HHSAR. But we found two instances where the. billed were compliant with the terms of the contract or otherwise allowable and allocable to that contract. In one instance, invoices reported labor costs based on labor categories, but did not show hours worked by employees or their respective labor rates. In another example, a contractor submitted an invoice in 2008 for services that were provided in 2003. Neither the invoice paid in 2008, nor the related file included evidence that the charge was investigated or further evaluated by either the project officer or contracting specialist. 40.4 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not have sufficient support for provisional indirect cost rates. For 17 contract actions that utilized indirect cost Rates, CMS didn't have documentation supporting what would be the appropriate rates for the contractor. For an additional 19 contract actions the provisional rates either did not match the indirect rates billed on the invoices or could not be matched because the invoice did not provide sufficient detail. When the agency does not maintain adequate support for Provisional indirect rates, it increases its risk of making improper payments. revised our testing procedures to consider and accept provisional indirect cost rates that were not maintained in the individual contract file but were maintained by the cost/price team in its central files. 7. The steps CMS described that it plans to take will be important for ensuring that contract office staff have the information needed readily available to manage contracts throughout the contract life cycle. As stated in the report, CMS’s current procedures regarding the accuracy of data entered into contracts are not sufficient to ensure their accuracy. We estimate that at least 46.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 CMS contract actions did not meet the FAR requirements applicable to the specific contract type awarded. Sixteen contract actions we tested had deficiencies, of which 1 related to a letter contract, 9 related to cost reimbursement contracts, and 6 related government’s ability to perform the various contract oversight activities required by the FAR. In addition to the 9 cases above, during our review of modifications we observed another 6 cases in which cost reimburse contracts were used even though CMS was not involved. the results of our statistical sample conservatively by reporting the lower bound of our two-sided, 95 percent confidence interval. The control deficiencies we found were primarily caused by a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures that would help ensure that applicable FAR requirements, agency policies, and other control objectives were met. CMS did not always meet FAR requirements for specific contract types that were awarded, nor maintain adequate support for approved provisional indirect cost rates. The agency did not timely perform or request audits of incurred direct costs. to the Administrator of CMS to develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives are met. Document compliance with FAR requirements for different contract types. Document in the contract file provisional indirect cost rates used as a basis for reviewing the reasonableness of the indirect costs billed on the contractor invoices. Document authorizations for letter contracts, adequacy of the contractors accounting systems, and determination and findings for time and materials contracts, when applicable. At a minimum, enhance current documentation, such as the contract checklist. contracting officer. We are encouraged that CMS is taking additional actions to implement the checklists developed by the Department of Health and Human Services to be used in fiscal year 2010. While such a checklist is useful for ensuring that certain documents are contained in a contract file, it did not reflect certain requirements in which we found CMS to be deficient, such as ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of a cost reimbursement contract. During our review and as a result of multiple conversations with OAGM staff including the team of contract auditors, we found that CMS was deficient. safeguards funds as well as having mechanisms in place to recoup those funds when improper payments are identified. CMS relies on incurred cost audits that are conducted at the end of contract performance when the contract is closed to validate the overall propriety of payments. HHS reported that CMS will review the questionable payments identified in GAO-08-54 to determine whether CMS should seek reimbursement from the contractors. It further stated that the questionable costs will be identified in the course of incurredCostAudits. and processes the final invoice with an adjustment for any over- or underpayments. The failure to perform contract closeouts in a timely manner puts CMS at increased risk of improper payments or waste, and may make identification and recovery of any such improper payments more difficult due to the passage of time. CMS has not taken sufficient actions to investigate and recover questionable payments. CMS described several actions it has taken to investigate payments made to 3 of the 12 contractors for which we identified questionable payments, but they are insufficient to fully resolve the problem. CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. Putting off the control activity until the end of contract performance increases the risk of overpaying for indirect costs during contract performance. We estimate that for at least 54.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not promptly perform or request an audit of direct costs. We found that 25 contract actions for which this control applied did not have an audit. It may make identification or recovery of any unallowable costs duringcontract closeout more difficult due to the passage of time. issues identified and more remains to be done to recover funds that may have been inappropriately paid to contractors. The $67 million we questioned related to costs incurred in fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006 and therefore would not be covered or investigated in an audit of fiscal year 2008 incurred costs. CMS’s resolution of questionable payments of the magnitude we identified ($88.8 million) in the prior report should be performed expeditiously. As a steward of taxpayer dollars, CMS is accountable for how it spends. are needed to investigate and recover the questionable payments we identified. No other changes were made to the report as a result of agency comments. See appendix III for a discussion of the remaining two prior recommendations (points 2, 3, and 4) for which CMS disagreed with our assessment of its progress. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretary of for the use of negative certification, (5) provide training on revised invoice review policies, (6) develop a plan to reduce the backlog of contracts eligible for closeout, and (7) review the questionable payments identified in the prior report to determine if payments are recoverable. The continuing weaknesses in contracting activities and limited progress in addressing known deficiencies raise questions concerning whether CMS management has established an appropriate “tone at the top” regarding contracting activities. Until CMS management addresses our previous recommendations in this area, it was acceptable for CMS to use negative certification. CMS uses negative certification to ensure invoices are paid in a timely fashion. CMS has not set criteria for the use of negative certification. HHS reported that CMS revised its invoice review policy. CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. The revised policy still contains the use Of negative certification as a default. The policy does not provide criteria to consider potential risk factors for theUse of negative certified in the review of contractor’S invoiced. It also did not describe under what circumstances or in what situations it not specify the documentation the contractors would be required to submit. CMS had not prepared guidelines or revised its invoice review policy to specify or provide examples of sufficient detail that would be needed to support contractor invoices to facilitate an adequate review. In fact, most of the invoiced we reviewed were not sufficiently supported. CMS policies did not provide guidance on what constitutes sufficient detail to support amounts billed on contractor Invoices. We identified invoICES missing payroll detail, travel receipts, and subcontractor invoice, all of which are necessary to provide the reviewers adequate information to confirm if the amounts are accurate. policies and procedures developed. Neither HHS nor CMS has developed policies that clearly define key areas of authority and duties for the CFA responsibilities. HHS reported that CMS revised its invoice review policy to better define roles and responsibilities. CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. The revised policy does not contain clear role and responsibilities for CFA. No action taken. The policy does contain clear roles and. responsibilities. The new invoice payment procedures contain clear. roles and responsibility. Noaction taken. contracting officers, specialists, and project officers to review the invoice prior to payment. Reviewing invoices prior topayment is a preventive control which may result in the identification of unallowable billings. OAGM’s invoice review policy was not revised to address this recommendation. Training on invoice review procedures still needed. HHS reported that they have completed the training but the actions taken do not achieve the intent of the recommendation, the report says. The report recommends that CMS establish criteria for when to use negative certification, based on considerations of potential risk factors. CMS had policies for invoice certification and purchase card oversight. The failure to follow established agency policy increases CMS’s risk of improperly paying contractor invoices or purchase card transactions. Not annually auditing direct costs increases the risk that CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. We estimate that for at least 59.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, the project officer did not always certify the invoiced. The project officer should have audited direct costs at the end of contract performance. review process prior to payment, are the first line of defense in reducing the risk of improper payments or waste. We continue to believe that the limited actions OAGM management has taken, and in some cases, management’s inaction, fall short of expectations. CMS asserted that its Acquisition Policy 16-01 entitled “Invoicing Payment Procedures” satisfies two of the prior recommendations. The intent of these two recommendations was to ensure that contractors provided adequate support to facilitate an appropriate detailed review of the invoiced costs.