through 2007. Forest Service’s data, for fiscal years 1996 through 2007. EPA’S data, from fiscal years 1988 through 2007; and OSM’ s data from 1993 to 2007. We presented these data for the past 10 years (1998 through 2007) because of variability in the program start year across the agencies. Some data recording errors in early years at some agencies also contributed to the lack of year-by-year presentation. We performed a limited reliability assessment of the expenditure data. in 2008 constant dollars. Because of limited time in preparing this testimony, we were unable to fully assess the reliability of the agencies’ expenditure data. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented to meet our objectives because we (1) attribute the data to what agencies report as their expenditures, (2) present rounded data to minimize the perception of precision, and (3) do not base any conclusions or recommendations on the data. To answer our second objective, we summarized selected prior survey efforts by federal agencies and organizations. BLM’s approach to determining the adequacy of financial assurances is not useful because it does not clearly lay out the extent to which financial assurances are inadequate. For example, in California, BLM reports that, statewide, the financial assurances in place are $1.5 million greater than required, suggesting reclamation costs are being more than required. In contrast, we totaled the difference between the financial assurance in place for an operation and thefinancial assurances needed for that operation to determine the actual shortfall for each of the 52 operations for which BLM had determined that financial assurances were inadequate. requiring an increase in the amount of the financial assurance. Conversely, hardrock mining operators may have financial assurances greater than required for a number of reasons. BLM’s estimate of reclamation costs has increased and there is a delay between when BLM enters the new estimate into LR2000 and when the operator provides the additional bond amount. There are about 2.4 times as many notice-level operations on BLM lands in 11 western states than there are financial assurances in place for those operations. fully covered. However, according to our analysis of only those California operations with inadequate financial assurances, the financial assurances in place are nearly $440,000 less than needed to fully cover reclamations costs. BLM officials said that financial assurances may appear inadequate in the Bond Review Report when expansions or other changes in the operation have occurred. BLM agreed that it would be valuable to report the dollar value of the difference between financial assurances. in place and required for those operations where financial assurances are inadequate and have taken steps to modify LR2000. Review Report from BLM’s Legacy Rehost System 2000 (LR2000) database. Because we had previously reported reliability problems with data on financial assurances in LR2000, we conducted a limited reliability assessment of the bond report data. This limited assessment included (1) basic logic checks on the data we received, (2) interviews with BLM minerals management officials knowledgeable of the changes made to LR2000. Although the data are of undetermined reliability, our limited assessment indicates that they are reliable. Bond Review Report: 1,463 hardrock mining operations on BLM lands in 11 western states. 52 of the 1,467 operations had inadequate financial assurances, report says. Agency regulations require reclamation of sites after operations cease, but do not require financial assurances for the reclamation. If a mining operator fails to complete required reclamation, BLM or the Forest Service can take steps to obtain funds from the financial assurance provider to complete the rewatering, the report says, citing regulations and officials. surface disturbance on 5 acres or less. About 99 percent of the value of financial assurances is for plan-level operations. A greater percentage of plan- level operations had inadequate financial assurances. Over one-third of the number of all hardrock operations and about 84 percent of  value of all all BLM operations were inadequate for financial assurances, according to the report. The report was published by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management on Wednesday, November 14. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The Forest Service allows cash, letters of credit, certificates of deposit or savings accounts, and negotiable U.S. securities and bonds in a trust account. BLM also allows surety bonds, state bond pools, trust funds, and property. Neither agency centrally tracks all the types of financial assurances in place for hardrock operations on its lands. BLM’s LR2000 tracks most of the types, and BLM is updating the database to include more types. The Forest Service does not have readily available information on the types. financial assurances are for hardrock mining operations located in Nevada. See appendix IV for further details on the number of plan- and notice-level operations in each state. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of the Committee may have. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony. For further information about this testimony, please contact Robin M. Nazzaro, Director, Natural Resources and Environment (202) 512-3841. agencies and state-developed…inventories presented may possess inconsistencies and are not intended for exact quantitative comparisons. BLM and the Forest Service have also had difficulty determining the number of abandoned hardrock mines on their lands and have no definitive estimates. In September 2007, the agencies reported that there were an estimated 100,000 abandonedhardrock mine sites, but we found problems with this estimate. According to this estimate, the Forest service may have about 29,000 Abandoned Hardrock Mine Sites on its lands. BLM and the Forest Service are responsible for managing more than 450 million acres of public lands in their care. BLM manages about 258 million acres in 12 western states, including Alaska. Forest Service manages about 193 million acres across the nation. In 1997, BLM and Forest Service each launched a national Abandoned Mine Lands Program to remedy the physical and environmental hazards at thousands of abandoned hardrock mines on the federal lands they manage. In 2007, they had inventoried thousands of abandonment sites and taken actions to clean up hazardous substances and mitigate safety hazards. EPA is developing a database to collect this and other information on hardrock operations by late summer 2008. EPA administers the Superfund program, which was established under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980. According to EPA’s Office of Inspector General in 2004, 63 hardrock mining sites were on the National Priorities List and another 93 sites had the potential to be added to the list. Typically, these sites are expensive to clean up and the cleanup can take many years. Historically, the mining of hardrock minerals, such as gold, lead, copper, silver, and uranium, was an economic incentive for exploring and settling the American West. When the ore was depleted, miners often left behind a legacy of abandoned mines, structures, safety hazards, and contaminated land and water. Even in more recent times, after cleanup became mandatory, many parties responsible for hardrock mining sites have been liquidated through bankruptcy or otherwise dissolved. Under these circumstances, some hard rock mining companies have left it to the taxpayer to clean up the mining site. Between 1998 and 2007, the four federal agencies spent at least $2.6 billion to reclaim abandoned hardrock mines on federal, state, private, and Indian lands. EPA has spent the most—$2.2 billion. OSM has provided more than $3 billion to clean up dangerous abandoned mine sites. BLM officials told us that in addition to the expenditure data they provided, the agency receives funding allocations from other sources, such as the Department of the Interior’s Central Hazardous Materials fund. as needed through telephone interviews to clarify and confirm problematic responses. To answer our third objective—to determine the value and coverage of financial assurances in place to guarantee coverage of reclamation costs— we requested the BLM Bond. Using these final edited data, we calculated the estimated number of abandoned mine sites, the number of features that pose physical safety and environmental hazards in the 12 western states and Alaska. Our definitional and editing processes provided us with reasonable assurance that the data were as clean and consistent as possible. that management controls were improved for the generation of bond review reports from LR2000. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented, and we did not base any conclusions or recommendations on these data. This appendix provides information on federal expenditures used to clean up abandoned hardrock mines by fiscal year (table 5) and by state (table 6). Range of estimated abandoned mines previously (2001) (2007) Mineral Policy Center (2003) Earthworks (formerly Mineral policy Center) ( 2007) (2004) “openings” No data provided Western Governors’ Association and National Mining Association, Cleaning Up Abandoned Mines: A Western Partnership, 1998. Median amount spent for public lands by BLM and the Forest Service was about $5 million and about $21 million, respectively. EPA spent substantially more to clean up mines that are generally on nonfederal lands. OSM provided grants with an annual median value of about $18 million to states and Indian tribes through its SMCRA program. Wyoming was the largest recipient of OSM grants for cleaning up hardrock mine sites—receiving about $99 million. See appendix II for BLM, EPA, and OSM total funding by state. on cleaning up abandoned coal mine sites. OSM, under amendments to the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) of 1977, can provide grants to fund the cleanup and reclamation of certain hardrock mining sites. A state certifies that it has cleaned up its abandoned mine sites and the Secretary of the Interior approves the certification, or at the request of a state or Indian tribe to address problems that could endanger life and property, constitute a hazard to the public and safety, or degrade the environment. an abandoned hardrock mine site is a site that includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances at a distinct location associated with activities to support a past operation. Using this definition, states reported to us the number of abandoned sites in their states. At these sites, on the basis of state data, we estimated that at least 332,000 features may pose physical safety hazards. At least 33,000 sites have degraded the environment, by, for example, contaminating surface water and groundwater or leaving arsenic- contaminated tailings piles. There is no generally accepted definition for a hardrock mine site. Using our consistent definition, 12 western states and Alaska estimated a total of at least 161,000 abandoned mine sites in their states. The estimates for a particular state do, in some cases, vary widely from study to study. An abandoned mine site includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances at a distinct location associated with activities to the site. For example, an abandoned hardrock operation with two mine openings, a habitation and recreational areas than on more remote sites, like in the desert. were up to six times as many. As of November 2007, hardrock mining operators had provided financial assurances valued at approximately $982 million. Some states were less readily able to provide the data directly from their systems without manipulation or estimation. For example, New Mexico estimated the number of abandoned mine sites from the data it maintains on hazardous features. Nevada estimated theNumber of abandoned hardrock mine sites from the data it maintains on the number of mining districts in the state. to public health and safety and require actions to secure, remedy or reclaim. Sites with environmental degradation include features that lead to environmental degradation, and, consequently, require remediation of air, water, or ground pollution. Because most states do not maintain environmental degradation data by feature, states could only speculate about this figure. Because of these limitations with feature-level data, we report only the number of sites with data on environmental degradation in order to ensure more reliable and consistent reporting across the states. features that pose significant public health and safety hazards, and the number of sites with environmental degradation. While states used our definition to provide data on the estimated number of mine sites and features, these data have two key limitations. First, the methods and sources used to identify and confirm abandoned sites and hazardous features vary substantially by state. Some states, such as Colorado and Wyoming, indicated they had done extensive and rigorous fieldwork to identify sites and were reasonably confident that their estimates were accurate. Other states, however, relied less on rigorous field work, and more on unverified, unverified sources. readily available records or data sources, such as published or unpublished geological reports, mining claim maps, and the Mineral Availability System/Mineral Industry Locator System (MAS/MILS), which states indicated were typically incomplete. Several of those states that relied primarily on literature used the literature only as a starting point, and then estimated the number of features on the basis of experience. For example, while one state estimated that there were about three times the number. of public safety hazards as identified by the literature, another state estimated. there were four times as many. pit, and a tailings pile could be listed as one site or four sites, depending on the definitions and methodologies used. See appendix III for more information on estimates from these studies. Some regional or state estimates included coal and other non-hardrock mineral sites because it was not important to distinguish between the type of minerals mined. In 2004, EPA commented on this problem, noting that a universally applied definition of an does not exist at present. The various estimates are based on different methods and definitions. support a past operation, including prospecting, exploration, uncovering, drilling, discovery, mine development, excavation, extraction, or processing. Can range from an isolated prospect shaft and its associated waste rock pile and adjacent prospect pits, to a complex site with multiple entries, shafts, open pits, mill buildings, waste rock piles, a tailings pond, and associated environmental problems. includes only hardrock (also known as locatable), non-coal sites. Features that pose a significant hazard to public health and safety include features, such as mine openings, structures, and highwalls.