JEMCO and JEMFAC must evaluate FSM and RMI progress in implementing policy reforms needed to improve the business environment and encourage increased investment and tax income. They must also identify problems encountered with policy reform implementation, and recommend ways to improve U.S. assistance for these objectives. We received comments from the Departments of the Interior and HHS, as well as from the F SM and the RMI. We also received technical comments from Interior, State, Treasury, HHS and theRMI. that it be expanded to include JEMCO and JEMFAC requirements for establishing policy reform implementation timelines. As noted in our conclusions and by HHS, the urgency of pursuing policy reform suggests that establishing timelines for such reforms could be a useful method to improve U.S. assistance. We also appreciate that the JEMco and J EMFAC should consider this suggestion. The amended compacts’ U.N. implementing legislation does not include establishing timelines. for policy as a specific required action for the J EMCO andJEMFac. GAO: We believe sufficient information is available for the committees to begin meeting their requirement to evaluate FSM and RMI progress in implementing reforms. HHS agreed with our recommendation and requested the information. GAO’s comment on the Department of Health and Human Services letter dated May 23, 2006, is published in the May 2006 issue of the GAO magazine, “Foreign Policy in the Middle East and North Africa.” It is also available online at: http://www.gao.org/. of increased private sector development, strengthened education and training, and improved public sector management. The amended compacts’ fiscal procedures agreements requires the JEMCO and JEMFAC to monitor FSM and RMI progress toward their long-term development objectives. The oversight committees have not defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement. At the fiscal year 2004 and 2005 annual JEMco and J EMFAC meetings, compact management committees focused on approving sector grants and discussing grant administration issues. economic advancement, the amended compacts and their subsidiary agreements, along with the countries’ development plans, target grant assistance to six sectors. In addition to providing grant assistance, the amendments provide for the establishment of trust funds for both countries that can provide income after annual compact grants cease. The U.S. implementing legislation also establishes numerous reporting and accountability requirements. The legislation’s direction to the JEMCO and JEMFAC to specifically address economic policy reforms to specifically focus on education and health. connections with the overseas business community may be one way to pursue such opportunities and should be included in meaningful JEMCO discussions. The coming reductions in U.S. grants, paired with current economic realities, also suggests the need for frank assessments of current limited prospects for economic growth in the FSM and what actions need to be pursued to improve those. As we emphasized earlier, the scheduled coming reductions of U.N. grants creates urgency for implementation of policy reforms and for capitalizing on opportunities to leverage compact assistance. agreements require JEMCO and JEMFAC to monitor FSM and RMI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long- term economic advancement. Neither organization has discussed these issues at its annual meeting or defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement. In the FSM, 2004 and 2005 GDP fell owing to compact delays and a lower level of assistance relative to 2003. For the RMI, the IMF estimates that GDP expanded moderately owing to increased public sector expenditure (see example) meetings, we recognize that the Deputy Assistant Secretary submitted a statement for the record at the opening of the 2005 JEMCO meeting that mentioned the lack of sustainability in the FSM’s economic dependence on government expenditures. The issue of FSM progress toward their long-term development goals was not discussed by the JEMco. We recognize that Interior has contracted with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’S Graduate School to obtain further economic information on the F SM and the RMI. JEMFAC did not discuss the linkage between compact education spending and improving RMI emigrant’s skills to encourage increased remittance income over the long-term. HHS suggested that communication be improved through periodic teleconference and videoconference updates. FSM and RMI officials report that they have implemented a few legislation actions to improve the private sector environment, such as bankruptcy and insolvency. JEMCO and JEMFac members in between meetings need to communicate more, HHS said. The RMI estimates that between 500 to 800 new job entrants will need to find employment each year from 1999 to 2009. To meet this objective, the ready access provided under the compact for Marshallese to live and work in the U.S. must be preserved. Economic experts have emphasized that the RMI’s free education system needs to be improved to help Marshallese succeed both in the R MI and abroad. The JEMFAC may consider when discussing compact grant implementation that Marshallese should have access to free education. The JEMCO and JEMFAC committees have not evaluated the lack of FSM and RMI progress in implementing economic reforms. Both countries have implemented or are pursuing some legislative actions. The RMI has yet to prepare a comprehensive policy for public enterprise reform. Although they plan to privatize some public enterprises, they intend to expand others, the authors say. The legislation implementing the amended compacts specifically directs the JEMco and J EMFAC to address FSM, RMI. business environments are particularly costly in several areas. For example, of 155 countries surveyed, the FSM and the RMI are among the worst 10 to 20 countries in terms of the cost of enforcing contracts and the degree of investor protection. In interviews with private sector representatives, problems were noted with F SM and RMI business environments (see fig. 7). The following are GAO’s comments on the Department of the Interior letter dated May 16, 2006. Regarding our finding that compact management committees have not discussed F SMs and R MI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement at their annual meeting. mechanisms to improve communication and information between annual meetings. periodic teleconferences and videoconferences should be pursued. The FSM viewed the report as a potentially constructive contribution to ongoing efforts to pursue budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement. We disagreed with our conclusion that FSM development prospects remain limited. We will provide copies of this report to your offices, as well as the Secretaries of the Interior, State, and Health and Human Services, and the President of the Federated States of Micronesia. HHS’s suggestion to improve communication and information between annual meetings through periodic teleconferences and videoconferences and have added language to the report to reflect this suggestion. The Federated States of Micronesia confirms the accuracy of our description of its recent economic performance, its constraints to growth, and its need for economic policy reforms. We maintain that given these current realities, we maintain that the FSM's development prospects remain limited. We have also added language in the report recognizing HHS's efforts to improve vaccine coverage. of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. We will make copies available to other interested parties upon request. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VIII. The amended compacts implementing legislation requires that we report on political, social, and economic conditions in the Federated States of Micronesia. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. After more than 40 years under U.S. administration as part of the United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the FSM and the RMI became sovereign nations in 1978 and 1979. For the last 20 years, the United States’ relationship with the two countries has been defined by the original Compact of Free Association. The compact represents a new phase of the unique relationship between the United states and these island areas. In 1986, theUnited States, theFSM, and theRMI entered into the original compact. for the Compact of Free Association to negotiate amended compact provisions. The compact also gave citizens of both nations the rights to live and work in the United States as “nonimmigrants” and to stay for long periods of time. In 2001, we reported that during the compact, a significant number of FSM and RMI citizens failed to meet U.S. passport, visa, and labor certification requirements when entering the United states. We reported that a number of those citizens died as a result. provided a framework for the United States to work toward achieving its three main goals. The first goal was met; the FSM and the RMI are independent nations. The second goal has also been achieved with the compact’s establishment of several key defense rights for all three countries. The defense relationship continues with, among other things, U.S. access to military equipment and training. The third goal was to assist the F SM and RMI in their efforts to advance economic development and self-sufficiency. The FSM and the RMI are members of the Forum Fisheries Agency and the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission. Despite the two countries’ stable democratic systems, key aspects of the FSM’s and RMI’S political environments hinder effective compact grant implementation. Lack of government consensus. Because each state has its own constitution, FSM's weak federal structure inhibits compact grant Implementation. Because the R MI has a strong constitution, it can be difficult to implement compact grants. Islands (RMI) as well as the use and oversight of U.S. assistance to those nations. This report examines each country’s political and social environment for compact grant implementation. It also examines economic conditions, including overall growth, fiscal balances, and private investment; and status of economic policy reforms. To identify key aspects of the FSM and the RMI political andsocial environment for Compact grant implementation, we reviewed the U.s., FSM, and RMI annual compact reports for 2004. is often nonoperational or censored. The U.S. State Department’s 2004 Report on Human Rights Practices in the FSM. According to the World Bank, Transparency International, and other development experts, lack of information about government activities creates uncertainty for public, private, and community leaders. This uncertainty can inhibit grant performance, which can inhibit funding for development projects in the Marshall Islands. The government has been criticized for not holding public hearings or disseminating sufficient information regarding a proposed dry dock. to be about $2.1 billion. Economic development and self-sufficiency were not achieved under the original compact. Total U.S. assistance accounted for more than 50 percent of government revenues throughout the compact period. FSM and RMI GDP estimates reveal that per capita GDP at the close of the compact had not exceeded, in real terms, early 1990s levels in either country (see fig. 2). Although U.s. direct assistance maintained standards of living that were higher than could be achieved without support, we found previously that compact funds spent on economic development were lower. largely ineffective in promoting economic growth. Many projects experienced problems due to poor planning and management, inadequate construction and maintenance, or misuse of funds. Compact funds were also used to support business ventures, most of which have failed. In 2000, we recommended, among other things, that the Secretary of State direct the Special Negotiator to work with the private sector to reach an agreement on a new compact with the U.S. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution on the compact in 2000, but it has not yet been implemented. facilities on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI through 2016. The compact’s third goal was to be accomplished primarily through U.S. direct financial assistance to the FSM and RMI. For the 15-year period covering 1987 to 2001, funding was provided at levels that decreased every 5 years. For 2002 and 2003, during negotiations to renew expiring compact provisions, funding levels increased to equal an average of the funding provided during the previous 15 years plus inflation. Central government that is represented on JEMCO does not control the majority of compact funds. FSM access to the compact infrastructure grant, for example, has been delayed for more than 2 years owing to national and state disagreements over infrastructure priorities. RMI government and landowners on Kwajalein Atoll have been disputing government use of leased land and management of public entities on the atoll. Such tensions have negatively affected the construction of schools funded by the compact. The FSM government has been unable to secure agreement from the state governments regarding compact needs. compact grants and the management of the Kwajalein utility company. Lack of communication and dissemination of information by each government on wide-ranging issues. Private sector representatives in several FSM states reported that the public radio station serves as the government’s primary means of disseminating information but does not have a national radio station of its own. The U.S., FSM and RMI departmental officials, private sector representatives, NGOs, and external economic experts revealed a lack of communication. Political conditions, including a weak federation in the FSM and disputes over public institutions’ and government use of land on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI, have hindered compact implementation and service delivery. Despite relatively high health and education expenditures, both countries face development challenges in these sectors. For example, although the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC)—which evaluates indicators with a relationship to growth and poverty reduction—ranks the F SM and RMI in the top 20 percent for health expenditures relative to other lower-middle-income countries, it ranks them in the bottom half. We identified key areas of concern in delivery of health and education services. We obtained FSM and RMI socioeconomic statistics on noncommunicable diseases, access to safe water and sanitation, teacher certifications and literacy skills. We also obtained Pacific Island Literacy Level student test scores from the Pacific Islands Forum. We looked at development plans and reports prepared in conjunction with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank, or the U.N. Development Program. The report was compiled by Transparency International and the University of Hawaii. The FSM and the RMI are established democracies with free and peaceful elections. Each country also has a vocal civil society evidenced by religious organizations and nongovernmental organizations (NGO) that have been active on some political issues. Both countries also participate in various regional organizations, many of which address trade, energy, and environmental challenges faced by islanders.both countries are in the bottom third for a key health indicator, immunizations. The FSM is ranked No. 1 in the world for immunizations, while The RMI is No. 2. immunization rates are significantly higher. The RMI provides a significantly higher proportion of the population access to improved sanitation. Private sector representatives in the FSM and the RMI characterized the business environment in their nation as obstructive and costly. They attribute this characterization to elements of the political environment (e.g., poor information), lack of progress in economic reforms (both legal and financial), and poor government performance in providing services. World Bank national business environment surveys suggest that a high cost of doing business is a common problem for small island states. MCC provides economic assistance to developing countries. eligibility determined by evaluating a country’s performance on select indicators associated with economic growth and poverty reduction. MCC ranks the FSM in the top 35 percent for expenditures on health and primary education, and it ranks the RMI in theTop 1 percent for both indicators, relative to other lower-middle income countries that qualify for MCC assistance. However, for another health-related indicator— immunizations—MCC ranks both countries in the bottom third. FSM Departments of Health and Education and the RMI Ministries of health and Education. We obtained regional socioeconomic statistics on population trends, teenage fertility, child mortality rates, immunizations, human poverty, and GDP and aid per capita. We reviewed the U.S., FSM, and RMI annual compact reports for 2004; FSM and R MI development plans; recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) Article IV documents for each nation; ADB Country Strategies and Program Updates. socioeconomic conditions in the FSM and the RMI, particularly in relation to regional averages, refer to app. II. Country studies and health and education officials in the R MI and FSM also highlight other challenges. These include the increasing prevalence of lifestyle diseases such as diabetes or hypertension; youth health issues; and poor teaching skills. According to the F SM Department of Health, 80 percent of 35 to 64 year-olds are overweight. The number of cases involving diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and cancer increased in the late nineties. Both the RMI and the FSM have a relatively large population density at 331 and 181 people per square kilometer, respectively. The RMI also has a very high teenage fertility rate. Except for Palau, both nations have the highest levels of aid per capita. The FSM’s child mortality rates are significantly lower than the R MI’S. The U.S. has a Compact of Free Association with the United States with which the F SM shares a border. RMI has made progress in reducing overseas referrals since 2001. Rising prevalence of lifestyle diseases poses challenges for delivery of health services in both nations. Future health outlays will also be affected by health challenges facing FSM and RMI youths. FSM, RMI health officials indicated concern about growing youth problems such as suicides, sexually transmitted diseases, and teen pregnancy. The care and treatment of such diseases often involves expensive referrals abroad, lowered funding for public health programs that serve impoverished populations, and burdens on household and national budgets. Only 28 percent of FSM citizens have access to improved sanitation, according to WDI. In the RMI, the 1999 census suggests that 85 percent of the population has access to safe water. Recent tests in urban and rural areas indicate that a significant number of potable water sources, such as groundwater wells and water catchments, are contaminated and deemed unsafe for human consumption. (For further information on this issue, visit WDI’s World Health Organization website. For more information on FSM sanitation, visit the World Health Organisation website. to trust funds—meant to provide an ongoing source of revenue after fiscal year 2023—increase annually by a comparable amount. Under certain conditions, the trust fund revenue available in 2024 may be less than even the lower level of grant funding in 2024. If the trust funds consistently earn a higher rate of return, or if additional contributions to the funds are provided, the probability rises that they could provide a sustainable income source at the level of fiscal year 2024 grants. Although the FSM and the RMI are stable democracies, both countries face political and social challenges with regard to improving grant implementation. Total combined compact grant assistance to the two countries is projected at an estimated $3.6 billion over the 20-year assistance period. However, to provide increasing U.S. contributions to the FSM’s and the RMI’'s trust funds, grant funding will decrease annually. Assuming current population growth estimates, this decrease in grant funds will result in falling per capita grant assistance over the funding period and relative to the original compact. While the level of annual grant assistance decreases each year, contributions continue to increase. amended compacts to contribute an initial $30 million to their trust funds. Recent RMI GDP performance may have differed if this funding were used to provide current goods and services rather than for savings. The RMI’s contribution to the trust fund does not alter the extent of RMI economic dependence on external assistance. We have clarified our estimates and figures with regards to funding streams they include and exclude. We will address amended compact implementation issues and trust- fund issues in two separate reports, forthcoming. self-reliance and economic advancement. Expanding FSM and RMI private sector activity and remittance income will require effective compact grant implementation. The scheduled coming reductions in U.S. grants to both countries create urgency for the implementation of policy reforms if they require fiscal resources. We recommend that the Secretary of the Interior direct the Deputy Secretary of Interior to work with the FSMs and the RMIs on policy reforms. We also recommend that they leverage opportunities to leverage compact assistance to improve social and economic conditions through reform. have added language regarding RMI consultations with the private sector and their desire for improved tax enforcement. The effectiveness of U.S. and ADB technical assistance to the RMI is outside the scope of this report. The RMI allocated no compact funding to a public sector capacity building grant in fiscal year 2004 and less than 1 percent of compact sector grant funding to such a grant in 2005. We discuss remittances in our report as one option that the R MI may consider in pursuing the economic goals under the amended compact. Business tax schemes in both nations are considered to be inefficient by the IMF, the ADB, and other economic experts owing to a poor incentive structure and weak tax collection. Since 1994, the IMF and other experts have recommended, among other tax reforms, implementing a value-added tax (VAT), a simplified net profit tax, and a single modernized independent tax authority. However, although the FSM and the RMI governments have made some improvement in tax administration, tax revenues have largely stagnated. Revenue potential from further tax reform will also vary by government (national and foreign investment) mortgage laws, yet progress on key policy reforms required to stimulate investment has been slow. An enabling business environment in either country requires substantial reforms in taxes, land ownership, and foreign investment regulations as well as a reduction in public sector competition with the private sector. Despite several years of policy dialogue on taxes, the FSM has agreed on elements of tax reform but has no plan for implementation. The RMI has not agreed on structural change to its tax system and has no plans to do so. In 2005, the FSM Task Force on Tax Reform developed a tax reform proposal. Such reforms are estimated to require 2 to 3 years for implementation. The FSM government has neither begun to implement the proposal nor specified an implementation plan. The RMI government and economic experts have recognized for several years that the RMI needs to reform its tax system to become more competitive and competitive with the U.S. and other countries in the Asia-Pacific region. For more information, go to: www.rsm.org. tax system is complex and regressive, taxing on a gross rather than net basis and having weak collection and administration capacity. Private sector representatives’ most common complaint on the RMI tax system is the need for better and tighter enforcement. The RMI Office of Tax and Revenue reported that it has focused on improving tax administration and has raised some penalties and tax levels. Legislation for income tax reform has failed and needed changes in government import tax exemptions have not yet been addressed. Inadequate access to land. RMI will need to overcome the “aid curse’—or the distorted incentives for effective public sector management. Despite several years of commitment to, and recommendations for, policy reforms, key reforms have not yet been implemented. Tax, land, foreign investment regulation and public-sector reforms, when implemented, will improve the business environment, in turn facilitating the private sector expansion. However, even with the needed reforms, the FSM and the RMI face notable challenges to achieving budgetary self- reliance and long-term economic advancement. FSM and RMI government involvement in commercial activities continues to hinder private sector development. Interviews with country officials, private sector representatives, and an ADB expert also suggest that local businesses sometimes lobby the foreign investment boards against approval of certain applications. IMF and ADB officials expressed concern that the FSM and the RMI governments are not committed to reducing their participation incommercial activities.in retail, according to its Foreign Investment Board. The share of employment accounted for by these enterprises, as well as estimated direct public enterprise subsidies has declined in recent years. market-oriented enterprises that could be more efficiently operated by the private sector. (3) improve government provision of critical support services. One example of a reform success highlighted by economic experts is the RMI’s restructuring of its Social Security Administration to reduce operating costs and improve service provision. However, despite government endorsement of public sector reform principles, early efforts to reduce public sector employment have generally failed in both the FSM and the R MI. F SM and RMI public sector wages also remain about twice the level. Some governments have also tried to improve foreign investment processes or created small business development centers. To create continued and strengthened demand for reform, the ADB has also recently assisted both countries in holding several “Dialogue for Action’ retreats that enable public and private sector representatives to develop a common vision for sustainable development through economic reform. Our interviews with ADB and country participants suggested that these retreats can be helpful for improving the public sector/private sector dialogue on economic challenges facing each society. the fact that most of the enterprises have drained public finances through poor financial performance, requiring subsidization or entailing debt (see examples in table 4). In conjunction with the ADB, the FSM prepared a comprehensive program for public sector enterprise reform in 1999 that identified two enterprises per state and national government for privatization. Such privatizations later became a condition for receiving ADB loan assistance. This unit has not yet been fully staffed, and theADB loan requirement was reduced to one enterprise per state or national government. provide a technical review of our findings and information on the reliability of data used to support those findings. In conjunction with our own assessment, we determined that trade data, remittance data, and data on the private sector profits contained weaknesses. Exact data for these elements were not presented in the report and related findings were corroborated with other reliable data. Nonetheless, our interviews with U.S., country, and international officials revealed important constraints to the FSM's and the RMI’s capacity to improve their economies. both FSM and Interior officials have expressed concern for that nations’ capacity to produce future statistics. We conducted our review from August 2005 through March 2006 in accordance with generally accepted U.S. government auditing standards. We requested written comments on a draft of this report from the Departments of the Interior, State, Health and Human Services, and Treasury. All comments are discussed in the report and are reprinted in appendixes IV through VII. Further, we considered all comments and made changes to the report, as appropriate. With regard to teacher qualifications, the FSM Department of Education reports that 90 percent of teachers need to upgrade skills to meet new certification standards. In the RMI, a 2004 Ministry of Education assessment reported that more than 50 per cent of teachers had failed basic English literacy tests. The FSM and RMI economies have performed modestly and have been characterized by continued dependence on external assistance, suggests limited prospects for achieving development goals of budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement. Private sector employment has largely stagnated. prepare regular, reliable, and complete data that would allow for a more thorough analysis of social and economic trends. Trend data on a variety of social indicators, such as teacher qualifications and student drop-outs, could assist in evaluation of the effectiveness of compact education assistance. However, much of this data are just now being collected in a systematic way. Also, given that both nations have weak domestic capacity to produce statistics, they rely heavily on external consultants for this purpose. In the FSM, the contract for statistical assistance from external consultants has now expired. RMI Pacific Island Economic Reports (PIER) prepared in conjunction with the ADB; and expert reviews of FSM and RMI fiscal structures and tax systems. We obtained data on gross domestic product (GDP), employment, government finances, migration, and private sector development from the IMF, OECD, and World Bank. To describe the status of economic policy reforms in the F SM and the RMI, we reviewed the documents mentioned in the PIER and ADB reports. We also reviewed the OECD’s international development statistics and the U.S. Department of Census. GAO: Economic reforms in each of the areas discussed are needed to improve the RMI’s prospects for long-term economic growth. We also agree that the annual decrement in compact grant funding is a major challenge to achieving this objective, particularly if implementation of key policy reforms requires fiscal resources. We recognize that the FSM and RMI were required under the Compact of Free Association to make changes to the Marshall Islands’ tax system. We have clarified the report language to reflect these changes. We obtained data on FSM and RMI public sector enterprises from the FSM’s 2005 Statistical Tables and the RMI’S 2004 Annual Yearbook. In addition, we held extensive interviews with officials from the U.S. Department of the Interior (Washington, D.C., Honolulu; the F SMM; and R MI. We also obtained data from the most recent available public enterprise audit reports and ADB progress reports on the R MI Private Sector Development Project and FSM Private sector Development Loan. with FSM (national and state governments) and RMI officials from foreign affairs, finance and budget, economic affairs, health, education, land management, tourism and fisheries. In each location, we also met with numerous representatives from private sector businesses, banks, and community organizations. We asked experts at the ADB, the IMF, the World Bank, the Boston Institute of Development Economics, and the University of Hawaii’s East-West Center with knowledge of the FSM and the RMI economies. We traveled to all four states in the FSM and to the RMI (Majuro) We had detailed discussions with the governor’s and legislature's offices in each of the states. We also interviewed officials from the ADB (Manila, the Philippines), the IMF (Washington, D.C.) and the Pacific Islands Development Program at the East-West Center (Honolulu) The U.S. Department of State, Treasury and Health and Human Services were also interviewed. estimated $60 million. External grants are the largest income component, providing $54 million in 2005. The structure of RMI revenues remained roughly the same over the past 5 years. In 2005, the RMI’s wage bill comprised 34 percent of total expenditures, compared with the 2000 to 2004 wage bill of 31 percent. In addition to receiving compact grant assistance, the FSM and the R MI receive substantial U.S. program assistance from agencies such as the. Agency for International Development. is small and the growing wage bill is high relative to regional standards. In 2005, FSM taxes provided an estimated $29 million in revenue, or 23 percent of total revenue. The largest income source is external grants, which, at $76 million, accounted for 60 percent of revenues in 2005. In terms of expenditure, the largest FSM expenditure component is public sector wages and salaries at an average of $1.2 billion. The FSM government receives fishing access fees from foreign vessels that fish in its exclusive economic zone. Both countries' budgets are characterized by a small local revenue base and recent increases in government payroll. Unless other donors provide additional assistance, expenditure reductions will be required. As compact grants decline through 2023, government fiscal balances and GDP could be supported, at least partially, by increased noncompact assistance. However, such increases in assistance are not guaranteed, may vary from year to year, and may not be flexible enough to meet FSM and RMI budget needs. Tax reform may provide opportunities for increasing annual government revenue. In both the FSM and the RMI, private sector activity has remained relatively stagnant and exists largely to provide services to the public sector. Since 2000, the estimated private sector share of GDP has fallen in both countries. Both countries’ 2005 public sector expenditure—about two-thirds of which is funded by external grants—remained at about 60 percent of GDP. Given the recent performance and structure of F SM and RMI government budgets, both nations are likely to face significant budgetary pressure as compact grants decline through 2023. FSM and the RMI according to economic experts and U.S. and country officials. In interviews, private sector representatives also expressed concern with poor government provision of power, water, and infrastructure services. FSM and RMI emigrants could provide increasing monetary support to their home nations in the future, although evidence suggests that they are less likely to do so now than in the past. The FSM Department of Economic Affairs could provide more information on how to send emigrants back to the United States. In attempts to modernize complex, traditional land tenure systems, land registration offices have been established in both countries. In both countries, inadequate access to land and uncertainties over land ownership and land values continue to create costly disputes, disincentives for investment, and problems regarding the use of land as an asset. Despite amendments to foreign investment regulations, the regulations in both country continue to be confusing and relatively burdensome. Several years of public sector reform efforts have also failed to reduce government involvement in private sector activities. Investment, or public sector reform; factors that contributed to this lack of progress; or the interdependence of policy reform implementation with effective compact grant implementation. Opportunities exist to create linkages between grant administration and economic reforms. For example, sector grants in public sector capacity building could be used to address capacity constraints that have been identified as an obstacle to reform implementation (e.g., the lack of certified land surveyors for land reform). Further, compact management committees could establish linkage between, for example, grants to tourism promotion agencies and progress in reforming foreign investment regulations. Land tenure systems in each nation are complex and based on traditional and customary rights, often for multiple individuals. Most parcels do not have a registered, legal title. Land values are also uncertain owing to the lack of a developed land market or price data on land in the FSM and RMI. Our interviews with F SM and R MI officials and private sector representatives suggested that costly boundary disputes are common. We are happy to clarify these issues with the help of our expert team of land experts. lease transactions, such that banks are unable to effectively conduct mortgage secured lending. Foreigners are prohibited from owning land in both nations and are also unable to secure a valid lease when land values or ownership is uncertain. Land reform issues have been discussed in the FSM and the RMI for several years, and land registration has been discussed as part of the plan to reform the two nations' economies. Using land for foreign investment is even more difficult, according to experts in the two countries. The inability to use it to secure financing for development is problematic, they say. offices have been established. Such offices have lacked a systematic method for registering parcels, instead waiting for landowners to voluntarily initiate the process. Landowners have shown little interest in land registration, partly owing to the cultural issues associated with traditional land ownership structures. The functionality of land registration offices in both the FSM and the RMI has also been limited by a lack of registered surveyors and trained surveyors. Only 5 parcels have been, or are currently being, registered by the land registration office. Despite the amended compacts’ structure of declining grant assistance, the FSM and the RMI public sectors have grown while tax revenues remain relatively small. Unless each nation can secure other donor assistance, maintenance of living standards over the long term will likely require private sector expansion or increased remittances. To date, JEMCO and JEMFAC have not discussed F SM and RMI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement or the role for compact grants in attaining these development goals. Prospects for long-term economic growth in the FSM remain limited. If key policy reforms were implemented, the business environment would likely improve and facilitate private sector expansion. The FSM will also likely need to identify and capitalize on niche market opportunities as well as to create conditions to maximize remittance income. The education and health of its citizens should be improved, particularly through improving the education, health and safety of citizens. The country should also focus on the development of its infrastructure and infrastructure. The current level of remittance income provided by these emigrants is unknown. In the RMI, the 2002 household survey suggests that RMI citizens send more money out to RMI emigrants than they receive in remittances. This is owing to the emigrants’ lack of high-paying jobs and inability to afford repatriation of funds. The 2003 U.S. census of FSM and RMI migrants in Hawaii, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands (CNMI) confirms this characterization. access and strong historical links to the U.S. market provide the RMI with relatively good opportunities to expand remittance income. Improved skill provision should benefit both RMI emigrants as well as domestic economic prospects. We have clarified our reference that 2003 data on international visitor arrivals are for other Pacific island nations. Such data are not available for Kiribati and Nauru. The World Bank has estimated that, in 2002, KirIBati had 5,000 international visitors. However, Kiribiti also has a per capita GDP that is less than one-third of the R MI’s. World Bank data show that remittances have become an important source of financial flows to developing countries. For the FSM and the RMI, many citizens have taken advantage of U.S. migration rights established by the original compact and extended by the amended compacts. As of 2005, RMI data suggest that about 15,000 Marshallese have immigrated to the United States. FSM data suggests that almost twice as many Micronesians live in the U.K. than in the Marshall Islands. The FSM and the RMI have amended various aspects of their foreign investment laws to streamline the process. In the FSM, experts report that foreign investment regulations vary between states, creating confusion and additional requirements for investors who want to invest in several states. The overall climate for foreign investment remains complex and nontransparent, according to economic experts and private sector representatives. According to an Interior official, a shipping company with service from the U.S. has been banned from operating in the country. the U.S. West Coast to Guam has for years been seeking permission to provide shipping service to the FSM and the RMI. The climate for foreign investment is also reportedly affected by private and public interests’ protecting local businesses from foreign competition. Some FSM states require a certain percentage of local ownership in foreign investment. Pohnpei state, for instance, requires 30 percent local ownership forforeign investment and prohibits foreign activity. The FSM state of Pohnpei also requires foreign investment to be made through a local company. Fishing and tourism are key potential growth industries. In both nations, fishing enterprises have shown poor performance. The number of tourists has been small relative to other Pacific islands. Economic experts suggest that the FSM and the RMI fishing and tourism industries could grow within specialized niche markets such as high-end tourism or dock services. Such opportunities remain limited in scale, however, and will require factors such as a sound design, adequate resources and capacity for tax enforcement, government commitment for reform and private sector growth. data indicate that the RMI did succeed in reducing public sector employment from about 3,760 jobs in 1997 to 3,530 jobs in 2001. We have modified language in the report to clarify each of these points. The report has added language to include the volatility in tax income from the fisheries and tourism sectors and the fact that RMI offices related to reform efforts, such as land registration offices, have been funded with compact grants. In addition to the persons named above, the report also includes the names of: the ADB and other economic experts suggest that growth in these industries in both countries may be limited by current structural barriers. geographic isolation and small fragmented markets; high airfares and poor flight connections; lack of adequate hotel and airport infrastructure. low freight capacities and poor interisland shipping; inadequate transshipment facilities in some areas. growing threat of overfishing; limited pool of skilled labor; and high production costs in terms of labor, fuel, and other supplies. In addition to facing structural barriers to growth, private industry in general faces a costly business environment in both the United States and China. small island economies suggest common challenges for socioeconomic development. Developing nations in the Pacific have exhibited relatively poor economic performance. Such nations have also exhibited the need for improvements in delivery of health and education services. Environmental challenges from climate change and increasing population density are also common threats to ensuring sustainable livelihoods in thePacific. Table 5 provides estimated socioeconomic data on various Pacific island nations in. The report was published by the International Development Association (IDA) and the World Economic Forum (WEF) on November 14, 2013.