Prof: You know why I am dressed up? When I do this course and when I do the first half of the French course I do a lecture on the bourgeoisie, the middle classes. Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. So, as a result, look at this. I wear this about once a year. Unfortunately, I wear it to funerals. The last time I wore it was something Bill Clinton had, some mutual friends. my one tie. The last time I bought a tie, ties cost fifteen dollars. This is a seventy-five dollar tie. That's a long way of answering your question about why I look like this today. But I hope to make some sense of that in the lecture. I didn't set that question up, did I? I Didn't ask you, "Please ask that question." When you're looking at me dressed, it's not Halloween. When you see Daumier or you see Delacroix's famous, Liberty Leading the People, and you see the bourgeois, there with his top hat, he's dressed in a bourgeois uniform like this. of class identity for ordinary people, for working people, the bourgeoisie had as strong a sense of self-identity as any social class you could imagine. It was, as I'll make the point in a minute, difficult to get into that class if you weren't born into it. The fear of falling out of it was something that helps motivate lots of political things in the nineteenth century. The ideal aristocrat, and this is how an aristocrat would have talked about him or herself, was born into the aristocracy through blood. The French Revolution and with Napoleon, middle-class values seem to be something to be emulated. The word "bourgeois" has really more cultural connotations, maybe, than objective or social categorization. We'll see some aspects of that in terms of access to private space. The middle classes shared some cultural values and symbols in common. When challenged by ordinary people, the middle classes could snap back in an extremely cohesive class-based manner. The class of middle classes is probably a better term. The French Revolution opened the way by removing legal blocks in very many places to the career open to talents. Napoleon used to say tediously that in each soldier's backpack there was a marshal's baton, or staff that you could get promoted with good work, hard work, if you didn't get your head blown off in one of these battles. The bourgeoisie did anything but that. Work was part of how they believed to get ahead, and getting ahead is what they wanted to do. It was always in the nineteenth century sort of classic to poke fun at bourgeois culture, and in some cases the lack of it. One employer wrote in the 1830s that, relative to his workers--is that the worker, I couldn't invent this, "should be constantly harassed by need, for then he will not set his children on the right path" It was a classic to ascribe to the middle classes philistine habits in which making money was really the only thing that counted. a bad example and his poverty will be the guarantee of good behavior." Of course, this is a caricature of middle class self-absorption, of narcissism, of this inveterate cruelty to the classes below them. On the other hand, the more we study the middle classes, we see certainly that no matter where you look one of the things the middle class people did was form voluntary associations. The middle class formed voluntary associations, and many of these were for extremely charitable purposes, particularly in Britain. to do an awful lot for ordinary people. It has a sense of moralizing. There's always this sort of top-down look about moralizing them. The Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals, these sorts of organizations really are one of the classic examples of bourgeois voluntary associations doing good things. They get together for social reasons in the coffeehouses of England, and in the clubs, circles you call them in France, and their equivalents. They also get together to hang out with each other and sort of try to gauge who has more money than the other. in Germany, and Italy, and Spain. One of the more ludicrous kind of mottos, we call it a devise, a motto, of the Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals was "One must love animals, but not fraternize with animals" You can see how, in places in which bullfighting over the long run in the nineteenth and twentieth century, such as the very south of France and in Spain--there were always movements to try to protect the bulls. Religion was a fundamental part of the British middle class's view of itself. The percentage of people who went to church could be exaggerated. There's a massive kind of church building campaign that has its counterpart in almost every country as well. After the Paris Commune of 1871 they start building churches in France, and in other countries as well, including the U.S. and Germany. The church movement in France is well studied, but you still had this de-Christianization. in the working class districts perched on the edge of cities. More about that in another lecture. Religion for the middle classes has a greater role in their lives than in working class cities. In the case of the peasants, there weren't any peasants left in England. I'll talk about that and it will be fun to talk about in one of these lectures. Anyway, there we go. How many people would have considered themselves middle-class? How do we know? How would you know who is middle class? the 1970s on what they used to call the new urban history, which is counting people up and deciding who might well have considered themselves middle-class. Inevitably I have to talk some about Paris because the work is so rich there. A woman called Adeline Daumard wrote a dissertation that was subsequently published called Les Bourgeois de Paris. She determined that somewhere between seventeen and nineteen percent of the Parisian population in the first half of the nineteenth century would have been considered bourgeois. Hamburg, Bremen, and Lübeck, and Hamburg above all, have a very enormous bourgeoisie. Barcelona is a really natural economy based upon important economic relations between its hinterland and Barcelona. Naples is one of the biggest cities in Europe right through the early-modern period. In Poland, Warsaw had a large--I was just at a history museum, a fascinating one at Warsaw Museum a couple months ago. In Russia, the estimates are about two percent of the population were middle class. of Istanbul, but Istanbul isn't in the Balkans, but with an important middle class. At the very top there are the great bourgeoisie, the big bourgeoisie. These are people who are big financiers. The nineteenth century bankers will become much more important for perfectly obvious reasons. They are big wholesale merchants who are making bundles shipping things from here to there. You won't yet find lawyers and people like that. What also makes them the high bourgeoisie, a small percentage, is that they have access to money. There's a revolution in France in 1830, yet another one that you can read about. Arguably--Marx says this and in a way it's sort of true--what it does is it brings to power in France the big bourgeoisie. They have the ear of the king, Louis-Philippe, who calls himself the Citizen King. He would rule from 1830 to 1848. He was noble. But in the official government he was not any bourgeois. That's what he calls himself. He's still the king. paintings of him you see people dressed like me who are coming into the throne room. They have power. He wants them in the painting with him. That's terribly revealing. So, these are people,. these are big bankers, high financiers at the top. Then you've got other layers of bourgeoisie. You can kind of fill in the gap. Here we have smaller bankers, not in size but in money, industrialists, merchants, these kinds of people. Lawyers rise up rapidly in popular esteem and usefulness. The middle class likes to see themselves as useful. Notaries know all of the secrets of people with money, he says. Notaries are important in all these countries, et cetera. Then at the bottom you have the petty bourgeoisie, and everybody's making fun of the petty bourgeois, but they too had a self-identity. Can you imagine going to a professional history conference where they all had their little nametags? All they do is they start up your body and look at your nameteags, and see if it's worth looking at your face. Pathetic. Can you imagine going to a conference like the World Congress of the Petty Bourgeoisie? "Hi, my name is Albert." But they had a self-identity. Who are in the petty bourgeoisie? Lots of these classically new nineteenth-century professions--schoolteachers. Schoolteachers were a way of social mobility for peasant families. Out of the working class or out of the peasantry female schoolteachers become increasingly more important. Master artisans own the tools that their journeymen work with. They rent or own their shops. times, as you know, in the French Revolution--;the French revolutions, and in the revolutions of 1848. They're always there. These folks are here, too. People are always dumping all over them needlessly. I will give you some example. If you've ever read the great French novelist--;he was paid by the word, but Balzac is really the novelist of the bourgeoisie. When he describes Paris and the seventeen to nineteen percent of the population who are increasingly living in the western part of Paris, he describes it as a jungle. as a jungle. In several hundred brushstrokes, Daumier captures the look of panic on his face because he's going to go home without his hat. He's got to buy one, and they've got to put the money together so he is not going to fall off the ladder in this jungle. Then you have to imagine this as a ladder, like this. In order to really give an image of what it was like, he's got this one magnificent print called the "Street of the Four Winds" mobility is the goal. You want to have enough money to leave to your 2.2 children. Then you'd have to grease this pole through bad economic times. What happens down below here? Holy cow! That's the big sea. I saw this wretched movie called the Poseidon Adventure once. It had an image where the water is kind of coming up below and it's going to finally get to the top and there's no more room to breathe. This is how the people on the bottom part of this ladder viewed the demands of the working class. Daumier is the greatest caricaturist in the nineteenth century and arguably ever, to make an extreme assertion, but it really is pretty true. This is what he captures, the prevailing mood in much of Europe in that money, more than blood if you were going to exclude places like Hungary, Poland, Spain, and Prussia. What is the.down here? This is ordinary people. The chances are that in these bad years you're going to fall down. But yet lots of people get up and the ranks of the middle class increases everywhere. man doing? He's counting his money. That's a very nineteenth-century profession, as it is for every subject. This guy, if you have extraordinary eyes and can read upside down, you will be able to see that he is reading a newspaper on the price of colonial goods, imports. He's one of these people that's at the very top of my triangle there. Look, this guy's got his coat, too. This is early in the century. You can tell. Some of these images, this is really not very interesting art, but that's not the point. The bourgeoisie didn't kiss and hug a lot. They still had arranged marriages. Love could count for something, but marriages were still essentially, less so for the middle classes than for ordinary people. That's what they were. They were economic relationships, wrangling over the dowry and that kind of thing. Look at our guy on the left. He's working very hard there. He had probably not secondary education. Most people didn't go to high school, secondary, lycée in France or gymnasium in France. in Germany, et cetera, and et ceta. It represents this world. By the way, we also know that this takes place in the center of Paris, right behind a big department store, subsequently the Hotel de Ville, but right near the town hall. This is very common. You see this in the book you're reading, I think. These things can be represented spatially very easily. One of the themes of the long run is the emergence of prosperous western Paris, prosperous western London, prosperous center Vienna and other places. minute. In Zola's great novel, L'Assommoir, Gervaise dies like a dog on a bed of straw, because there was no more mattress. She must be at the very top. Now these rooms then became in the twentieth century student rooms and then were transformed into enormously expensive lofts. But this is a way of visualizing the special concomitance of what I'm talking about. The more you go up there, you're still within the middle class. People were aware of what these symbols meant. This is your classic Hamburg financier's apartment. Ordinary people did not wear slippers. Domestic servants cost almost nothing. It was considered to be a way of moving up the ladder to say that you had four domestic servants instead of three. You've got brass or copper here on the heater. That's a good sign. You're on one of the lower floors. Why? Because you see the trees outside the window. And you've got a domesticated animal. Pianos were expensive, but the middle class has pianos. The piano replaces the harpsichord. The middle class wants privacy. They want their own rooms. There's the kitchen. This is the domestic with her children, who are part of the team who has been hired to help run this. There is more than one room. You'll see in a minute there's even more than two rooms. It's all obvious stuff. There are lots of rooms. These are very good chairs, sort of Louis-Philippe chairs. The middle class arguably helps create the notion of childhood. In many early-modern paintings children are portrayed as sort of little squished up adults. Most ordinary people--and some of the worst tenements in Europe were in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Lille in France, but also in Berlin and lots of places. There were no secrets at all. What the middle class wants is privacy and they also developed something else, he says. The middle class also wants to be able to make decisions about their own lives. class wants, besides social mobility and access to political power, is they want space. The notion of childhood, childhood didn't exist for ordinary people. To be sure, nobles had children, but it was a different way of bringing up your children. Nobles did not send their children to public schools or even to private schools. They were educated, to some extent at least, by private tutors. If they were poor and didn't have jobs, then they were sent out to beg. hour, when you're supposed to come out when there were guests and run through your extraordinarily modest bag of tricks for the guests. How about birth control? How about not having ten or eleven children? We have friends, one of whom unfortunately just died, very older friends who were born in the early 1930s in the south of France. One had thirteen brothers and sisters, and the other eleven. They grew up in absolute misery. The whole salon, the idea of going to see art shows. It really starts in the eighteenth century. birthday, papa." You didn't take time out to celebrate a birthday if you were an ordinary person having to get to the fields at 4:00 in the morning in the summer, or going to work during the day. There's a whole notion, and here again this would probably fit rather awkwardly into the birth control description, but there's this whole sense of being prepared that emerges with the middle class. It was the idea of protecting that one suit. We didn't carry umbrellas, because it rained all the time anyway and I'd just lose it. The bourgeoisie, the middle classes, and this is particularly true of Germany and France, and of England, too, and other places--they want the right to bear arms. They want to be in the national guard. The national guard might hypothetically be there in case there was an invasion of France or Germany by, I don't know, some distant place, the Fins or something most unlikely. But the main reason they wanted to join the national Guard--and you had to own property to be a national guard--was to be able to vote. You had to be defined as a property-owning citizen to have the right. until you have universal male suffrage, by how much taxes you paid and how much property you own. They didn't want to pay a lot of taxes, but property reflects one's belief in one's own social worth. No longer was it the worth of blood. So, they formed these national guards, particularly after revolutions and after 1848, or after 1830. But these are mainly there to protect them against the workers. Should one day all of these people try to rise up, climb up this ladder, you'll be down there to stomp on their fingers or to shoot them down. H.D. Daumier's light lines, and this is the last one, disappear in this painting, which is called the Rue Transnonain, April 15, 1934-don't write it down, in Paris. It's a street that no longer exists. It disappeared when Haussmann built the boulevards in the 1850s and 1860s. It was selected to disappear because it recalled an event in the early 1830s when these bourgeois panicked and started going into a house full of very ordinary people and simply shooting them. Transnonain, where this happened in the center of Paris, simply disappeared. It didn't quite disappear from the collective memory of people thinking about Parisian things. In conclusion, the middle classes extremely vary. They have a common material culture. They share a belief in achieved status, as measured by the amount of property that you had. They want a collective voice in decisions. Have a good weekend. See you on Monday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from.