s gawan and the Green Knight um I believe this is the last piece where we don't know who the author is where it's unknown um I find the background interesting and that through textual Clues they're able to figure out who wrote it. SAR Gowan as a ruthless bloodthirsty Warrior um we really don't see him in that regard um this is just an excerpt so the rest of the story maybe um but what we want to focus on here as you see the the lit term archetype. archetypes um you know these certain types the of characters you know the Damsel in Distress the heroic KN you know that type of thing those are those are phrases and names and roles that go throughout history in literature and movies and books. As we go through this look at the the role of the hero I think straight off we can say that that's probably gow or sir GA however you want to say it okay then you have the villain or the dams and all as we come through the story try to put these titles with certain characters. well must be five it's pentag the five things that the way that they live their life you know being good to women and being chorous and all that stuff but being HonorBound having honor is huge you've seen that in movies you know Samurai and stuff people would rather die than be captured and so they fall on their sword right that's very you know Roman to some degree with regards to Brutus and and uh some of those other Emperors um you know from from the past um so anyways follow along uh we're going to uh go through this it'll take a little bit of time and uh we'll talk about it upon completion but it's a sir Gowan or G and the Green Knight back to the beginning we start to get those archetypes. if you look down at the bottom of uh uh uh well it's actually on 176 now he comes in and addresses everybody and everybody gets kind of kind of quiet uh because this is a huge monstrous man with a monstrous Axe and he saysi come to uh speak to the person in charge and off Arthur King Arthur says that would be I and he goes I've come to search you based on reputation remember how we talked about the the honor okay people don't do you know if the knights do something it's a reflection of Arthur and Arthur as we know from all of our you know illusions of movies and cartoons and stuff that you know he is a good guy. your reputation Royal sir is raised up so high and your castle and Cavaliers are accounted the best the mightiest of male clad men in mounting fighting the most warlike the worthiest the world has bred most Valiant to VI with in viral contest and as chivalry is shown here so I am ass assured at this time I tell you that has a track here so he goes on in great detail say I've come here because of the reputation did you notice some of those alliterations sprinkled throughout there hopefully it did. I so a game but to see if people here are as good as their word and so he says on page 177 that I am here not for war and I shall offer to him this fine axe freely that they strike a blow in return for another. Arthur says oh well surely you just this is ridiculous but I will do this if this is what you truly want I'll do it and we all know that Arthur based on what we know of him from the past you know is true to his word. As you firmly seek Folly find it you shall. do it and I will give it to you not out of punishment but that's that's what you're looking for um and no good man here so his other Knights is a ghast at your great words. Think about it if Arthur for some reason fails their King has to willingly take a hit with an axe do you see GA getting in the way and say no you're too valuable you'reToo important you're the king let me take this for you let me deliver this shot and if for somereason I fail then I alone will take the shot so a very Noble thing yes compared to the Knight that we've been experiencing thus far the type of night from the wife of bath. see a big difference uh Raper and this guy big difference okay and so he says I will do this and I will take the axe um where's the actual beheading there on line 182 or so uh they're kind of getting the groundwork going goes when I have taken the blow after you have duly dealt it then you may keep your Covenant and call on me and if I waft you no words then well may you prosper stay long in your own land and look for no further trial so if after the deal I'll tell you where you can find me I will give you my name there are no tricks here. bath he didn't know that he was going to have to marry that woman did he no would he have still done it well how much does he value his life you know probably. The Green Knight graciously stood on the ground with his head slightly slanted he even got down exposed his neck the naked neck for the business now doe go gripped his ax gathered up and slashed down and what happened well line 203 the fairhead fell from the neck struck the floor and people spurned it as it rolled around. his Steed snatched the bridal stepped into the sturup and swung a loft holding his head in his hand by the hair he settled himself in the saddle as steadily as if nothing had happened to him though he had no head. Then the head will obviously have to tell him his name and where you can find him are you envisioning this cut the head off the body walks over I mean you've seen it comically where a headless body is looking for a head on the ground right. will be able to pick it up and still live and survive and so oh crap this is not going to turn out well. The Knight tells him you have a year to find me you can find me I the Knight of the green Chapel green Chapel no kidding Everything Green line 232 233 come or be called a coward and it's not just sir GNE being called a cowardly we've got to understand that mindset who would that be calling a coward Arthur and everybody else the Knight came here specifically to challenge the best that Earth has ever bred. mind um in this you know kind of lengthy introduction just to set up the fact that this guy is having some supernatural abilities that the normal person like probably GNE does not have. So that will lead us into uh into the uh the coming up here with him looking for the night so at the bottom of 181 uh he's gone off on his journey had a year and a day to find it and throughout the book you I'm sure there are tons more Adventures probably more of those uh you know uh battles or actions. you receive the the hunter the owner of the house the husband says whatever you receive you must give to me that seems kind of weird what possibly could he receive while he's there well we find out that the wife really kind of starts to come on to him over time okay real flirty she's she's a temptress okay very seductive uh she gives him a kiss what does he do when the husband comes home that day cuz the husband's going to share his his food share his everything with him as long as GNE you share with me. you know of his pact uh with King Arthur to be a good individual. She eventually does give him a green girdle um a green corset a a sash some sort of clothing that he can wear under his stuff and she gives that to him and he accepts it okay which isn't necessarily so bad. She says you wear this and no harm will fall upon you that's about the best thing you can say to somebody who's getting ready to go get hit in the head with an axe. up my sleeve come time to get that shot in the head um and so he does leave and he keeps that GLE for himself um and doesn't give that away page 185. He roamed looking for this man he roamed up to the roof of that rough dwelling then from that height he heard from a hard rock on the bank beyond the brook a barbarous noise. What it clattered amid the cliffs fit to cleave them apart as if a great sight were being ground on a grindstone. thing and so he hears it you know happening and um so he screams out and the and the um and the Green Knight comes he says by there said one on the bank above his head and you shall swiftly receive what I once swore to give you. He chastises him and tells him take off your helmet uh and offer no more argument or offer noMore argument or.thing and he gets ready to hit him and it's one of those kind of like you've had friends before probably have come up to you and go like that. action than I did when you whipped off my head with one stroke no s GNE by God who gave me a soul the Grievous gash to come I Grudge you not at all strike but the one stroke and I shall stand still and offer you no hindrance you may act freely I swear but page uh not page line 401 uh the dawnless man would have died from the blow but go glanced up at the Grim axe beside him as it came shooting through the shivered shivering air to shatter him. that upsets him obviously it's calling into question his his loyalty his OES his his manhood um he says do it again I will not flinch go on game on 185 187 excuse me um I shall stand your stroke not starting at all till your axe has hit me um gaw waited unswerving with not a wavering limb but Stood Still as a stone or the stump of a tree gripping the rocky ground with a 100 grappling Roots then again the Green Knight began to GD so now you have a whole heart I must hit you. take his head off like he did with the like what happened to the Knight he just dinged them and so there was some blood. We find out all along that sir gain was never really intended to get any Nick at all if he stayed true to what his words were. The most he was ever going to do was scare him and probably wasn't even going to hurt him and then congratulations you guys are honored okay you guys exude honor you are like what you say you are and not just you but King Arthur and the other night but since you lied that's why you got the Nick. little of all but ultimately the main one you need to get away from this is think about it you live your whole life a certain way and honor Cod and you were just proved to be a coward and you broke your oath to Arthur. How do you think he's going to respond embarrassed have you ever had somebody say to your parents not necessarily I'm mad at you I'm angry at you but I'm disappointed in you Justin you just I'm just very disappointed inYou? That crushed him. in this and the Green Knight pushed her along hey try to seduce him see what happens we're testing him to see what's uh if he's truly a good uh a good person or a coward as it turns out. 510 curses on both cowardice and Covetous uh their Vice and villainy are virtues undoing um uh where I you finally see that now I am faulty and false and found fear fearful always in the train of treachery and untruth go woe and shame. celebrate was it New Year's is that what it is we'll come back and celebrate this cold New Year I'm not mad at you so now we need to go back and look remember the archetypes we talked about we have the the protagonist the antagonist who is the real villain of this piece is there a villain in the Green Knight? The Green Knight's ultimate purpose is simply to challenge challenge King Arthurs and his crew and see if they truly are as honorable as they say as legendary as Legend has as the stories have it. so he's the protagonist but yet I don't think uh you know the whole good vers bad protagonist you know hero villain protagonist antagonist it's kind of a a mdl you know very murky we don't understand exactly who it is. We do have the Damsel in Distress we have that woman the temptress um the sexual being that's trying to corrupt the hero um and take him down the path maybe uh satanic in some degree with regards to trying to lure the good person away with the forbidden fruit.