So let me say here just the repetition, normal, inferior. Let us say we are talking about price of good 1 has gone up substitution, income these are the effects and overall. When P 1 goes up subs because of substitution effect x 1 will. Come down. And for income also because of income effect it will come down. So, overall it comes down. While inferior goods substitution effect quantity demanded would come down while income effect is Up. Up. Can you give me an example its very very difficult to find Giffen good in real life why? Sir, like if Gucci is a brand and it is. Prices comes down by significant amount. No one could buy a Gucci, it is at that level. only because of it is prices. I am not certain about this statement then when price of these goods would come down then people would not buy what you are saying. No, no if some purse is very expensive like 10 lakh rupees and it symbolizes your status. And other day it comes down to 1 lakh rupee. Then there is no point that the set of people who were consuming that purse that good for 10 lakhRupees to show their status would buy the same purse at 1 lakh Rupees because it will become more common. The consumption of these goods will go up because price has come down, maybe not same set of people would buy, but when we are talking about from for the market. And also see this is the another requirement here that income effect has to be larger than substitution effect it means significant portion of your income is gone in buying these items so that is not true. So, these luxury goods are not Giffen goods fine, it is clear? Let me give you just an example typically it is very very difficult to find GIFFen goods. You know if you take an example of potato that I gave you earlier and it was it was talked about for a very long time in economic discipline that during Irish famine the potato was Giffan good. for meat and other food products. To get enough calorie; they had to increase the consumption of potato. So, in that case if this story is true then potato is Giffen good ok, but the problem is with this the second requirement that income effect is larger than the substitution effect. Typically this is not fulfilled that is why we have very-very hard time getting finding out, figuring out Giffsen good in an economy. It's very hard to find out what's good.