Simple graphs are simpler. The edges don't have direction. They just correspond to a mutual connection, which is symmetric. A directed graph might have a self loop, an edge that starts and begins at the-- starts and ends at the same vertex. Those are also disallowed in simple graphs. There's a thing called multi-graphs where there are multiple edges between vertices. And there could also be self loops, but we don't need those. Let's not complicate matters. graph is that it's an object G that has a bunch of parts. Namely it has a nonempty set, v of vertices, just like directed graphs. It has a set E of edges, but the edges now are somewhat different since they don't have beginnings and ends. An edge just has two endpoints that are in V, and we don't distinguish the endpoints. So let's just draw a picture. Here's a case where there are six vertices V shown in blue, and there are these undirected edges shown in green. A basic concept in graph theory, which is what we're going to make a little bit of in this video segment, is the idea of the degree of a vertices. The degree is simply the number of incident edges that touch it, and the edge is said to be incident to its end points. So let's examine some properties of vertex degrees that are motivated by a simple example. If I asked the question, is it possible to have a graph with vertices of 2, 2, and 1, implicitly it's a 3 vertices graph. The handshaking lemma says that the sum of the degrees summed over all the vertices is equal to twice the number of edges. There can't be a degree 3 graph with this spectrum of degrees 2, 2, 1. It's impossible. Well, we could have reasoned more generally. And there's a very elementary property of degrees that we're going to actually make something of in a minute. There it is. The handsh shaking lemma. Theorem: The degree of a graph is the degree of an edge. written as a formula, twice the number of edges. So that's the cardinality symbol. Absolute value of a set means the size of the set. E here is finite. Twice the number. of edges is equal to the sum over all the vertices of the degree of the. vertices. And the proof is trivial, but let's make something of this. You might wonder why it's called the handshaking lemma. That will emerge in some problems that we're going to have you do. There have been repeated studies that are cited in the notes that show again and again that when they survey collections of men and women and ask them how many sexual partners they have, it's consistently the case that the men are assessed to have 30% more, 75% more. We're going to come up with a very elementary graph theoretic argument that says that this is complete nonsense. The most recent study that we could find was one that's mentioned in 2007 by the US Department of Health. And the statistician who collected the data knew that the results were impossible. to model the relationships between men and women by having a graph that comes in two parts. It's going to be called a so-called bipartite graph. So looking back at this graph, this edge from that blue M to that orange F indicates that they had a sexual liaison. They were partners. OK, so this is a simple graph structure that we can use to represent who got together with whom in any given population of men and woman. The left hand side is the number of-- is the sum of the degrees of men divided by the size of the M population. And here I'm doing a little trick. Notice that the F's cancel out. In the US overall there are slightly more women than men. There is 1.035 women for each man in the US population. The men degree is the female population divided by the M population times the average degree of the females. But this has nothing to do with their behavior, or promiscuity, or lack of it. It's simply a reflection of the ratio of the populations. But we do get them consistently in one survey after another. You will no longer be fooled by such nonsense.