Professor: We had formulated an exact approach using the time evolution operators and diagrams. And well, I think we understood what it means when atoms in the ground state emit photons which are virtually absorbed. So we figured out what is really inside this formalism and what are the processes. What we want to continue discussing today is one problem which you often have such approaches. And this is the problem of resonance. And that means if you write down the perturbative expansion, you have a 0 in the denominator. You have a divergence. I reminded you that in a phenomenological way, you've seen that this problem can be "fixed" by adding an imaginary part to the energy level. I want to show you what are the tools to treat those infinity source divergences in a consistent and a systematic way. And one hint how we have to do it comes by simply taking this energy denominator and expanding it in gamma, simply a Taylor expansion in gamma. And then, we realize gamma is often calculated in second order Fermi's golden rule. That tells us that doing something here probably means infinite orders in a perturbation series. means to sum up an infinite number of diagrams. It's a very elegant way to combine equations with graphical manipulations. So that's our agenda for at least the first part of today. And OK, we want to understand the time evolution of this system. Our tool is a time evolution operator. And at the end of the class on Monday, I told you, well, let's simplify things. Let's get rid of those temporal integrations and multiple integrals by simply doing a Fourier transform. now the starting point for our discussion today. We want to calculate the Fourier transform of the time evolution operator to infinite orders. So unfortunately, [INAUDIBLE]. We should copy this equation. Because we need it. And now we want to iterate it. So the resolving G in 0's order is G0. Now plug G0 into the right hand side of the equation, and you get the first order, G0VG0. I think you've got the idea. It's almost like a geometric series. terms, which are 1 over Z minus Eb. Sometimes, scattering and evolution equations are better formulated when you do it in the complex plane. Just remember, Z is the energy. And it is the initial energy. The initial energy is if it's a ground state and a resonant photon, we have a problem. Because the denominator is 0. So in other words, for resonant excitation, we are interested in the case that Z is on the order of this close to Eb. easy part, which has no divergence, we can make any kind of approximation we want without altering the physics. But the resonant part, this needs special attention. Because if I treat it literally in those expressions, they don't make sense mathematically. Because they cause infinities. But because I think it's just beautiful method, I want to look at this equation and write it down in symbols. So we want to arrive at a diagrammatic representation for this matrix element of the resolvent Gbb. Quantum mechanics is an algebraic equation. We want to figure out which of those expressions include this problematic term exactly twice or three times or four times. So we regroup the terms, and then we see what we can do. Now, I've picked the matrix element Gbb. So that means over here and over here we start out in the state b. So if I write down all terms which contain this resonant term twice, well, we start with a resonance term. And we have to end with a resonantterm, because we have the matrix elements Gbb, which I'm focusing now on. We can go through two vertices. But it can only include dashed lines in between. So we start with that state. We end with a state b. But in between, we can sort of once, twice, three times go through other intermediate states. But we never are allowed to create another divergence. And this infinite sum over all other states-- I don't know how to calculate it yet. But I'll just call it a square box. The square box is the circle plus all terms like this. equations. We call this the function Rb of Z. And it's clear how to go to higher terms. So we've just defined this function R by focusing on two occurrences of the straight line. Well, let's look at higher order terms. What happens when Z minus Eb, the divergent term, comes to the power n? Well, we just dealt with n equals 2. Let's now look at n equals 3. And what I've shown in diagrams above is nothing else than the circle Vbb, the matrix element of the interaction. Professor: R has a real and imaginary part. One is a self energy, and the other one is a decay rate. The real part will be the self energy. Yes, we connect a lot of passwords you may have heard here and there. But the nice thing is no. Because n equals 3, we don't have to find more and more symbols for more complicated sums. We just have to use the same symbols as we have always used. We don't need to change our passwords. means we have to start in state b. And one time in the time evolution, we can go through stateb. But one thing is not allowed-- to involve the state B. And everything else other than the state b has already a symbol. It is the square symbol. So this is the exact representation for n equals 3. And the contribution to the resolvent G, the Fourier transform of the time. evolution operator, is-- well, we have factored out three occurrences of the state. And then, we need two square boxes. But the square box has already an algebraic definition. we ask what happens when we allow more appearances of the state b, for each of them, we obtain another square box. So by looking at the terms which are bothersome and regrouping the infinite terms according to one occurrence, two occurrence, three occurrence of this divergent denominator, we have now found an exact expression for Gb of Z. And since this is now an algebraic equation with a geometric series, we can write it exactly as this minus Rb ofZ. non-trivial expression, the function of the kernel, has no divergences. And therefore, because there is no critical part to it, rather simple approximations can be made and lead to physically meaningful results. That's an idea you may see often in physics. You have a theory whether it's something complicated, non-perturbative divergence. But you just rewrite the theory, transform the equations in such a way that structure of the equations now accounts for the physics behind it. then, the perturbative expansion involves no divergent terms and can be performed. So therefore, we are now in a position to make approximations to the function R. And the simplest approximation which we can do is we can just try to see if we can get away with very low order. And let me call this now the triangle. So that would mean the following, that the exact formulation involved-- let me get black-- had a propagator. The state b has to go through multiple squares. This is how it propagates. And an approximate result is now that the squares are replaced by triangles. light scattering. We have derived it. I just go now and apply to an excited atomic state. So the state we are interested in is the atomic state b and no photons. And if you use the lowest second order approach, then diagrammatically-- just give me one second, photon was emitted. And this is the matrix element between state B0B0 and the time evolution operator. So we are calculating, of course, the Fourier transform. And all the work we have done with our diagrams means instead of calculating G, we're calculating the kernel of Z. Yeah, sorry, so the process we have considered is that we go to second order. We can go through an intermediate state, can say, absorbing it and meeting a virtual photon. So that means now that we, with this approximation, approximate Gb of Z, the Fourier transform, the resolvents. We let b just propagate, which is problematic because this has divergences. But we are allowing now the state b to go through intermediate states a. And remember, since this appears in the denominator, that means for G, just make a Taylor expansion in R. a photon, go to another state. It's reabsorbed and such. So the question is now, what is neglected? So what we neglect is actually a lot. In this lowest order approximation for the function R, we approximated R by second order. We have not included processes where we go through states a, a prime, a double prime, and then eventually we go back to the state a. Or we don't go back. to b. We go to a prime. Then, we scatter again. And then, we are back in b. Fermi's golden rule where we-- well, with a little twist-- have the initial state. The dipole interaction or the [? p.a ?] interaction takes us to an intermediate state with a photon with [INAUDIBLE] and polarization epsilon. We propagate in the intermediate state Ea. And now we have to go back with the same matrix element. So therefore the matrix element is squared. And we have a double sum. We sum over all possible states of the photon. The time evolution operator has poles in omega. So we can't just Fourier transform. But what we can do is we can add an imaginary part plus or minus eta. And we can just go around the poles. And then, it becomes mathematically meaningful. And what we're doing here is-- but I'm not really explaining it mathematically-- we have played those tricks here. But I hope it becomes clear if I say what the real and imaginary parts are. So the real part is this matrix element squared, but the imaginary part is also squared. double sum. But what we use is the principle part of it, which is well defined in the theory of complex functions. And it's divergent, but you take a certain symmetric limiting procedure. So the imaginary part gets us Fermi's golden rule. And the real part has a 1 over [INAUDIBLE] dependence. So this is actually nothing else than the AC Stark shift not due to a laser beam, but due to one photon per mode. Because we started with an atom in an excited state. It can emit a photon in any mode. Now creating an AC Stark shift. And this is mathematically the expression. And such AC Stark shifts which appear as self energies, as energy shifts created by the state, this is nothing else than the famous Lamb shift. So that's what we get out here. I have already-- do I in this sum? What we have here is we have this function R in the real and imaginary part, which depends on the energy E. But remember, we worked so hard with diagrams to make sure that the triangle-- first the square, and then the triangle, and this is what we calculate here-- has no resonant structure at the energy Eb. So this replace, neglect E and set, or replace the dependence by E, by taking the value at Eb, this corresponds to the Markov approximation. And by neglecting the energy dependence, we are now saying everything is constant as a function of energy. And that means in the temporal domain that we have a delta function. And we obtained, as promised, the Fourier transform of the time evolution operator, which initially had a divergence at energy b. But by now, calculating the function R, we had a correction, which is a radiative shift, which comes from the real part. imaginary part, which we can approximate by Fermi's golden rule. If we now Fourier transform back and obtain the time evolution of this state, it no longer evolves with the energy Eb. It has a shifted energy by this self energy. But in addition, because of the imaginary part, it has now an exponential decay. But there are two things you should learn. The first thing is that the exponential decay would be different if we had not made the Markov approximation. spectrum of energies. And it's obvious that the properties of this expression where you sum over all states, something will happen when you go past the normal excitation energy or the ionization energy of the atom. So what you can immediately read form here is that exponential decay is a simple approximation. But at very early times, it will break down. Because then, the energy dependence matters. But the longer you wait-- if you wait a few nanoseconds, the relevant part of the Fourier transform is only a small energy or frequency interval around the resonance energy. And then, this approximation is excellent. infinite summation of diagrams, if we had done a perturbative expansion, we would have never obtained exponential decay. We would have obtained some polynominal decay. If you do lowest order perturbation theory, instead of getting an exponential decay, you would just get a linear slope. And if you fix it, I think you get quadratic terms. So it's not really profound what I'm saying. It's pretty much an exponential function is non-perturbative. we have an atom in the ground state, and a photon comes along, and it takes the atom to the excited state b. Then we go back to the same state-- could be also another state-- by emitting a photon k prime epsilon prime. And the relevant matrix element of the time evolution operator, which is the T-matrix, involves now the matrix element, the initial energy minus the intermediate energy. It transfers exactly to the light scattering problem, that we have to include now radiative shifts. to infinite order. If you're off-resonant, you don't have a problem. This extra term delta and gamma, the radiative shift and the line widths only matter when the black term is close to 0. So everything we have done by correcting the naked propagation of the state b by the correct propagation with this infinite emission and reabsorption of virtual photons, this is only needed if the denominator is 0. And then, we have to figure out what else happens.  chapter of diagrams. Until maybe 10, 15 years ago here at MIT, we were not teaching that. And I felt often in discussion with students that a little bit more of a complete picture behind atom photon processes is needed. What I summarized could of course cover a whole semester course in QED and how to do calculation. And if you're interested in mathematical rigor, the green book, Atom-Photon Interactions, is pretty rigorous and still very physical. But on the other hand, many of you experimentalists, I think you should have sort of this picture behind it. many modes. It emits photons and reabsorbs them. And you can often neglect that in the simple description of your experiment. But if you take certain expressions seriously, they would have divergences. And that's what we discussed without this infinite number of processes which happen. Of course, yes, the whole other regime which I should mention is when you can completely neglect the coupling to many modes. If you do Rabi oscillation with resonant interaction, you don't need all that. Because then, you're really looking at discrete states.  chapter-- to give you sort of the fundamental story, the profound story behind the optical Bloch equations. We want to describe a quantum system. But the quantum system is coupled to the environment. And that means we have dissipation. And this is something which is not easily dealt with in simple quantum physics. And so in this section, what I want to address at the most fundamental limit is, what is the step where we go from reversible equation, unitary time evolution, to something called relaxation, which is dissipative. A small system which I just described by Schrodinger's equation, now follows the density matrix equation, has relaxation, the entropy increases, and such. So in other words, we have coupling to the environment. And in this cause in part one, we've dealt with it and looked at vacuum Robi oscillation and a few really neat things. But what happens is that the system is an open quantum system. You can have spontaneous emission. And if your mirrors are not 100.00% reflectivity, some light leaks out. So this is our system. In general, if you write down the total Hamiltonian and do the time evolution, something will come out which, in general, is very complicated, very entangled. So you have to know, to keep track of all the photons, which have been scattered in the lifetime of an atom. So often, what we do is we simply put the photons in a trash can. We trash them. We're not interested in what the photons are doing. The vacuum chamber has taken care of them. So all that we are interested in is how do we describe the atomic system? emitted. But those million photons which have been emitted into the environment, they change, of course. They change this density matrix of the atom. And if you find a description, the master equation is including with extra terms what those photons have done. Maybe this sounds very abstract. But in the end, you will find that maybe photons which emitted produce some damping. Or if you put atoms in molasses, the atomic motion comes to a standstill. So that's the idea. it causes stimulated emission. And it causes absorption described by the Einstein b coefficient. And you have a similar equation for the excited state. So this is clearly the semi-classical limit of what we want to accomplish. We want to know more. We really want to find the full quantum time evolution. We have to be careful. The time evolution as a Hamiltonian, if you now bring in the environment, cannot be simply included by adding an imaginary term. This here violates the unitary time Evolution. Consistent with the loss of quantum physics. If you find an equation which describes the atomic system, it will be a requirement that a density matrix turns into a densityMatrix. And that is actually extremely restrictive. This is actually something which is the frontier of our field. We have some evolution of an atomic system by coupling it to the environment. But can you engineer the environment in such a way that it does something really fancy to your system? Well, you can dream of it. But you dreams are restricted by the mathematical structure of all possible master equations in the world. I will be telling you is also sort of relevant to understand this sort of frontier in our field which is called environment engineering. OK, density matrix-- good, five more minutes. So what we have is we have a system. And we have this environment. And what we are exchanging with the environment is both energy, but also entropy. And so when we transfer energy or heat, there is a corresponding change in energy. And it's a general property of all quantum systems. It's a consequence of the fluctuation dissipation principle. display that, that we do not get any form of damping without at least the fundamental quantum noise. So what we need is we need a description of the quantum noise, which comes from coupling to the environment. The tool which we use for that is the density matrix. The density matrix can be written as a probabilistic sum over states. This will actually play a major role. We will make certain models for damping. And it's really beautiful. On Monday, I will give you the beam splitter model for the optical Bloch equation. have certain quantum states k, and we just add them up probabilistically, this kind of microscopic interpretation of the density matrix is called unravelling. It's sort of writing it as a specific diagonal sum over states. But those unravellings are not unique. They describe one possibility. But there are other possibilities. And you can see by inspection that this will do the trick. So we'll talk a lot about unravelled of thedensity matrix. That's why I want to say up front, that the same density matrix can be thought of as being created by different processes. But this actually makes it even more powerful. processes. OK, any last questions? Well then, let's enjoy the open house with incoming graduate students, and I'll see you on Monday. I'll be back on Monday to talk to you about the classes we'll be teaching next year. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this interview. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to see the full Transcript of this Interview. Back in the page, please share your questions and comments.