As a nurse you play an important role in teaching the parents about car seat safety. This education actually starts at birth before the child even goes home from the hospital in their first car ride. In this lecture we're going to concentrate on the main concepts that you need to know as a nurse. For exams first let's talk about the four types of car safety restraints that you can use in a motor vehicle. You can access the free quiz that will test you on this content so let's get started. lap belt should be used together when using this type of restraint and lastly is the seat belt. This sits the child forward in the vehicle using the car's seat belt and again both the shoulder and the lap belt should been used together. When selecting a car seat safety restraint you want to educate the parent that they don't want to solely go by the child's age especially whenever it's time to upgrade the car seat. The child's height and weight limits set by that car seat manufacturer should be taken into account. restraint instead they want to look at these other factors. They want to see how well their child's actually fitting in that restraint. There's some signs that you can tell if your child actually fits in thatraint which we're going to talk about here in a moment. Now let's dive into these different types of car seat safety restraints and talk about those main concepts that you need to know so first let's talk about the rear-facing restraint so with this restraint again the child is going to be backwards facing in the car. all the way up until that child is like a toddler or preschooler but it really varies depending on how that child's growing. The american academy of pediatrics actually removed that age criteria and just said whenever the child outgrows their rear-facing device is whenever they need to be switched now there are different types of rear- facing devices that you want the parent to be familiar with because they have different height and weight cutoffs so this is where it's very important that you stress again to that parent to become familiar with that manual. A rear-facing to forward-facing restraint is for a child up to 65 pounds. A convertible restraint is not mobile so you can't carry the child around in it like with the other one. It's important that the child's head is one inch below the top of the restraint. The straps of the harness at the shoulder should be at or below the child’s shoulders. You should not be able to detect any slack in the harness when the child is sitting forward- facing. in the harness so whenever you go to pinch it you shouldn't be able to pinch the harness together also the chest clip when it's buckled should rest at the level of the armpits on the child and that it's normal as a child grows to not have as much leg room in the back so you may start to notice that the legs start to come into contact with the back seat. Many car seat manufacturers are actually adding an extension panel to help with this since children are staying in this rear-facing position longer.