which we are to for next week and here and I'll talk about that actually week from today because it's callay on Monday so it will get behind but if we get any further behind I'll have to make it up sometime the but if you don't have that you be copies available upstairs is it c um come to my office okay to dany's office he doesn't have copies of it there that's six six upstairs in the first floor immediately after CL and then on the next Friday I will talk about the parts in the in the inquiry that were assigned and also a that essay of of the oral concept. and the compact of government and I'll talk about that in a moment and the latter is actually is a compact which I'll mention but it's a Act of fiduciary Trust on the part of the people now the idea is that for a regime to be legitimate LX view has to be such that beginning in this state of equal right which is to state ofequal political jurisdiction now and that you have to keep in mind because it allows for a society and various forms like families and tribes and so on and even tribal band it's not about political jurisdiction. The way in which he described absolutism of the kind of he's objecting to is going to be thrown out um and the has if his premises are correct more arguments than he needs. If you're rational you're not going to agree to submit yourself to an abolute monarchy or any form of abute arbitary power and then and there other restrictions so if we go through it will turn out that aism in the form which he's attacking it gets thrown out by these restrictions. Mo's view is that although of course one is bound I'm sorry one is Born Into into society as a matter of social fact biological fact and so on one is not obligated through the political institutions until one gives at least some consent to a regime. He's here opposing filmer who believe that people are born into a society and that they are naturally subjected to it as a result of growing up in it. He argues that people have as were no choice they are bound to a particular regime. the Age of Reason some form of consent now it's unclear the form in which is tast whether it's an oath of fidelity to the crown upon inher say the family property or whatever it's not expressly said. There's a distinction between express consent and P consent Express consent incorporates us into society as full member and as a Perpetual or presumably taxic consent does not do this. The point for us that's important is that when you read hum's account of the original contract he gives arguments against unlocks View and you have to ask yourself how effective is K's argument against each of these two parts. legitimate form of regime and the other is the conditions under which. particular individuals become bound to say the regime of England as opposed to the. regime of France. How does that happen and you want to ask in H's case which of these two and possibly both are his or effed okay then I will go on with this other question. I want to talk a bit of uh today and it may seem as if I'm getting bogged down in some points of n only theory of constitutions and so on but pension history. exclusion crisis of 1679 and 81 um the original part of the second CH was written it believe about 79 and 880 and then other chapters that were were added in 81 83 and two chapters added after. Now by definition a mixed Constitution is a constitution in which two or more constitutionally defined agents let's say share in and each have a part in What L calls the legislative power that is the supreme power in the constitution is the Legislative power. In the English case of course it's the crown and Parliament so we're only actually dealing with two agents in this case and neither is supreme so we want to say that they are coordinate powers. In mock terminology the crown and the whole combines within itself in this one constitutional agent what call the executive and and Federated power now. In the English case they essentially just these of two agents and we can then we only have to call that two we don't have an independent perhaps in our case a coordinate power of the Judiciary that's the key reality of our system now consequence of there being two coordinate powers and both in a way equal. The crown cannot govern without Parliament is depending it depends on that in general the tax monies and is to enforce and has the duty to enforce the laws. means that is there's no legal framework within which that is within the Constitution for settling the conflict there is no way to do it at law. In paragraph 168 he says if there is a conflict of the sort then the people have the right to appeal to Heaven which is a euphemism for for go to war that is Civil War and uh the power then refs to them and they have theright of resistance I'll come for that the moment now I might mention that in our constitution there are devices that tend to prevent this sort of conflict from happening. of Andrew Johnson although didn't past and it tends to make it politically impossible for president to persist over a period of time and a long drawn that conflict of with Congress so I might say that today checks then has this effect and comparable things were not available in the 17th century you had not yet institutionalized these various devices. Mar's problem is to justify existence of the crown in this kind of situ situation now now the source of Lock's constitutional Doctrine the source and thought is a book where at least is belied to be. the political Community as a whole and the people are then free uh to exercise their Liberty and to establish a new and different form of government with the different powers assigned to various coordinate con constitutional agents or else if they don't do that they can take necessary steps to restore what they believe is the a traditional form of the Constitution which has been violated by conduct of one of the Pres Powers so it was laon's view in this book that actually the English government was dissolved in 1642 so what Mark is saying something analogous to that that it was again dissolved in the course of the exclusion crisis in 798. before the view of next con Constitution and he says that the crown is in a powerful sense uh Supreme 151 now so much for Lock's problem and an indication how he attempts to answer it View and then I'll go into this in some more details now the significance of this for us is the following which I will go on some that later namely that we want to make a distinction implicit in in Lock's View and in aon's view between constituent power and ordinary power. Now by constituent power I mean the power of the people to determine the form of the Constitution oh it is the power that is exercised by the making of the or placing the political Authority in a certain form of regime. This is a compact between the members of the political Community to do something they need to establish political Authority. It is not the contact and not a contract is another term not favor term with the government or with the Agents of the government. We want to think St from the establishing of political Authority in whatever form the majority shall decide it shall take unless within the social contact with some Proviso that it has to be greater or other than a majority so that action that takes place in the second part will be a fedu will be the exercise of this fiduciary power U. it doesn't make the king for example the compact citizens with each other and there is in fact no such contract contacted government in LW and there isn't in h either but other contract doctrines some sometimes as a talk with a both but here there's only the one contact. The concept of Mages power as a fiduciary power the point of that I think is to emphasize the constituent power of the people. The people always had this right had this constituent power it isn't and cannot be alienated and that in the case of a conflict between the various coordinate agents that it establishes in the form of theim. power as a p power it connects up with the idea that political Authority is the right of making laws only for the public good says that the very beginning in three since given all of the constraints on parties to the social compact it can not be given uh for any other purpose now I don't know whether I ought to do this I might Ting out kind of what the form of thesocial compact might be. We think it just as AAL and express uh consent we hereby compact with one another each with all and all each it's better to unite into more non political Community or political society. to comply with the loss of political power as defined say in section three political power of the purose of community. We cannot act irrationally so this has to be rational agreement it doesn't violate any any Clauses of or duties that are consequence of fundamental law of Nature and so on. I think I'll skip over that um but it's sort of an exercise I believe to try to uh write it down now I'm want to say where two about mck's view was not accepted by the other wigs. changed his mind he thought perhaps it was not all together safe never knew in England the English were regarded in those days as very unstable people uh and not now we think of them as how and settled down or any rate 200 years after that they we regard as a model and longer of stability and and political common sense. Mark was afraid well who knows uh may be different I don't want people know what I said in the past it might be unsafe. He didn't want to have to flee to Holland again but his view was that Charles II then had violated his trust. government is dissolved people are now free to establish a new Constitution and to change the powers of government. Mark says nothing about the details of of this process that is how does he Enis that this constition power is actually to take place he doesn't give any institutional account of how he supposes actually might be done laon is also vague on this he says something has the idea that it would begin in the county courts and they organized there and would then they presented Des sent from there to a parliament. in that case but the implications are quite are quite uh obvious in some sense this is inly radical U Democratic Doctrine or it could be although I don't pain that either of them or actually what we would think of today is either Republicans Or democrats of come to that in in a moment. The point is is not surprising those that the wigs rejected this do and no doubt they did so partly because of the radical implications if thought through of L's View and it might have been a politically unappealing Doctrine so far as in might estimate. Nation than the other now why did L refuse to alter his view I think we have to assume that he didn't change his mind and he persisted in the doctrine that he formed earlier in 79 and 880. I think partly because his views are more radical than the standard view of his college that that would be one reason but also because he felt I think that it was inconsistent now there isn't this view in the trus but if one sort of HS it through perhaps one can see that it is any rate in danger of being insistent. he found in lawon and of which he gave a very clear and re statement is consistent and it presents he thought a more or less adequate account of the basis of sovereignty in a constitutional regime. What is important I say is the not formulates or we can find in this view this the distinction between constituent and and ordinary power and the idea of power is is connected with the motion of aary trust now the this distinction between this difference andordinary power raises the question. What I did was to see the importance of this view formulate in a very brief and readable clear manner I think. of how this constition power gets expressed in institutions and may effective you see it's all very well to talk about power and say that there is such a thing and talk about it uh coming into play when there's this kind of a conflict but if you don't have some kind of ideas how to be expressed in institution and how it can be made effective then it's always some extent this problematical. We may want to think of certain basic rights of the people as protected by the Constitution as also institutionalizing the basis through which and institutions through which this constituent power can be expressed. protected it's the importance of this notion now I'm not I want to mention at the end I gu about the last for some minutes um I'm going on to mention a witness in lock view from from our standpoint. The fact that is clear from paragraphs say 138 to 40 particularly 40 and 157 to8 that Mark is presupposing and taking for granted that only a few people vote. Mark is not arguing that point one way or the other taking it for granted and also when he talks about property he's not attempting to justify property in the sense of explaining it and justifying it. about an institution which is politically Tak from point of view everyone accepts D's argument had been that MOX or any social compact view or contract view the earlier agreements could not account for prodate property. "In that sense it's not a justification but attempt to explain how property could arise within the social contract cont well there are has it ought to distinguish three kinds of inequalities" "The right to vote is only shared by a few people now the question is that L lawr to argue that beginning with a state of equal" Right and going through all these agreements the contact of society would take place consistent all these other constraints and and yet the form of regime would be one in which most people did not have the right to vote and how could that come about. We don't have a clear explanation in L of how that might come about also we don't know who is included among the people uh when M talks about it excludes a lot of people excludes those that are dependent or some kind of servant it includes women. certainly thought that everyone those most people had what we might call Freedom of opportunity had some opportunity to accumulate the amount of of land and me tackle in order to be able to vote so it was not let's say cast system which was uh one could not by social institutions cross from one to to the other. But it would probably hard for most people um and what I'm looking at it from the standpoint of those who are born into a family that say doesn't have a right to vote how can one account for that on this scheme? form of a regime that excludes most people from actually voting I we might say adding on the condition provided that everyone has or most people have the opportunity to mer and gain and to acquire that amount. I believe that Mark more or less achieve his objective in this book which is to give an argument per it's easy to argue against but to give a coherent argument for the right of resistance in mixed Constitution. It isn't a criticism of what M does in terms of his aim but from another point of view we want to free the notion of constition power from being exercise subject to historical conditions. and who does not have the right to vote and what the conditions on it are maybe we want to free it from that of course what I'm thinking of eventually um is that that that would be one motivation for introducing an idea like the origal position that say it's a way of conceiving how con power might be exercised. No point in criticizing someone for something they didn't intend to do okay well I think it's stop so remember there's no class here Monday so the next class here will be next Friday.