Professor Amy Hungerford: Today it is my very great privilege and pleasure to introduce Andrew Goldstone, a TF in this course. Andrew is a fourth-year student in the Ph.D. program in English, and he is writing a dissertation on the autonomy of the work of art in modernism. In preparation for that, for next week I'd like you to finish the novel and then read his essay, "On a Novel Entitled Lolita." It should be bound at the back of your book. we had three main themes that were used to introduce this novel to you. First is the idea that the novel invites ethical questions but also holds them off through parody. We looked at Humbert's techniques of rhetorical seduction and related that to a kind of intellectual problem that Nabokov sets himself of trying to make you identify with this villainous character. And that leads to the third big question we looked at, which is the place of Nabokovsky in this novel amidst the many layers. Humbert: "I discussed Soviet movies with expatriates. I sat with uranists in the Deux Magots. I published tortuous essays in obscure journals" "I composed pastiches: "Fraulein von Kulp may turn her hand upon the door. / I will not follow her. / Nor Fresca / Nor / that Gull." "I'm just going to read a little bit of this so that you have the flavor of the thing. I'm going to try to connect that to Nabokov's exile" that Nabokov is burlesquing: Here I am, an old man in a dry month, Being read to by a boy, waiting for rain. And it comes to a moment where the possibility of rejuvenation is described as devoured by a series of caricatures of Europeans. So: By Hakagawa, bowing among the Titians; By Madame de Tornquist, in the dark roomShifting the candles; Fräulein von Kulp--[There she is--] these terrifying figures in Eliot--Fraulein von Kulp--are just some of Humbert's nymphets. So, I called this a burlesque of Eliot's modernism. It takes something meant to be really serious, and turns it in to a dirty joke. Nabokov will say in that afterword you're going to read, "the novel has as its only purpose to afford aesthetic bliss." So, the parody is of something very close to home. sense that civilization itself is being overturned. Third, the idea that the paradigm of experience is artistic experience. Fourth--and this goes along with that--a rejection of convention, especially sexual convention, sexual morality. Sixth, this is a term from the critic Joseph Frank: spatial form. In place of a linear narrative you have a system of cross-references and repeated motifs that give the structure of works. And then, this anticipates my last points: Modernism is self-consciously international. For Nabokov, the highest value is originality. He says this in his last Russian novel, The Gift. "Any genuinely new trend in art is a knight's move, a change of shadows, a shift that shift that all. for all" "I had a teacher who used to compare Lolita to Huck Finn. They are two novels about traveling across America and an unconventional couple. Right? So, anyway. Okay. But now, that modernist tradition is something that Nabokova owes a lot to, but he always tries to distinguish himself from it" displaces the mirror." Okay. Any genuinely new trend is a knight's move. In chess the knight doesn't move in a straight line. Unlike any other piece, it skips over pieces in the way. So the knight, far from going on a straight course, surprises you. You might think of walking in here expecting Professor Hungerford on censorship and getting me instead. But this is a very important idea for Nabokov. And I want to show you that way of writing very early in the book on page 10 now. from traumatic event of the mother's death--should be the center of the sentence; it's just dismissed--hopped beyond into this stylistic wash, a golden haze. So, the strategy of the knight's move is to frustrate your expectations, to leap over the apparently important events into something else characterized by a kind of aesthetic play, and these parentheses are a real icon of that. A critic has counted 450 sets of them in this novel, the parentheses, an important example of the knights's move. is, The Metamorphosis--"Bely's St. Petersburg," a pretty obscure Russian avant-garde novel. Proust is himself gay. One of his big subjects is homosexuality, and Nabokov's reaction to this is really homophobic. It's about a relationship to predecessors who are seen as too similar. This should cue you to think about the theme of doubling in this novel, to think of the possibility of desire between men here, says David Bianculli. he's attractive to all women, about his supposed virility. And it should just make you wonder whether pedophilia is in itself a kind of knight's move from homosexuality. In other words, is there another form of perverted desire hiding behind the one that's in front of us? Just a suggestion: look on page 20, still in Humbert's early life, near the bottom. It happened for instance that from my balcony I would notice a lighted window across the street and what looked like a nymphet in the act of undressing before a co-operative mirror. turns out to be an adult male. And I just want you to ask yourself why that could be. But, Nabokov's relationship to this modernist past is not just the burlesque that he visits on Eliot. It's not just this complicated attraction and dis-identification that he works on with Proust. An element of admiration is also present, and that's really part of his relationship to Joyce. Remember that he names Joyce as the greatest master of twentieth-century prose. kind of suggestion that that banal reality is redeemed by the artist's activity. Fourthly, Joyce loves puns. So does Nabokov. This is incredibly important, and there's a direct glance at that just ahead of where you read. I don't want to spoil what's coming up, but on page 221 there is a reference to--don't look, don't look--to a writer named Vivian Darkbloom plagiarizing from Joyce. That's the anagram of Vladimir Nabokovsky. Eliot's poem describes the hero, Stephen Dedalus, as a young boy trying to write a poem. And eventually in the novel he will succeed in writing a poem, but here he doesn't manage to. And so, this is a kind of forecast of what will happen later on. The further complication is that here he's writing a poems and then he remembers an earlier attempt; that layering of memory, and that kind of layering, is actually a prototype for the layering in Lolita. in the collected poems of Lord Byron. When he had written this title and drawn an ornamental line underneath, he fell into a daydream and began to draw diagrams on the cover of the book. The version of this that comes up in the novel is in the midst of Humbert's diary. And I've given you a piece of that diary to look at on your own on the handout. But this is the moment that directly alludes to Portrait, and it's really very important for understanding Nabokov's technique. Young People's Encyclopedia I found a map of the States that a child's pencil had started copying out on a sheet of lightweight paper. On the other side of the map was a mimeographed list of names referring, evidently, to her class at the Ramsdale School. A poem, a poem forsooth! So strange and sweet was it to discover this Haze Dolores: she, in its special bower of names with its bodyguard of roses, a fairy princess between her two maids of honor. ordinary materials of life become the basis for a kind of artistic achievement. However, obviously this is not like the Joyce, where there is a realistic depiction of a young boy trying to write, getting bored and failing. There is that bower of roses. That refers to Mary Rose Hamilton; Haze, Dolores; Hanek, Rosaline. And then there's Emile Rosado and Carmine Rose--a red rose--Angel, Grace-- really--Stella Fantasia. Lolita is a kind of artificial, processed, bland, easily consumable version of fate. You might think of it as having the same relation to real fate as Chicken McNuggets do to chicken. There is a short circuit between the Joycean idea of taking ordinary life and transforming it into an aesthetic order. In other words, chance is already fated. The ordinary is already aesthetic in the book. The randomness. of life is the same as chance.randomness.of life. thing that stands for randomness in this book, the thing that looks like ordinary detail, has already been arranged to give you artistic pleasure. So, the artificial has taken the place of the real here, and this novel really reminds you of that all the time. This is the, kind of, hand of Nabokov, taking a narrative of real events and twisting it into something that makes a kind of sense, taking fate and making it McFate. And I want to show you one more example of that, in the scene where Humbert and Lolita have reached the hotel, the Enchanted Hunter. 118 near the bottom. "In the slow, clear hand of crime, I wrote 'Dr. Edgar H. Humbert and daughter, 342 Lawn Street, Ramsdale' A key, 342, was half shown to me, magician showing object he is about to palm and hand it over to Uncle Tom." The coincidence--normally, in real life, it would be a delightful coincidence to go to a hotel room that has the same number as your street address. Here it's a kind of too-easy icon of the correspondence between the place where HumberT meets Lolita and the placewhere he rapes her. foreign country, lives in a kind of denaturalized world, a world where, instead of everything making instant sense everything has to be decoded. In that afterword to this book, Nabokov says he had to invent America. That's because he didn't know it already; it wasn't given to him. In a way this is a terrible state, a state of discontinuity with the world you exist in. But it has a payoff, kind of, a payoff which is the possibility precisely of inventing. because Humbert is a foreigner--into something you can laugh at, something youCan enjoy, something that you can apply the knight's move to. Gaston Godin says about the school that Lolita's going to go to, the girls are taught "not to spell very well, but to smell very well" The foreigner's love for this kind of move is a response to this denaturalized world of the exile. It's important, in this connection, to remember that the Knight's move as a way of avoiding obstacles keeps skipping over forms of violence. turn of the staircase was glazed with ruby, and that raw wound among the unstained rectangles and its asymmetrical position--a knight's move from the top--always extremely disturbed me. Nabokov will say that his private tragedy is that, let's see: [His] private tragedy, which cannot, and indeed should not, be anybody's concern, is that I had to abandon my natural idiom, my untrammeled, rich, and infinitely docile Russian tongue for a second-rate brand of English. the fear that it's too like what he wants to do. But the main point here to think about is that feeling of damage. On page 152, Nabokov's wife, Vera, drove him on thousands of miles of trips around the country while he was writing this novel and hunting butterflies. These techniques are really I think the source of the most appealing writing in this book, and so let's look now at one of those evocations of the American landscape which I just think maybe are the closest the book comes just to pure beauty. evocation of the landscape. "By a paradox of pictorial thought, the average lowland North American countryside had at first seemed to me something I accepted with a shock of amused recognition" Nabokov: "beyond the tilled plain, there would be a slow suffusion of inutile loveliness, a low sun in a platinum haze with a warm, peeled-peach tinge pervading the upper edge of a two-dimensional, dove-gray cloud fusing with the distant amorous mist" Humbert says the novel has as its only purpose to provide aesthetic bliss. So, a European artist actually appears again there, with Claude Lorrain, but kind of made strange: given that knight's move, given a new twist. So--instead of familiar, incorporated into this profoundly strange, vast landscape that gets Humbert's most appealing rhetoric--the rhetoric of an exile. But, I don't want you to think that this just means everything's okay. Of course, everything is not okay. Humbert Humbert: "We had been everywhere. We had really seen nothing" "I catch myself thinking today that our long journey had only defiled with a sinuous trail of slime the lovely, trustful, dreamy, enormous country" "We have to pair that with that other evocation of the landscape to see this alternate idea, that actually this distanced criss-crossing of the landscapes could be damaging" "There's another version, yet another, that relates back to that funny figure of Gaston Godin" There he was, in priggish New England, crooned over by the old and caressed by the young, oh, having a grand time and fooling everybody, and here was I. And the contrast here is between someone who has remained tied to that European past, remained comfortably alienated--and by that very means been able to fit into society. And in fact it's more than that: he translated Lolita back in to Russian later on, and he added a second afterword where he said this: That wondrous Russian tongue that, it seemed to me, was waiting for me somewhere. in safekeeping for so many years, proved to be nonexistent. And there is nothing behind the gate but charred stumps and a hopeless autumnal distance, and the key in my hand is more like a skeleton key. So, there's a kind of lost paradise of European culture which he can't get back, even with this spectacular effort in English. That suggests that it's not all to the good; it hasn't been saved by taking up these knight's move techniques, the defamiliarizing techniques; there's still a record of damage. element of violence that keeps coming back, the trail of slime across this dream of transforming reality, in this Joycean way, into something saved. Could it be that all of this modernist technique that Humbert succeeds in putting to his own ends is not an unambiguous good, but a record of a kind of damage? On Monday you're going to hear about this novel's confrontation with the idea that art could be saving, that it could somehow be redemptive, but here I think is a hint that it's something that the novel simply laughs at hollowly. the admirable way foreigners, or at least naturalized Americans, use our rich language. In other words, that the aesthetic discovery of English is something that just kind of fits comfortably into this prejudice of the dull suburban American. So, I'll just end there with this thought, this doubt, about Nabokov's own use of modernist technique in this novel. Whether it could be--not just that triumph of the imagination that Humbert sees in the list of the names--but a mark of a wound that can't be healed.