Professor Donald Kagan: We have been looking at the question of the rise of the polis. He says the concepts and the kind of characteristics I've been describing appear to spread all over the place. One of the ways in which we can date the pol is has to do with the Greek traditions about the establishment of colonies throughout the Mediterranean, he says. Kagan says the idea of the farmer hoplite citizen is a critical element in shaping a polis and for my money that's what the poli is about to start with. are a clue is because every time we see a colony, learn anything at all about it, it appears to exist in the form of a polis. So, that's the chronological significance of it. I should say all of these dates that I will be giving you are some combination of Greek tradition--and the Greeks dated these colonies very specifically. But you shouldn't take the date that I give you, the traditional date, as being firm. It's a general thing; it's around that time is the best we can really say. Greece is again that date we keep talking about, 750 roughly. But in fact, the earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773. The Greeks thought the earliest colony they ever established -- a place that they called Pithaecusa, which is the island of Ischia in the Bay of Naples. There's no question that there was a Greek colony there and as I say the archaeological remains confirm the general time for this happening. the natural thing to do given the character of life, which was based upon farming, if you leave you lose your farm, and based upon the difficulty of transportation. The Greeks were, even though they went to sea plenty, they were terrified of the sea for very good reason. Their ships, their boats were not very seaworthy; storms come up in the Mediterranean very suddenly and terribly; you take your life in your hands when you travel. So, what I'm saying is, when you leave the place you were born, you leave your ancestors as well. south Italians in the late nineteenth century and come--well, go all over the world actually, to South America, Australia, but the largest numbers to the United States. Why did they do that? Well, we don't have to do a lot of guessing. We have written evidence from the people who went and they say why they did it. One answer, and it's the one that is most widely believed among Greek scholars, is that the growth of population that we have mentioned in connection with the rise of the polis. four, how do you provide for the extra two? Well, sometimes you divide up the land equally, but if that land continues to get smaller and smaller, it will not sustain an additional person, not to mention additional family. So that clearly is a problem and the notion that land hunger is a key explanation, I think, is supported by the fact that wherever we find a polis, whatever other characteristics it has, and they vary, some of them are located at wonderful places on the sea. place for trade. They would have had to be damn fools to have settled there without that being in their minds. Some of the places where they settled leave us puzzled, and have left the ancients puzzled. One of my favorite examples is the colony on the south shore of the Bosporus, which is called Chalcedon. It's right opposite Constantinople--that doesn't exist, Istanbul. Winston Churchill never, never conceded that it was Istanbul; he called it Constantinople till the day he died. In any group of people there is a small minority, I want to emphasize small, who just love to do risky things. They just love adventure; they're never happy if they're safe, and so off they go seeking adventure and seeking to make a fortune however they're going to do it. So, for these reasons and probably for hundred of years, they've been colonizing. And now that we do have something, namely, this wave of colonization, they join that as well. Colony is a Latin word ultimately for colonia and the Roman colonies were, first of all, garrisons that they planted in land they had conquered to keep the people quiet. The Greek word for this is, apoikia, and most literally it would mean a home away, an away home and that's what they're making. They are establishing for themselves a household, a home someplace away from where they started. That's the name. And then later in history, in Roman history, that was the name given to establishments, rural establishments, when the civilization was breaking down. on those rural places really were not free men. They were the antecedents of the Serfs, which we will see later on in medieval history in Europe. So, when you see the word colonia in late Roman history, it's talking about something very, very different from what we're talking about. Remember that these are apoikiai from the Greek point of view. Somebody in one of the old Greek cities has to decide that he wants to go out and establish a colony. of eminence, and yet unlikely to be part of the sort of dominant faction in that city, because otherwise why would they leave? Anyway, the Greeks had a name for this individual. He was called an oikistes; he is the found of the colony. So, now he has decided to do it and he's gained recognition from the town council, let's say, and he can go forward. Now, he has to have an idea. He can't just say, I think I'd like to found a colony. What is more typical is that he thinks, I would like to take and have found a colonies on the southeastern coast of Sicily. Delphi is halfway up Mount Parnassus and it was thought by the Greeks to be the omphalos, the navel of the universe, the center in every way. There the god Apollo had established an oracle. Gases would escape through this gap in the earth and there were priests who worshipped Apollo there. They would place a young woman there who would sit as these gases came up and she would after a while begin to speak in tongues, which is to say she would rattle off a lot of language which nobody could understand. or so it sounded, or Greek but making no sense to anybody, and then the priest would listen to this stuff and he would say, what Apollo said through the priestess here is. Well, archaeologists investigated this carefully, and the French School of Archaeology late in the nineteenth century dug everything up and concluded this was baloney; it was a myth. There were no gases coming up from any of this stuff, and so everybody believed for the next century. John Hale of the Yale Class of 1973, who is now an archaeologist at the University of Louisville. learned, or having agreed, let's say, with my prejudice, that the higher naiveté must reign. And so he decided to investigate this and he took with him a fine geologist from Wesleyan just to go to the place there at Delphi. They discovered evidence that, in my judgment, but I don't think really anybody doubts it anymore, that totally confirmed the Greek story. They tell you precisely what the gases were, what the characteristics of those gases were. It squared beautifully with all details that we heard about the Delphic Oracle. King Croesus of Lydia, the richest man in the world, decides it would be a nice thing to conquer the Persian Empire, his neighbor to the east. So, he goes to--he's a barbarian, but the barbarians came to the Delphic Oracle too, because you want to know what the gods want. He said, "If I cross the Halys River, that's the boundary between Lydia and Persia, what will happen?" The oracle replied, "A great empire will be destroyed" lot of money to consult the oracle. Most of the things they asked were questions that really had a yes or no answer. According to my thinking, there's no way they could have been wrong very much. These people knew more than anybody else about these things, and so consulting that oracle was a very rational act indeed. "I'm suggesting to you is that this was the best information gathering and storing device that existed in the Mediterranean world," he says. 'I'm not going to do the words that they would have come up with' will decide whether it's a good idea for him or not. Recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. There are festivals held in each city just for its own citizens and my guess is that when you could do that, when you felt that you could recruit a full colony from your fellow citizens in Corinth, let us say, that's what you did. were not enough Corinthians who were ready to go with you on your expedition. So, you would try to take your message to one of the Pan-Hellenic festivals which were getting organized about this time. That would be a place where Greeks from all over might come and you could then try to recruit settlers for your new colony. So now you have everything in place, you've recruited your settlement, you get on your ships and sail, in this case out to the west central Mediterranean, you find your way to Sicily, work your way into the harbor at Syracuse and things work out. Syracuse is an independent polis, autonomous, self-governing, whatever regime it wants, etc. It is not a subject of anybody, not Corinth or anybody else. The most typical, the usual, everything else is an exception is that there are friendly relations between the mother city and the apoikia. But keep in mind that they are always independent, and an example is in the Peloponnesian War. The question really is, what kind of relations did they have? I would say there are three categories that they fall into. The city of Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. From where we sit, it looks like the Corinthians were making a gesture of friendship, of solidarity, the kind of thing you would expect a mother city to do, not to ignore its apoikia when it was in trouble. So that's all that they did. Corinth really had a very great deal to say about what was going on in the Peloponnesian War. Potidaea. got into trouble with Athens, and found itself besieged, Corinth sent a real army to go in there and fight, and I think that's because of this very special relationship that they had. At the other end of the spectrum it's again Corinth and they have a colony up in the northwest called Corcyra, it is the modern Island of Corfu. The first relationship between them is a navel battle, and thereafter we hear of them quarrelling and fighting with each other just about at least once a century. more time, that the overwhelming normal situation is the first one I described, friendly relations. These guys that have gone out, let us say to Syracuse, they are your people, they have relatives back home. They have friends back home, it is natural--oh by the way, they're accustomed to worship the gods in the same way that the Corinthians do. We do know, again, Thucydides is our source, that it was customary for colonies to send representatives back to the mother city for the religious observations that were common to them all. shop, but you can't get now, so you would want to buy what the Corinthians sell. Guess what? You've got great grain fields out there in Syracuse. Hard to believe today, but Sicily was one of the major granaries of the Mediterranean world at that time. Corinth always needs that kind of stuff, so we sell you our wheat, you sell us your pottery. You sell good wine that we can't grow yet and maybe never will be able to grow in our neighborhood. So you can see why it would be very natural for all sorts of ties to unite these colony and mother city. Kagan: Nobody was compelled to do anything. The British practicing mercantilism passed navigation acts, saying what ships could carry what and so on--nothing like that in the Greek world. Everybody--all of this is voluntary on both sides of every agreement. Okay, now where are these colonies? Let me give you a little run down. Before we get to that, I should say that the Greeks have already, before this period of the period, had colonies. In the back, yeah? Student: What extent was the primitive form of [inaudible]Professor Donald Kagan: Primitive form of what? By the tenth century B.C., we see Greek cities lining the coast of Asia Minor on the west, and even around on the bottom and to some degree on the north, and on the islands in the Aegean. So, there has been a Greek--what's the word I want? There is an expansion of the Greek world already by the 10th century. I might point out that the way the Greeks did their immigration into Asia Minor had a pattern so that you can go from north to south and you will find some consistency. The Black Sea is not a Greek lake, but there are Greek cities that are spotted along the coast. When the mythical mission of Jason and his Argonauts go sailing out to that territory, he is out there in Tarzan country. As far as the Greeks were concerned, it was just the wild out in that territory and remember he marries and brings home a wife, Media, and she, of course, is like no Greek woman who ever lived. She can perform magic and she can do monstrous things that you can't imagine a Greek woman doing. there, Palestine, there are no Greek cities there and that is because during the period we're talking about those regions were occupied by civilized powerful people. Nobody would even dream of trying to take them on and building cities that would challenge their control of that area. So that is not territory that you can build colonies; you've got powerful empires to deal with. There is one exception. In the sixth century, I think it's around--imagine around 550 or something like that, the Greeks settle a single colony in the Delta. of the Nile of Egypt at a place called Naucratis, and the root of that word is ship. It is a trading post and it's there by permission of and under the protection of the King of Egypt. So, that's a great exception to everything I've been saying. Going west, would you believe, when you get into what is now Libya, there was a very important Greek colony of Cyrene and that whole region was called Cyrenaica and it was a Greek. powerful. It tried to control not only North Africa, but the waters of the Mediterranean in the west entirely. The Carthaginians, in fact, have a powerful pied à terre in the western part of Sicily. So, that's how far east they get and in time the Carthaginian also cross over into Spain and they control some portion of the Spanish coast closest to Africa. There are now Greek cities on the coast of Spain and there continue to be Greek cities, not everywhere, in a spotty way into France. Greeks are not interested. You will find very rare of the case of a Greek city, which is founded away from the sea; they always wanted to be close to the sea. Lots of these towns sent colonists up north into the Dardanelles and so on and beyond. Some of the same cities send out colonies to Sicily, so that for the real colonizing states there was no limit to where they would send people who wanted to go in those areas. Thebes, the greatest city in Boeotia, also does not colonize. what can we speculate is the meaning of that? What we find is that the states who are doing most of the colonizing are located where most ofThe trade was going on at this point in history. When I say manufacturing, you understand everything is done by hand, but you see things like shops that contain a number of slaves working for a master. In some cases, especially the later on you go, some shops that have quite a few slaves that worked to produce these things. Well, these places are the ones that have the trade, the industry, and also engage in colonization. is easy to see that where there is that kind of conflict and trouble, there would be people who would want to flee that and to go elsewhere. It might well be that the people who won those wars, internal wars, would have been glad to send them away rather than to have these discontented people and these folks who were their enemies hanging around town and making trouble. It is only speculation, but it seems to make sense and we know we don't hear of such troubles within Athens and Thebes, and Sparta. they never lived before and their presence has a real impact of a different degree in every place. I would say that typically their impact was greater in the west and the north than it was in the east and the south. They had very little to teach or to impose upon those people rather than vice versa. If you look at Greece in this period, I don't know if I've used this term before, but some scholars refer to this general period we're talking about as the Greek renaissance by analogy to the renaissance in Italy. Greeks learned a great deal from Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations. The Greeks are sopping up tremendously useful information and talent, and skills. It is inconceivable the Greeks could have developed a civilization that they did without contact with these eastern civilizations. There was also, of course, some influence of the Greeks on the people they went to. But it's evident that they borrowed stuff from the Greeks in every element of life, although it didn't shape their lives in a potent, fundamental way. who have interests rather different from those of the most primitive polis you could imagine. Some scholars early on in the century, moved by Marxist theories, suggested that you had a capitalist class growing up, there's just no evidence of that; it's just wrong. My guess is that the earliest traders of any scope were probably noblemen who also had land and estates back home, but who had the opportunity, the know-how, the connections to make it possible to make a lot of living in trade. is going on. More and more farmers are becoming independent, self-sustaining, hoplite farmers of the kind that I've described. They're not going to feel the same way about it, there's going to be pressure from them for a better participation in the decisions that are made in the state. And also there will be some rich people, very rich people,. rich in a different way from the way people used to be rich; rich meant the best land. There will be people who will have wealth in the form of precious things and I would use the word money. come to mean weights of silver or gold. So now you have a change in fundamental economic things. Well, all of this is tied up with this colonial story I've been telling you. Finally, I think, it works in both directions at the same time in terms of the impact all of these changes have on the political situation. On the one hand the changes, that is (A) the rise of the hoplite class; (B) the development of lots of commerce and industry and wealth in a new kind. especially, some scholars have pointed out, I think persuasively, also for some considerable time provided an answer to that problem in the form of an escape valve. Americans didn't have the kind of terrible class warfare and the terrible warfare within cities that the Europeans had experienced throughout most of their history. Really unhappy and angry people could always go west, get new places. I mean, fundamentally, Kansas is a colony in a certain Greek sense, all of these places are. So, that's part of the story of why America had the very lucky early history that it had. that colonization provided something analogous to that for the Greek people. So now, here we are somewhere in the seventh century, most of these places I've been talking about have been settled, the currents that I have been describing are flowing and the kinds of problems they have give rise to what will be felt in most of the towns. That is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.