Professor Steven Smith: I want to look at two sets of issues. One is Locke's theory of the constitutional state, particularly focusing on the role of the executive, vis-a-vis the legislative branch of government. The other is thinking about Locke and the American regime and the current state of political philosophy, modern contemporary American political philosophy. Smith: Locke doesn't endorse necessarily one particular form of government from any other. He is an advocate of what we have come to call limited government, of constitutional government. a domestic, not an international issue, which is to say, in the case of a fire in a city it is sometimes necessary, he says, in his day for the fire department to tear down the house of an innocent person. This is acting for the public good of the community, even while in some ways it's clearly a violation of rights of property and so on. In fact, the example is not so far fetched. Think today for example about arguments we have today. Even in Connecticut, there's a big argument going on about the right of what's called "eminent domain" Locke asks what are the limits of this prerogative power. What check, if any, is there on this power to prevent their abuse? This is beginning to sound more and more in respects like Machiavelli than the advocate of, again, limited government. This power comes into play, he says, especially during times of national crisis or emergency when it is necessary to act for the public safety. And again, this seems to have special resonance for us today as we face issues like states of emergency and states of exception. utilize when ordinary constitutional operations, like the rule of law, prove to be inadequate. Consider Lincoln's famous suspension of habeas corpus during the Civil War. Lincoln argued quite forcefully that this sort of prerogative power is already deeply embedded within the structure of constitutional government. The Constitution seems to embody within itself, our constitution that is, this Lockean power ofprerogative that comes into effect or can be legitimately exercised in times of rebellion or invasion. Are we living in that kind of age now, not rebellion perhaps? John Locke's Second Treatise is a key source for thinking about constitutional issues today. In a constitutional crisis, Locke says the people have no other remedy but to appeal to Heaven. Locke affirms here a right of revolution. Locke's doctrine of consent and legislative supremacy should make him a hero to Democrats, to radical Democrats, and even libertarians, says Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: A judgment on America is very much a judgment on the philosophy of Locke, if anyone is to be considered more or less the philosopher-king of America. For many years and for many people, even today, the affiliation between Locke and America has been regarded in a largely although not wholly, largely positive light. For many historians and political theorists, our stability, our system of limited government, our market economy has been the result of a sort of broad consensus over Lockean principles. For still other thinkers, more or less on the left, Locke legitimized an ethic of what was called "possessive individualism" And for still others, in many ways more recently, Locke's emphasis upon rights and the protection suggests a purely or overly legalistic conception of politics. John Rawls wrote a book in 1973 called A Theory of Justice. In many ways, Rawls' book was an attempt to update the liberal theory of the state. He invokes the idea of a state of nature, an original condition, as he calls it, a theory of rights. For Locke, going back to chapter 5 of the Second Treatise, rights derived from a theory. of self-ownership. It is on this rock that Locke builds his edifice of natural rights, justice, and limited government. a more or less kind of random or arbitrary genetic lottery or social lottery of which I or you happen to be the unique beneficiaries. Fortune, luck, Machiavellian fortuna, in that way, is utterly arbitrary and therefore, Rawls concludes, I should not be regarded as the possessor but merely the recipient of what talents, capacities and abilities that I may, again, purely arbitrarily happen to possess. So what does that mean in terms of social policy or theory of government? The result of Rawls' difference principle and its fundamental difference with that of John Locke could not be more striking. For Rawls, our endowments are never really our own to begin with. They are part of a common or collective possession to be shared by society as a whole. The capacities of hard work, ambition, intelligence and just good luck that, for example, got you to Yale, on Rawls' account, do not really belong to you or at least the fruits of those ambitions and intelligence and good luck. They're not yours or mine, in any strong sense of the term, but rather, a collective possession. or your drive or your endowments are, again, what he calls a collective asset. Think about that. And it is this conception of common assets that underwrites Rawls' theory of distributive justice and the welfare state. Unlike Locke, whose theory of self-ownership provides a moral justification for the individual, for the self, for our moral personality, RawLS' difference principle maintains that we never again belong to ourselves at all. We never really have ownership in ourselves. but are always part of a larger social "we," a social collective, a collective consciousness whose common assets can be redistributed for the benefit of the whole. Both of these views, again, they begin from common premises but move in very different directions. Locke's theory of self-ownership regards the political community in largely negative terms. Rawls' theory of common assets regards the community in a far more positive sense as taking an active role in reshaping and redistributing the products of our individual endeavors for the common interests. John Rawls and Jean-Jacques Rousseau disagree on the theory of inequality. John Rawls says Rousseau's theory is more correct. John Sutter: Rousseau is right to be concerned about inequality. Sutter says his view is closer to American theory, to Locke's theory, than Rawls' is to Rawls. The debate will take place on Wednesday on CNN at 10 p.m. ET. Click here to watch the debate on CNN.com/John Sutter. Rawls wants government to work for the benefit of the least advantaged but this will require the extensive and often arbitrary use of judicial power. The result would be, I think if we follow Rawls' teachings to their letter, a class of chief justices endowed with the power to rearrange and redistribute our collective assets for the sake of achieving the maximum degree of social equality. It is no surprise that the warmest reception that Rawls’ writing gets today is in the schools of law. He has had an enormous influence on shaping the education of the current and the next generation of lawyers. Some historians, let me just mention again, Louis Hartz was but the most famous, treat America as a nation uniquely built upon Lockean foundations. America, he believed, remained something of a Lockean remnant--a Lockean, yeah, remnant, fossil in some ways, in a world increasingly governed by more radical forms of modernity. I am not suggesting for a moment that Locke is some kind of cure all. But Locke's effort to build a kind of modern republican government on the low but solid foundations of self-interest and self-ownership and the desire for comfortable preservation could not help but generate its own forms of dissatisfaction. satisfy the deepest longings of the human soul? Can a regime, devoted to the rational accumulation of property answer those higher order needs or higher order virtues, like honor, nobility and sacrifice? Can the avoidance of pain, discomfort and anxiety produce anything more than contemporary forms of Epicureanism and Nihilism? In any case, I'm suggesting no more than any other land could America insulate itself from the great heights as well as the great depths of later forms of modernity. We are but a moment in the kind of comprehensive self-dissatisfaction that is modernity so that a return to Lockeanism, in many ways, is not so much a cure for the pathologies ofmodernity.