NORVIN RICHARDS: Today is phonetics, which means that today we begin making funny sounds at each other. Let's see. I'm trying to remember if there's anything that I ought to announce. You remember, maybe, that problem set 1, which confusingly is your second problem set, is due on Thursday. Normally, it would be due on Tuesday. But because I am technologically challenged, it's due Thursday. I just figured out how to get the projector to project over there instead of in the middle. When we speak, if we're speaking an oral language, what we are typically doing is producing a flow of air. And it gets obstructed in various ways in the vocal tract. One way of categorizing the various things that your vocal tract does to the airflow is by what's called place of articulation. So for example, there are what are called bilabial sounds. These are sounds which are made with both lips. And that's what we're going to do. This picture over here on the right is the old technique. And we'll go back to the old days. right is what's called the sagittal section. That is, it's a picture of someone's head cut in half so that you can see the stuff that's inside. Those arrows are meant to get you to imagine that this person is making a sound by putting their two lips together. So that's what you do for the sounds that are at the beginnings of words like "paint" and "bath," and "mouth," and well, "wipe" where your lips don't touch, but they both move. letters of the English alphabet. There are also what are called labiodental sounds. Labiodentals are made with your bottom teeth and your upper lip. We'll talk about other kinds of articulation that English doesn't use, but I think that one just doesn't exist. And again, two symbols of the IPA, which again, are not going to be used. And so that's a symbol of the International Phonetic Alphabet. As we go along, we will be seeing weirder and weierder symbols from the International phonetic alphabet. Interdental sounds are linguistically not hugely common. We have them in English. There are various dialects of Arabic that have them. But they're not all that common. These are the sounds of the beginnings of words like "thistle" and "this" The symbol for the sound of the beginning of "face" is an f, and the symbol for "vase" is a v. The International Phonetic Alphabet is there so that we can unambiguously talk about what we're talking about. There are two different IPA symbols for them. The Greek letter theta is used for the sound at the beginning of "thistle" And that second letter is an old English letter, still used in Icelandic. It's sometimes called "edh," and it stands for thesound at the start of "this" Then there are what are called alveolar sounds. If you put your tongue at the top of your mouth and drag it-- so put it first against your front teeth and then drag it backwards along the top. another new symbol. That's the symbol for the sound of the beginning of a "ship," and another new symbol that's the sound in the middle of "azure," the "zh" sound. Both of those are postalveolar sounds. A little further back, there are what are called palatal sounds. These are either even further behind the alveolar ridge, back where the roof of your mouth gets as high as it's going to get. And the one palatal sound that we have in English is the "y" sound at the start of "year" The IPA symbol for that sound is a "j" Continuing our tour of the mouth, there are what are called velar sounds. In the velar sound, the body of your tongue is up against what's called the velum. The velum is responsible for partitioning your mouth from your nose through your oral cavity. And then further down, further down in your throat, you've got the vocal cords, the glottis, this space that's down there inyour throat around your larynx, and your vocal folds. English doesn't make a huge amount of use of the glottal stop. But it's what shows up at the beginnings of words like "uh-uh" That catch that you're getting in your throat-- that's a glottan stop. The way you make that is by basically slamming your vocal folds together to close off the flow of air. That's how you make an "h," right? As in, what's my word up there-- "help," yeah. I think your tongue is in motion as you are making that sound. So it makes one-- it completely stops the flow of air. And then it gradually peels back and allows the air to flow out. You can think of that first thing it's doing as-- I'm on completely the wrong slide-- as being like an alveolar stop, right? So it's like a "t." And then as it peelsback, "ch," you end up with something like a 'shuh,' like a postalveolar. "Puh" is not an English word for me. There are dialects of English in which that's something you would say, right? "Puh." There are places in English where things that we write as other kinds of sounds actually are, in fact, glottal stops, at least in my English. "Can't" is really just "can" plus aglottal stop. I'm not saying "can't," usually, unless I'm being very emphatic. in mind? STUDENT: No. So we haven't gotten yet to "r." We'll get to " r," eventually. But actually, people discovered at a certain point-- so people investigate this kind of thing in all kinds of ways. These days, people do a lot of MRIs. I'm going to put on the website a couple of websites that have charts of all of the sounds that we're going to talk about plus many more together with MRIs of the insides of people's mouths making these sounds. "r" is one of the kinds of sounds that people classically have trouble with. If you've been around small children, for example, it's standard for them to not quite get "r" right and to say something that sounds more like a "w" at a certain stage. So a place of articulation is obviously not the whole story. Here's another part of the story. It's what's called voicing. So if you think about an "s" and a "z," those are both alveolar sounds. Your tongue is reaching toward the alveolars. "Cat" and "dog" end in sounds that differ in voicing. We say that "z" is voiced and that "s" is voiceless. It's like whistling with a blade of grass, or playing a reed instrument, right? It's getting something to vibrate really fast. And that's what you're hearing and feeling if you put your hand right here when you're doing a "z." That's that buzzing sound that you're seeing and feeling. or-- what's my other example here-- "th" [pronounced as in "thistle"] and "th," right? If you whisper "safe" and "save"-- (WHISPERING) "safe," "save,"-- (SPEAKING NORMALLY) you have the feeling that you can hear the difference between them, yeah? I think if you were to whisper one of these-- so do a controlled experiment. Go back to your dorm. Whisper toyour dorm mate, (WHispering) " safe." And then find out what they think you said. [LAUGHS] Oh, boy. The complaints. f, v, f, f,. v, v. f, v,. v. Does anybody feel a difference between "f" and "v"? Not here, right? Yeah? STUDENT: I guess the "v" is more-- there's more air [INAUDIBLE] NORVIN RICHARDS: So yes? STUDent: Also, my mouth is opening slower, I think. NORVin RICHards: Ah, there might be a difference in the aperture of your mouth. Student: I actually have the opposite of your feeling. what it means is that your vocal cords are vibrating. But I think maybe what we're learning is that you do some other things, too, to optimize the flow of air so that you will get a good vibration going. There's experimental work on this. This is the kind of thing people try to figure out. Yeah, really good question. OK. So when you whisper, you're not engaging your vocal cord, but you're doing all of the other stuff. And that's what you're using to hear the difference. or they can not be vibrating. So you have voiced sounds and you have voiceless sounds. "s" and "t" are voiceless. And "z" and 'd' are voiced. Does that all sound right? Is anyone upset by any of that? Disturbed? Alarmed? Hungry? Yeah, anything? OK, good. So it's back to the Polish plurals. We saw before, we convinced ourselves, or I convinced myself-- and I tried to take the rest of you with me as collateral damage. end in "p" when you add the "e," the suffix, like corpse. Voiced "b" becomes the voiceless version, which is "p," yeah? Those are both bilabial sounds. They involve both your lips. There's a reason that I started with sounds like "s" and "d" and not "s," "c," "d," "b," "u," "a," "f," "g," "m," "n" "z," and "f" and "v" Because you can go s, z, s, Z for as long as you have, breath right? Whereas buh-- there's a limit to how long you can "b," yeah? We just said the way voicing works is that you've got air flowing across your vocal folds and making them vibrate, right? And for a "z," you can see how that would work. So the air just flows. For a "B," well, the air only has so far to go, yeah? That's one reason you can't keep a "b" going for very long. voiced sounds are becoming voiceless. So "z" becomes "s" "d" become "t" "b" becomes 'p" and 'g' becomes 'k' "n" is voiced in the sense that you are stopping the air from flowing through your mouth. "zh" and "sh" are the postalveolar fricatives. And the "zh," is the voiced one, and the sh is the voiceless one. OK. So now we have these three ways of categorizing these kinds of speech sounds-- place, and manner, and voicing. doing an "n," you've stopped the flow of air in your mouth. By lowering the velum, you're allowing air to flow through your nose. This is a nasal stop, a voiced alveolar nasal-- people often just call them nasals because nasal fricatives. For "t" and "d," the airflow is stopped at theAlveolar ridge. For 'n,' the airflow also is stopped. It's stopped right there. It can't go through the mouth. But it goes through the nose. English doesn't allow words to begin with velar nasals. But there are languages that do. Tagalog, for example, the word for now is [TAGALOG]. So it starts with a velar nasal. One of the entertaining things about learning Tagalog is learning how to make sounds that start with velars. If you're an English speaker, you're not used to it. So we've got stops and fricatives and nasals, nasal stops. Things can be voiced or voiceless. about any of this? Is anybody looking at this and saying, whoa, this table has grown out of my ability to keep up? Yeah? STUDENT: Question about the [INAUDIBLE].. NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. English doesn't allow words to begin with velar nasals. We don't have any words that start with a sound that's at the end of words like "song" or "year" There are plenty of languages that do. system for categorizing sounds. Why isn't there anything there or there? And what would it be like if it were there? We'll do a little bit of that in a second. But yeah, you're right. So we haven't yet talked about the kind of sound that the IPA symbol "j"-- the sound we usually write with "y" in English, the sound of the beginning of "year"-- we haven's put that on the table yet. We'll get to it. English doesn't have a bilabial fricative. But there are languages that do. In Japanese, you must learn to pronounce the "f" bilabially rather than labiodentally. In English, we have a labiodental "f," with our lower lip against our teeth. In Japan, your teeth are not involved. It is only your lips, yeah? Yeah? What would a buh bilabials sound like? Vh, vh. And that exists, too. There are dialects of Spanish where if you have a "g" between vowels, it'll get this kind of sound, in words like "agua" English doesn't have that. But there are languages out there that do, languages like Hmong, for example, which is a minority language spoken in Vietnam. Let's skip palatal and do velar. We've got velar stops in English-- "k" and "g," kuh and guh. And we'veGot velar nasals, nnnn. What would a velar fricative sound like? Kh. in your vocal tract. But you're allowing the air to flow through your nasal cavity, right? That's what a nasal stop is. Or velar nasal, "ng," like at the end of "king," you're also lowering the volume and letting the air flow through. A glottal nasal-- you'd have to stop the flow of air down there at the vocal folds and let the air go through your velum. So you would need, again, as I say, probably there are unethical surgeons who would modify you so that you could makeglottal nasals. English has interdental fricatives-- thuh and thuh. There are languages out there that have what are called dental stops. Part of your job, if you're learning Tagalog, for example, is to learn to make dental "t"s instead of alveolar "t," because that's what they've got. If you're studying another language, this is the kind of thing to think about because sometimes, your teacher will not be thinking about this. But you should. out what's going on in your vocal tract exactly as you do this stuff. There's all this work on what people do to compensate for various kinds of obstructions in the vocal tract. So yeah, that's another set of IPA symbols. These are your first IPA diacritics, I guess, those little square doohickeys under the "t" and the "d" there. Those indicate that that particular "t," those are dental. There are even languages out there that have both dental and alveolar "t's. The languages of Australia often don't make voicing distinctions. So they have stops, but they don't distinguish voiced from voiceless. They have places of articulation and lots of them, and nasals in all those places as well. But there is no distinction between voiced and voiceless in Australian languages. OK, any other questions about this chart before we zoom past it? Like I say, there will be a link to charts that will look, hopefully, like this, more official charts by the IPA, which will have sound files so that you can listen to trained phonologists making the sounds. English just does not use. what are called retroflex sounds. These are sounds in which the tip of your tongue is on your palate. Instead of a tuh, you're making a cuh-- [NON-ENGLISH]. Retroflex sounds are very popular in India, and Australia, and Indonesia. They're all over the place. And there's a retroflex lateral, too, right? NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah, mm-hmm. Yeah. uvula, which is the little doohickey that hangs down there at the back. That's your uvula. We do not have these in English, at least when we're feeling well. But there are languages out there the do. Inupiaq has a uvular stop. It has one at the end of the name. The Inu at the beginning means people. And piaq is a suffix meaning something like real, or normal, or regular. German, right? So if you're pronouncing the French word for "red," one of the ways to do it is with this fricative, to say "rouge"-- "rgh". That "rGH" sound is a voiced uvular fricatives. And then there are also pharyngeals. Pharyngeal. involve constriction near the pharyn.geal wall. Arabic has these. The Berber languages have these. You're getting the back of your tongue to get against the back. of your vocal tract. uvulars, retroflexes. And for some reason, the dental stops are still red. I don't know why. Have to fix that. OK. Now people keep asking me about sounds that I've been carefully avoiding, so let's talk about them. There are what are called approximants. Approximants are not stops, and they're not fricatives. They're not nasals. They involve your articulators vaguely gesturing towards each other in some part of your vocal tract. A "w" is like an "oo" sped up. A "y" sound, yuh, is a sped-up version of an "e" as opposed to an "r" or an "l," which are just something else. So why don't we just use the letter "u" for the bilabial glide, for the "w"? And let me see if I can come up with a good answer to that. Eventually, we're going to get to-- so far, all we're doing is talking about sounds individually. There are rules for the distribution of sounds for which it's useful to have that distinction. We make that distinction as long as it turns out to be useful for explaining stuff. Sounds like chuh and juh-- I think I said you could think of chuh as a stop, a "t" followed by a fricative, shuh, or juh. There's a little bit of a debate about whether what I just just said is true or not. But that's the prima facie reason for distinguishing them. said is the right way to think about this or not. What people do is say, yeah, there's this package deal, an affricate. When you're trying to figure out what sequences of sounds are allowed in a syllable in a given language, sometimes it's useful to be able to say this is a language that doesn't ever, ever allow, say, a stop followed by a fricative. Oh, but it's OK for it to end with chuh. That's the move people make, yeah. There are glides like wuh and yuh. There are some other glides there which I can try to read to you. What would a labiodental glide sound like? Vuh, right? Like a "v" sound. English doesn't have those. I believe Hindi does. Similarly, there are velar glides, [NON-ENGLISH],, where your tongue is just vaguely gesturing in the direction of your velum. It looks like something out of Tolkien. English has a very large number of vowels and a not-very-good system for writing them. This is one of the things that makes English spelling so difficult that we can actually have competitions where you watch people spell. In Finnish, the spelling bee would just never end because every word is pronounced exactly the way it's spelled. We don't do that in English. So here are two vowels. And those are their IPA symbols. The vowel in "bead" and the vowels in "bad" For "ee," your tongue is tense. And it's up there at the top of your mouth. And then for "ah" your tongue drops, right? And in fact, it drops so far that it drags your jaw down with it. So one way of classifying vowels is in terms of height. And there are vowels in-between, like the vowel in "hate" That vowel is called mid. So we have high vowels and we have mid vowels, and then we have low vowels. For "ooh," my tongue curls backward. And it avoids my molars. I think that's the thing you were saying just now. Is that the experience people are having? Everybody do some more ee,. ooh, ee, ooh. Feel your tongue moving back and forth. Ignore your lips, right? And think about your tongue. Yep. OK, so we have high, mid, and low vowels, but we also have front and back vowels. Back vowels are vowels like the vowel in "who" and the vowel of "hoed" English is supposed to have five vowels. It does not have five. It has 14. Why do we only have five letters for vowels? Who gave us this alphabet? The Romans, right? Yeah. And in Latin, there in fact are five vowel, which can be either long or short. And so we've ended up with 12, 14 vowels, different dialects of English are different. And we have 5 letters to spell them with. And this is why we have spelling bees. yeah-- one of the reasons. OK, so I've written six of our five vowels here on this chart. And then we have more. So think about "ooh" and "uh," in "who'd" and 'hood," or "ee," and 'ih" in 'heed' and 'hid," or 'ay' and'eh' in 'raid' and "red" or 'oh' and '' in 'coat,' 'caught' There are various ways of talking about this distinction. We say that there's a distinction between what are called tense vowels. English doesn't have words that end in "ih," "uh," or "eh," with the possible exception of "meh" English doesn't even have monosyllables that start with these vowels. The first vowel in "machine" is a schwa. It's not higher back. It is not front. It isn't high. It doesn't stop. It stops. It just stops. There are more vowels in English. Anybody want to attempt to pronounce them? Yeah. English monosyllables can't end in lax vowels that are either front or high. Not all speakers of English distinguish schwa from wedge. Not every dialect of English has all of these vowels or has them all in the same places. "caught" and "cot" are different, have different vowels in them. "dove" [the bird] is pretty similar to schwa and is sometimes represented with that wedge shape there, which is called a wedge. people who pronounce "caught" and "cot" the same. For me, those are two different vowels. I pronounce those three words-- "merry," "marry," and "Mary" The vowel in the last one is more of an ash. I associate that with New Jersey, where-- you're from New Jersey. OK, yeah. We're just about out of time. Let me just give this to you as an exercise. And then we'll stop. Anybody want to try to pronounce the first of those? this exercise next time. As we go along, I'm going to be asking you to read things in IPA. So I'll start putting IPA on the slides more and more. So start trying to familiarize yourself with it and get to where you're familiar with at least the symbols for sounds that we use in English. Do you want me to read the rest of them? I'll do some more IPA. OK, so what's the second one? STUDENT: "Sue says he's a bad egg."