see then it will go right but some extra amount of plasma or plasma fluid most of it enters into space or DC and then goes back but some which remains extra which is no drain back into sinusoids that will drain into the periphery and that will convert into length right so lymph is moving from the center to the periphery now in between the hepatocytes the parasites are draining on this side secreting on the other side what does what is the substance bile and bile is moving to the center. This is the lymphatic which is a drainage system right and here we can make what is this bile duct so how many things were in present how many channels or systems are present at the corner of this classical Lube you the four systems but unfortunately because early astrologists did not recognize the lymphatics so they thought there are only three system there is a branch of portal or this branch of puerto bean. Later on of course the new it is not portal triad it is portalTriad this is it right or simply we call it. portal area what we call it plural area so at the outer corners of the hexagonal lobules we have portal areas in every portal area. We have portal vein input we have artery hepatic arterial input and we have two drainage system there is lymphatic drainage system and bile duct drainage system. Blood is moving from the periphery to the center into these hepatic classic lobules and of course you should not forget to mention that bile is that right and in the same direction. you understanding me right these bile ducts from every corner and this is left hepatic duct and what is this right hepaticduct. I will drain the I will draw the whole structure here so once forever it must be clear hopefully is a side diagram but it has it is a very important anatomical implication. What is this here yes what is the structure thank Ria's great now what really happens this is right hepatics duct what is  common hepatic  duct and from here which is coming here I will make the gallbladder here. coming here what is this cystic duct and now all this together is called common bile duct it is coming behind the do denim of course come into pancreas. Common bile and pancreatic duct come together and open here in Tudor denim at the employ of weatr here pancreatic juices and bile will come down other right again the relationship right and left the Patek duck and - what is the common hepatic duct meeting with the sister making what isThis.