The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. today is that the coherent state is a complex number. The coherent state has a time evolution. It moves in a circle. And this is really the phasor of the electric field associated with it. So coherent state, the alpha value is directly related to an electric field. That's why this state is closely related to the classical limit of the electromagnetic field. We looked at the fluctuations and showed that it's a Poissonian statistic. And then we use now-- once you define something, you can use it as a tool. I think the standard deviation here is-- what is it, square root 1 over square root 2? Because the Gaussian has usually 2 times sigma squared. And that showed us that the coherent states are not orthogonal. So therefore the coherent state is not a delta function in the causal probability. It's a little bit blurred circle with an area on the order of unity. And you have some homework assignment to look at it. You can read pretty much everything you want from this diagram. look at a number state-- Well, you often know in quantum mechanics, number and phase are complimentary. If the number of photons is fixed, you know nothing about the phase. And indeed the quasi-probability of a numberState is a ring. It has no phase. It's completely random phase over the 2 pi circle. The energy is sharp of aNumberState, since the energy is e squared. But what you get is also something blurred on the order of unity. In the analogy with the harmonic oscillator, the electric field was a minus a dagger. In those quasi-probabilities-- and we will see more about it-- something which is sharp in momentum is a sliver parallel to the x-axis. So therefore, since momentum is electric field, you always get the electric fields by projecting onto the vertical axis. And if this quasi- Probability starts to rotate due to the time evolution, we get an oscillating electromagnetic field. fuzziness. For instance, if you would say the phase is determined by the 0 crossing, you don't know exactly when the0 crossing happened, and that corresponds to an uncertainty in the phase. So this fuzziness here is the intrinsic uncertainty of quantum physics. So that's what we want to discuss today. But then we will immediately start with non-classical states. And that is, well, if this area is determined. by Heisenberg's uncertainty relation, what can be maybe deform the circle into an ellipse, and these are three states of light. In quantum mechanics, you cannot measure x and p simultaneously. These are non-commuting variables. So therefore, what happens is, if you now define a phase space function, which is done in quantum mechanics textbooks, you can actually do it in three different ways. And the three different way are Q, P, and W. The definition of those functions involves the operator definition, a and a dagger. If you define something in units of X and p or a and the dagger, you could actually do something in three ways. have a product which is fully symmetric i in the ordering of x p, which is anti-normal or normal. The reason why I picked for the course Q of alpha is that it's a real probability, it's always positive. The other guys, P of alpha, can be positive or negative. And also, W of alpha can be negative or positive. But the fact is all three have their advantages and disadvantages. So they all have pluses and minuses. And as a result, it can be written like this. the coherent state is now not this Gaussian. It doesn't have thisGaussian distribution as a course of probability. The probability of the coherent state alpha has a delta function peak at alpha, which is sort of nice. And the number state is not a ring of a finite radius. You would naively expect the energy is sharp. The square root of the energy's electric field, shouldn't it be sharp? And indeed, it issharp. It's actually worse than aDelta function. The Wigner distribution is something you actually find in most quantum mechanics textbooks. The Q and P distribution are more common in quantum optics. The projection on the x- and y-axes are indeed psi of x squared, psi of p squared. So you get actually the x wave function and the p wave function. But of course it has a disadvantage that it has negative values, and try to explain to your next neighbor what is a negative probability. Some people don't get it. actually see negative probabilities spring out the non-classical character. In the bigger picture, all the three distributions are the same. It's more sort of on the level of whether something is a delta function or has widths unity. So on the small scale, it matters. But if you map out something on a bigger scale, they are all related to each other. And for the rest off today and the next class, when I show you those phase space distribution, I'm not completely rigorous which of the three functions I've really chosen. want to understand in more depth the fluctuations. And in particular, I want to show you that coherent states are minimum uncertainty states. So by identifying the vertical axis with p, the horizontal axis with x, we immediately expect that we find a result related to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. And what we find is that it's square root h-bar over 2 omega and, for delta P, it is squareroot h- bar over omega 2. And maybe, Colin, to address your question, I could imagine that. coherent states were maybe invented by simply saying, We have an harmonic oscillator data. We want to find the minimum. uncertainty states for which the uncertainty in x and p, when expressed in natural units, is. The coherent state is the solution to the following question. If you plot the quasi-probability distribution, you give yourself an uncertainty area. The minimum uncertainty state means that the area of the 2 uncertainties, delta P times delta Q is h-bar over 2. In the real part of alpha times the uncertainty in the imaginary part ofalpha for the quasibability, then this is 1/4. OK. So what we have learned is that-- just one second. We have learned about one way to characterize uncertainties-- the quantumness of the electromagnetic field. The fluctuations of the intensity are usually expressed by the second order temporal coherence function. The classical description is you measure the intensity of light. And then you'll see what is the difference between quantum states of light and classical light. But I always feel that if you want to really appreciate the quantum character, you have to know the classic description first. It is simple. It's quantum mechanical. It’s exact. That's what we want to introduce now. Yes, this is theSecond order temporal correlation or coherencefunction. the product. And you normalize it by the average intensity squared. So if tau equals 0, it's nothing else than the intensity squared average. And I've left the proof to the homework to show that the classical g2 of tau is always larger than 1. But you can show that this is also the case for finite tau. So quantum mechanically, we will see that the g2 function is not necessarily larger than1, it can be smaller than1. And that's actually an interesting-- you can see-- litmus test for the quantumness. with it and use a classical intensity to calculate the second order correlation function, you get something which is larger than 1. This is similar to what I said before when you want to show that you have non-classical light, you do quantum state homography, measure the Wigner distribution, and show that the Wigneder distribution has negative quasi-probabilities. It's only possible if you have a truly non- classical state. The expectation values would need averaging over time, not over ensembles of I of t. In classical physics, you can determine an ensemble average by taking an ergotic system and observing it at many, many times. The idea is that one system as time goes by will sample all possible states. So in other words, you would actually think, if you switch on a light bulb with a stable power supply, that the light emitted by the light bulb will go through all possible quantum states as time evolves. So how do we generalize that to quantum mechanics? Well, one possibility would be that-- OK. of tau is we measure the intensity now and a little bit later. But measuring the intensity really means absorbing photons. So what is more closely related to an experiment how you measure the correlation function is you want to look at something else, namely at the probability of absorbing 2 photons. And this is your total probability that you can absorb 2 photons out of an initial state. But since you're in sum now over all final state, this turns into-- Now, I could put for you as in the final state is a complete basis. But I can't. In many, many textbooks, the discussion would start with this expression. And you realize yes, for some measurement with photomultipliers, that's what you measure. But I wanted to show you how it is related to the intensity correlation function defined classically. But this looks like it's constant in tau, which doesn't really make sense intuitively to me, because at least classically, it shouldn't be constant intau. Also, I just wanted to give you the structure of the operators. the time argument here. But the fact is that as long as we limit ourselves to a single mode of the electromagnetic field, a single harmonic oscillator, things are independent of tau. And nothing happens as a function of time. It's constant. You can actually say-- and that sort of tells you where the fluctuations come. If g2 of t Tau changes, it comes because you have several modes of theelectromagnetic field, which, as afunction of time, constructively and destructively interfere. But if you have asingle mode, in a single modes-- and what is a single Mode? It's just a sine wave. But when I transitioned to quantum states of light, I decided to deal with only one mode of the light. We should now sum over-- I should put double or triple indices on all the alphas for polarization, for spatial modes, for different frequencies, and we sum over all of them. But instead what I did is I wanted to just show you the simple case. I think you will be thankful for that in your homework, that you only have to look at a's and a daggers in the operator algebra for single mode. The g2 function is related to number fluctuations. It's related to an average and an n-squared average. It is independent of tau. And the reason is we have now limited ourselves to just one mode of the electromagnetic field. We find g2 functions which are smaller than 1.2 modes to get out of phase. But if you have 1 mode, there is no coherence time. And this sort of tells us now where do we find the most non-classical behavior, namely when g2 of t Tau is as small as possible. The Fano factor is-- wants to compare the fluctuations. n square average minus n average squared. The classical fluctuation-- well, I say classical, classical in the simplest case-- are Poissonian fluctuations. So with those definitions, we can now compare the different states of light we have introduced. We started out with black-body radiation, thermal radiation. We defined coherent states. And now finally, maybe the most interesting state from the perspective of non-classical light-- of quantum light-- is the photon number state. number state, the number of photons is an eigenvalue. Therefore, n squared average is n average squared. The Fano factor is minus 1. Sub-Poissonian distribution. And the g2 function, which classically cannot go below 1, is now n minus 1 over n. It is smaller than 1. And you see immediately that the biggest violation for g2 is to go to minus 1 for the case of a single photon state. Any questions? AUDIENCE: Shouldn't it be 0 for [INAUDIBLE]?? PROFESSOR: The g2function? No, if you put in-- wait. Gosh. I'll double-check. Light is not a continuous stream of energy, it comes quantized in photons. The granularity of light due to the photon character is, of course, most pronounced for a single photon. If you've only one photon, you find one photon and for the next photon, there is no photon to be detected. So the probability of detecting two photons is 0. And that only happens when you go down to similar photons. So this is when certain fluctuations are most pronounced, because the energy is dependant on a singular photon. me first address one misconception. You can say, Well, let's just use a coherent state. Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always a g2 function of 1. And attenuation is not changing it. Attenuation is preserving that. So now I want to show you explicitly why an attenuated coherent state may have an average photon number of 1 but it shares nothing else with a quantum state of 1 photon of n equals 1 Fock state. coherent state with an expectation value of 1 photon is not a single photon. The probability to find 0 photons-- no photon at all-- is actually 1/3. In 2 percent of the cases, you will find 4 photons. If you want to get n equals 1, you cannot just use a strong laser beam or a strong light source and attenuate it. You have to work with something which genuinely creates only 1 photon. It's called the Fock state with quantum number n. The creation of single photons has been a small cottage industry over the last 10 or 15 years. Single photons are often needed for protocols in quantum computation. We can control single atoms. And then we can make sure that single atoms create single photons. It's a little bit a way that we cannot control the bullets which are fired. But we can control the guns. And we make sure each gun can emit exactly one bullet. So that's a way how we can create non-classical light. states of light. So we obtain the quasi-probability distribution by taking the single photon state and projecting it on a coherent state. The ring immediately tells us that there is no phase defined. All the phases are equally probable. And that also means, if you don't have a phase, the average value of the electric field this 0.1. The equation of single photons is essential for studying non-classical light, but also since it's a very active frontier of our field. it's about-- it involves single atoms. But it's a little bit more demanding like that. So you want to take 1 atom home or 1 ion. But the problem is if the atom or ion emits a light, it can emit the light into all directions. And therefore, you have a single photon afterwards. But you have many, many different spacial modes. And in any given mode, it will not have asingle photon. So therefore, what you have to add to the single atom or single ion is-- you haveto put it in a cavity. state decays to the state 2. So in other words, you're not starting with single atoms, which is sometimes more demanding. It has other disadvantages that n atoms have. With n atoms, they have a super-radiant factor n with n atoms. You can get an n-times enhancement of emission into a single mode. So there are real, massive advantages in working with many atoms. But now you know that one atom is in state 2 when you detect the first photon. And then you have the same situation. single photon out of it, which is the photon for the inverse Raman transition when you pump the system back to state 1. There are some uncertainties. We don't have perfect single photon sources. But to involve, for instance, three levels is sort of an advantage, because you're not limited by the preparation of a single atom. You can have many atoms. The atoms are always there. And the moment one atom is prepared in state 1, one photon is released. And if you can get now a single photon in 90 percent of the cases, you publish a wonderful paper. 2, this atom announces itself with a single photon. Then you can gate your whole experiment to a time following the detection of the first photon. And for your gated time afterwards, you have a very, very high probability of finding this photon. Or if you want, you can now do experiments with 2 photons. And now you can do correlations between two different single photon states and such. It's a very rich frontier of our field. You have another question? AUDIENCE: Yeah. Is this also within a cavity now, like the single photon [? reflection ?] in the first test? I don't want to go into details-- but those who have an understanding of that-- is the following. If you n atoms and you prepare one atom here in state 2, you do not know which of your n atoms is prepared. And if you have n indistinguishable probabilities which atom you have prepared, the emission of the photon back is n times enhanced. So therefore, you have actually a system which has an n times stronger coupling to the cavity. Having n atoms makes it much, much easier to construct a high finesse cavity. You get this super radiance increase of the strong coupling for free. The famous Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment was done in the 1950s. It was the first experiment which really looked at g2 functions correlations, which one could say was the beginning of quantum optics and modern experiments with light. You will look at it a little bit more closely in your homework assignment. They're really the world experts in that. OK. Finally, we're not really getting to squeeze light. We start with squeezing the light tomorrow. It's time to go to bed. When you want to find click click-- double clicks in the stream of light-- you have to involve a beam splitter and involve two photodetectors. In principle, you can now find 2 photons which are only a few picoseconds apart, because the first photon is observed by the first detector, and the second photon is detected by the second detector. So what we are asking here when we measure the g2 function is that in a very small temporal window, 2 photons are detected. simultaneously. The classical version is the g2 function is the product of the intensity at. time t times the product at time t plus tau. So what you would do here in this circuit, you would take the signal. from this detector, the signal from that, and multiply the two. This is how you determine I of t times I ofT plusT. So whether you do it in. the classical domain or whether youDo it in the quantum domain, this is the way. how you experimentally measure the second order correlation function. say photon, I should actually say intensity. The intensity splits equally. And if you do the measurement with the coincidence detector, you find the difference between the g2 function, which I discussed earlier. That's actually the only way how you can distinguish a light bulb from a laser beam. But it is the correlation experimental which shows you that you started with a thermal source. It has a g2function of 2, and you can never get rid of it, whereas the laser beam has ag2 function of 1. especially when we have a single photon, the photon can go to only one detector. And that means, for this extreme case of a single photons, the g2 function is 0. Anyway, you will look at those situations in more detail in you homework assignment. Yes? AUDIENCE: Sir, if you know that different for tau non-zero, then even the single mode in the function would have a final g2 [INAUDIBLE],, because there would be some probability. The experiment how it is done is often done as in an open system, where you couple the system to a light source, which is always replenishing your experiment. I think, in essence, the experiment would be done with a single photon light source. But the single photons have a high repetition rate. You have an heralded single photon. You know the term heralded photon. I showed you how to generate single photons. But in other words, what we have focused in the simple description is that we have a quantum state which is prepared-- it's a closed system. And now we do our detection. single photon comes now. You do the experiment, and then you repeat it again. And then you find indeed, that during that temporal window, you will never find a second photon. So this may happen in a few nanoseconds. Then you wait a microsecond, and the next photon arrives. But this is then related to the repetition rate of a single photon and not to the single photon itself. I think you've got the taste. Your homework is a really simple. You just deal with a closed system. The way we can distinguish from a thermal state and a coherent state is through the g2. Even if you do not put in any light, we put in the vacuum state. And you will find that the description of the beam splitter in the quantum state is incomplete. All the laser cooling, all the absorption imaging-- all that would work if you had a single mode thermal source. But the only property which distinguishes a laser from the thermal light source-- we're not taking advantage of it. course practically, if you take a thermal source and filter it down to a single mode, you will be left with only a few photons. You cannot create an intense enough single mode light source unless you use stimulated emission. And that's a laser. So anyway, what Colin says is there are actually more different light sources that just the laser and the thermal light source. There are LEDs or semiconductor devices, which provide photons with interesting statistical properties. OK. We have to stop. I'll see you on Wednesday.