More than half of large US firms plan to use AI within the next year to automate tasks that were previously done by staff. The New York Times reports that generative AI could automate activities equivalent to 300 million full-time jobs around the world open ai's chief executive that's Sam mman says governments will need to assume the bulk of responsibility in supporting workers AI labor market disruptions and the question will employees just end up training AI systems only to them be replaced by them the potential human cost to all of this. New York Times also looks at how call center workers are quickly being overtaken by generative Ai. There are now warnings that entire Industries could be compromised mostly by AI. AI chat bots in as soon as a year well later in the program we'll speak to the writer of both of those New York Times articles. Our regular AI contributor Stephanie hair and also with us jintan Patel who's chief technology officer for Cisco in the UK and Ireland. natalis Gardino who's President and chief people officer at Salesforce. moment what we're seeing and uh often with these sorts of technological changes we see that we sort of tend to overestimate the impact in the short term and underestimate the long-term impact. We do believe that actually you know some of the the sort of the mundane activities and tasks that can be automated are being automated but actually driving up productivity for organizations which can only be a good thing on in its broader sense and and Stephanie I mean there's always that concern isn't there that AI is going to pinch all of our jobs. or doing something with your hands where I think you're quite safe from computers for the moment you're probably fine. If you are working in a call center something where your job could be automated that is something that you need to be looking at for the next few years. open AI CEO Sam ultman said it's the government's job to be retraining people and taking responsibility for all of this job losses but the government is us so it's really the taxpayer who's going to have to pick up the bill for this technology. last decade you know over a trillion customer insights are built on our platform every single week and now here we are in the generative AI Revolution um when it comes to the employee experience some of the AI deployments are things like uh you know a lot of our employees were spending time looking at disperate systems to find knowledge articles access to benefits who to speak to on the first day how to onboard and ramp. Now with AI applications that we've deployed they don't have to go to multiple systems anymore. One quarter of employees saved a combined 50,000 hours. At.at what that's allowed you to do I mean as you said free up time allow those staff to do other things. I mean how does that work how do we square that Circle well I think like you know any other uh benefits of becoming more efficient or more productive it is now spending more time on higher value impact work in your job those are the core benefits that we've seen from our teams instead of spending you know 10% of your time looking for information. There's a danger that we focus on all of this and on what it can deliver but frankly it needs people that understand it. There is no AI without data without the network to actually connect the you know act as the connective tissue to to the algorithms that are answering our questions and giving us our responses. If you can't secure that end to end then that's where that trust issue arises. We can draw a lot of parallels from the internet where you know we've been at the heart of the internet for over 40 years. really comes into as you mentioned around cyber security and you know when we when we first started sort of the the journey in the internet we saw the opportunity to actually train people around a program called Cisco's networking Academy. You know that's been going for over 25 years we've trained 20 million people in 190 countries around the world. We see the same thing happening again where you know we have to train the Next Generation in both these Advanced AI skills but also some of the fundamental essential digital skills that we need. of companies say that yes they know they need to do this but I think what 14% say they're actually ready to do it that's quite the Gap yeah. Who is we talking about overhauling the education curriculum from what age 5 to 18 and then into the universities who's funding that and who has the skills to even do it yeah yeah and that is a big question and Stephanie you're always our guide on this program aren't you through all things Ai and I know you've got questions uh for our panel we've got two big players here um what do you want. to know so what I want to know is first of all all of this um automation we're saying we're going to be getting rid of the most sort of benal tasks and making it so that people are free to do value added tasks but that value ad is going to shareholders and CEOs it's not going back to people. What can we do to make it. so that AI is valuable for everybody and not just the usual people who profit from technology yeah um Natalie let's throw that to you. Salesforce and we want to make sure that we're not leaving any talent unhidden and AI is helping us optimize that so I do see um you know the advancements of democratizing uh access to AI through those efforts as well but it's something we think about all of the time related to trust and you know making sure that how you're creating your products is representative of the world of societies of communities all these things are also core to the design process yeah chintan do you want to come in on that as well?  AI decoded looks at the impact of AI in the world workplace. The tech may be able to speed up and automate all sorts of monotonous or repetitive roles but there's also now a concern that Tech like intelligent chatbots could replace roles that have traditionally relied on a more human touch things like customer service or call center helplines. We're going to speak to one reporter who's been researching the threat posed to workers and how some are now fighting back around the world and across the UK. some workers are feeling the effects of that already and they're starting to ask who is going to protect us you know what entities are stepping in to take responsibility for retraining or providing opportunities for workers whose jobs might be entirely eliminated by AI technology. I think that would be incredibly demoralizing for anybody who's asked to do that so I think employers really are going to have to think about the messaging but also the after plan so once you've trained up an AI to do your supposedly Bol tasks what are employers offering are the higher value more creative more interesting. Emma asked if we would actually see an increase in Union membership for private sector workers in the United States. She said a lot of workers want to feel that their voices are part of the process in deciding how AI is going to be used. She argued that actually the people making all the decisions about the AI are not the ones who will be affected by that change it's workers further down the food chain that will find their job disappears before the ones sat in in the boardroom. EM: The role that I'm seeing unions play is just reminding employers that they should be bringing workers to the table to help make and shape decisions. frustrated because she felt that she was being asked to train her replacement whenever she used an AI tool because the AI was watching her do her job to the best of her ability. What she was asking asking from her Union was just the ability to be at the table making decisions about AI along with company Executives and Emma. This made me think of the difference between what it's like to work in the United States where Union representation is so low and often in opposition with management. Could we see that that cultural change happening not just in the US but even more widely across the globe it's a important question. in decades um so unions are are becoming much more popular the their um the number of workers that they represent is still quite low but you're seeing Union drives at companies like Starbucks and Amazon many companies that hadn't previously been unionized. People are hoping that this kind of momentary shift of power toward unions will turn into a more um long-term and sustained power moment for unions. They can then play a role in pushing companies to treat workers well as they're bringing AI to the table. Could we actually replace CEOs or Executives and actually end up having AI run companies and just get rid of those High expensive salaries altogether absolutely. were most at risk because of automation. People are realizing you have to throw out the door any ideas you had about who is really at risk and say every job is going to be changed. We just hope that the workers whose jobs are changing have a voice in saying how yeah it's turkeyy is not going to vote for Christmas are they if those are the ones that could find their jobs being replaced. There's uh there's so much in there and Stephanie just a final thought from you in all of this about briefly if you will. I think we also have to be realistic you're not just going to suddenly go get an engineering degree in two weeks right learn cyber security overnight um these are these are highly complex skills that require usually years of training so this will involve I think a sort of again look at the Danish model of the government and companies working together to sponsor re-education and retraining for workers. This is a total pivot of our economy uh Stephanie really good to have you with us again guing us through all of this and now Emma thank you so much.