The first technical discussion of the actual solar cell device itself. We're going to be talking about the interaction of light with matter. This lecture could alternatively be called "Light Not Getting Absorbed" or "Optical Losses" Both are important, and both are related, as we'll see. We discuss cost trade offs of implementing this particular technique for the way for it to absorb more light, for example. We'll talk about the technologies and the cross-cutting themes. Conversion efficiency is really what dictates the performance of the device, the solar cell device. So from the solar spectrum, we have to absorb that light and excite charge within the material. Then that charge has to move around inside the material to get to the metallic context in the front side. And finally, the charge collection process. And so the total efficiency of this device is the product of each of these individual processes. So one of the easiest ways of boosting efficiency is simply to take care of your optical losses and to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed. of your solar cell device. We want to, obviously, maximize this part right here. This is going back to the particle wave duality of light. The visible photon wavelengths are usually in the hundreds of nanometers. And the solar spectrum peaks somewhere around 550. So just to situate ourselves with broad numbers, so when we dive in and talk about spatial dimensions in relation to the wavelength of the light, we're in a situation where we can actually have a horse sense, a common sense, about it. So this was that solar spectrum, the integrated solar radiance versus wavelength. And the second point that is equally valid, we can describe the wavelengths of the incoming light. We're interacting with a very specific type of electron inside of our system. It's the valence electrons. These are the electrons that are typically most loosely bound inside of a system or I would say in the outer shells of the atoms within the material. You're typically not interacting with core shell electrons with visible light. For that, you need x-rays. you can have, for example, in the visible range, a decreasing depth of penetration of the light with increasing energy, whereas with x-rays, it's the exact opposite. It's because you're dealing with different types of electrons and the material. The real component of the refractive index is material-specific property. So if I have silicon or if I've silicon nitride, it'll have a particular type of glass. It'll have different refractive indices for different materials. a particular refractive index. It's comprised of a real component which indicates the phase velocity inside of the material and an imaginary component, which can be thought of as an extinction coefficient. And it is related to the attenuation of the light intensity as it travels through that material. And we use that information to calculate engineering relevant parameters such as reflectance of light off of a surface. And the reason that's important is because we want to minimize reflection off of surfaces. So I've come up with the first equation right here. which is describing the reflectance from air to a solid, in this case, from air where the refractive index is 1. And so I have an equation here that describes thereflectance. Let me dive a little deeper into it and try to understand what exactly that equation is telling me. So from the folks who have studied mechanics, many of you are mechanical engineers in the room, you may recall studying a problem wherein you have two springs that are connected. They have different spring constants, different stiffnesses, shall we say. interface. In reality, those ends have a very similar meaning, the n and the z. The n, in the case of light, which is the real components of the refractive index. Mind you, this parameter right here, this indicates phase velocity in material. It could also be thought of very loosely as the ability of an electromagnetic wave coming into material to slosh those electrons around. So I would advise taking this analogy as far as it will go until it breaks down. And you'll see at some point it actually does, but it's a useful place to start. If I add a coating, for instance, to a window that increases the reflectivity, then the amount of light that is able to escape from the inside to my eyes decreases. If I have a bigger n, I would get bigger reflectance. Is that right? r goes up? Well, you'd have to plot it out, I guess. So if I change the refractive index of the material that I am working with, I can change the reflectance off of that interface. reflected off of one side is equal to the amount of light reflected off the other side. So just the same way that I'm losing the ability to see inside, the folks inside are also losing the able to see out. What if that glass pane was flipped around? Would it change anything? If I'm outside on a sunny day, how much brighter is it outside versus inside right here? Factor of? AUDIENCE: 100, maybe? TONIO BUONASSISI: Maybe a factor of 10, somewhere in that range. If I took that glass and just flipped it, would it change it? What about the symmetry argument, that the amount of light is reflected, the r reflectance, is the same from both sides? TONIO BUONASSISI: Yeah, so I would advise you to actually walk through that calculation. And what you'll find is it winds up being the same. And it's because you have to take all reflectances off of all these interfaces into account. We're just assuming that all of these layers are well above the wavelength of the light. These linear equations, are valid. So we're happy to walk through that perhaps during recitation. OK, so what we're going to do now is we've talked about reflectance off of surfaces. What I'd like to do is talk about a light absorption inside of a material. And for that, we apply a very simple formulation inside of this class, which is called Beer-Lambert's Law. And now the light that's incident on the material is actually going to go inside and get absorbed by the material inside. very simple yet very powerful formulation that describes not only the interaction of light with the solar cell material but also light through the atmosphere, light the water, many other forms of optical absorption. And for that, I'd like to call Joe up for a quick demo that will allow us to actually plot out Beer-Lambert's Law. And so I'm going to come up with a hypothesis. What we're going to be doing is taking many sheets of material. This is just some polyethylene material, a little bit discolored. And we'regoing to shine a laser down on to this photodiode. of what's going to happen. I'm going to say that if we double the thickness of the polyethylene that we're going to halve the amount of light going through. And let's see if the hypothesis is correct. It's not. And it's a logical thing you might assume. And then we'll walk through a derivation that will correct our missed logic. So go ahead, Joe. Take it away. JOE: Sure, so if you guys want to play along, that's fine too. Right now we're getting about 1.32 milliamps. Then as we keep increasing and put one layer of polyethylene, that drops to 0.75. There's kind of this sense that it should be exponential. What don't we add some more filter in front, and we'll see what exactly this comes out to be. It's actually starting to go in a straight line. We're going to see what it's like, what the power of our-- yeah. to curve down. Exponential. It looks like one at least. And we can test whether or not the hypothesis is correct by an exponential fit, which happens to match pretty well. JOE: Now one other quick thing you notice is that if you look at the fit, the first point's a little bit higher than that fit. Anyone have an idea of why that might be the case? What are we ignoring in this experiment? AUDIENCE: The reflection is [INAUDIBLE]. Joe: The reflections, yeah. TONIO BUONASSISI: OK, so we notice that we have some exponential character to be decay of the intensity of the transmitted light through a medium. And the amount that's absorbed is following another trend, which is just 1 minus that. So it's the amount of light that'sabsorbed is following a curve looks something like that. OK, let's look through the formalism of Beer-Lambert Law and try to understand why it is that we come up with that exponential function right here. by some sort of scattering intensity within the medium-- and this sigma here can refer to a variety of processes. The sigma is independent of thickness throughout. And then as you integrate through, you wind up with that beautiful exponential function at the end, the sigma l times n. That alpha is an absorption coefficient. The l is the total length or the total thickness of this medium right here. So if we increase the total. thickness, we're going to decrease the total amount of light coming through via that exponential function. a geometric parameter. It's an intrinsic material parameter. This alpha will vary as a function of wavelength inside of a material. And so from an engineering point of view, we don't really-- to first order, it doesn't really matter what sort of scattering or absorption process is happening in a material for us to calculate the amount of transmitted light. We just need to know the alpha. We need to known the optical absorption coefficient. We can measure, experimentally just like we did right there, our alphas for materials. states within the material, that light, depends on the energy of the light. So there's a wavelength dependence. And that general equation is the same one that drives the reduction of light intensity as it travels through the atmosphere. So if we increase the atmospheric path length, we'll be reducing the amount of light that actually reaches the surface of the earth. That's at air mass two or air mass three, there's less solar flux coming down than at air Mass one or air Mass zero. The only geometric parameter that is of essence is really our l.variable, Tonio Buonassisi says. Oftentimes we're operating in a wavelength regime of light wherein free charge is excited. But we can also keep increasing that the wavelength of light, say, out to 10 microns, very long wavelength light, very low energy light. That can excite free carriers within the material-- carriers that are already excited, essentially excited them further, without generating any new free carriers inside of our material. Alpha is a function of the wavelength of light and the property of the medium. We're talking about an energy range quite broad here, from about 6.2 eV to 0.62 eV. The visible wavelengths range would be somewhere in this regime right here, so a very limited band. And the infrared out here, ultraviolet over here, and we can see for a variety of different types of materials what the absorption coefficient is. The red would be crystalline silicon, gallium arsenide, indium phosphide, and amorphous silicon. The thickness of gallium arsenide is necessary to absorb 90% of the incoming light at 550 nanometers. To make sure people are setting this up right, i divided by i0 is 0.1, 1 minus 0.9. If we're absorbing 90% the light, it means only 10% is going out the other side. That means their i is going to be 1/10 of i0. And then we would take the log of both sides, typically, typically. and solve for our l based on the alphas that we have here. Again, units of alpha would be in inverse centimeters. Did anybody manage to walk all the way through that calculation? Did anybody get any other numbers for gallium arsenide. How about the silicon? Is it larger or smaller? Let's just for order of magnitude first and the general trend and then try to pick up the precise number. For silicon, crystalline silicon that is, with an optical component, that is. absorption coefficient and order of magnitude less than gallium arsenide. Is the thickness needed to absorb the same amount of light going to be greater or smaller? AUDIENCE: Greater. TONIO BUONASSISI: Greater by an-- AUDience: Order of magnitude. OK. All right, so that was at 550. And there's a lot of solar radiation right around 550, so the numbers that I have on the top of my head work somewhere out to be on the order of a micron. peak of the solar spectrum. Most of these solar cells that you see of crystalline silicon are on the order of 100 microns, typically a little thicker for some technological reasons, which we'll get to. But if you just assume one pass through the material, you'd need about that thickness to absorb a lot of the light. And I'll pass around some of these materials right here just so you can get a sense of how thick they are. And you can actually pick them up if you like. Just be aware that these little pieces of silicon are-- silicon's brittle material. It's like glass. inside of that little bin, these are small shards of silicon solar cell wafers. Their thicknesses in the order of 100 microns, those are particularly thin. You can go down to a few hundreds nanometers and still make-- actually the record efficiency of gallium arsenide solar cell is a few hundred nanometers thick. And our calculations right here assumed one pass through the material. That's all we gave the light. We only gave one chance to go through thematerial and get absorbed. 10% of the light that didn't make it, that's going to get reflected back. The first thing that we can do is texturize our front surface. If we don't have texture, if it's absolutely flat, what we call specular surface-- specular coming from the root mirror. We're just focusing on the lights, the rays that get reflected. That beam that gets reflected off, instead of just going back out toward the sun, it's now going toward the material again. As the material goes from one medium to another, the refractive index changes. Texturization increases the probability that light will enter the device. And what it also does-- this is a secondary benefit-- is it increases the path length, the effective path length of the incoming light. The way to understand that particular phenomena is called Snell's Law. So the way in which the electromagnetic wave oscillates the electromagnetic waves. We discussed this right at the beginning of lecture. So we have a texturized front surface. Let's go there. electrons instead of the system is changing from one medium to another, let's say from air into the solar cell device. Now, we can ascribe the refractive indices to air and to our silicon like so. And the light path will obey what is called Snell's Law, which is the product of refractive index and sine of that angle, the angle relative to the surface normal. So a simple way to think about this is when the light goes from a low index of refraction medium to a high index ofrefraction medium, light bends toward or away from the normal? The refractive index of silicon is going to be greater than that of air, so light would bend toward the normal. So there are two benefits to texturizing your front surface. One is you have an additional pass, additional bounce, an additional encounter with the material. And the second benefit is that you're able to increase the optical path length by the delta in refractive indices and the fact that the path of the light will be Snell's Law. Of course, the light actually falls along the surface or actually bounces back in. most often, depending on the angle. You have what is called total internal reflection, which is this case right over here. You might change the nature of the anti-reflection coating on the glass. Even if the panel looks black, there are some really aesthetically pleasing solar panels out there that look completely black. They may still have white back skin, but the glass is just very good at absorbing that light and preventing it from escaping. To engineer front and back surface reflectances, you really have to carefully select your refractive indices. When you look down, the ray of light is traveling like this and it bends toward the normal and likewise symmetric. What change of property would give you these two images over here? In one of those two images, the refractive index of the medium inside the pool is not 1.3. It's 0.9. And in another one of these two, the Refractive Index of theMedium is actually going to be negative. So which of thesetwo do you think is which? our reflection condition. I'm going to come back to Snell's Law in a minute. But for the time being, I want to move on to the next concept here, which is Lambertian reflector. You'll hear this topic or this word thrown around quite a lot in the solar cell community. And it's used rather liberally to mean a lot of things. But in optics, it has a very specific meaning. It's a very loosely used term. It is wrong by the book, but nevertheless, it's one of these things that live on in our industry. The back skins of our solar modules can quite often be Lambertian scatters. And we have a certain amount of light that comes off at some angle here that will get trapped by a total internal reflection inside of a modules. And so the notion of a Lambertian scatter is important on our solar panels. It's those waves, those rays that are bouncing off at those large angles that are causing the totalinternal reflection event. It is not sub-wavelength, but smaller features such as texturization on the back skin right here. the backsides of solar cell devices. We would obviously wants to even change the scattering profile. We wouldn't want necessarily specular reflectance. We might want to maximize the amount of light reflected off at particular angles. And there is, of course, research being done to figure out how to make light do that. And you don't only have to texture your back skin. You can also texture the bus bars. The bus bars are these little metal wires right. Let's ignore front surface texturing for now. Let't just focus on the backside. here that are collecting the charge from each of the solar cells. They're connecting essentially the front side of one cell to the backside of the next. And this metal right here is just really shiny, and it's reflecting light right back out into space. What if we instead were to texture that metal so that when laser light shined on it a certain amount would be reflected off at an angle and then caught by total internal reflection? That's exactly what you're seeing right here. There is a limit to how much we can trap light simply by modifying or corrugating the surfaces. A gentleman by the name of Eli Yablonovitch, who's now a professor in Berkeley calculated these parameters I think back in 1982. He came up with an upper limit to the optical path length. That's a pretty good litmus test for the ability of a material to trap light. If you have silicon, for instance, with a refractive index of, let's say, in the infrared some around 3.6, your Yabonovitch limit is around 50. we have a grading of refractive indices going from air, our anti-reflection coating, to silicon. And right over here we have a certain thickness, d1. And over here, d2, over there, over here. So what is happening in these two images? Let me show you with another, a little bit more clear figure, coming from our beloved Wikipedia, and then go back to that other image right there. What's happening is we have an incoming wave that for some reason is ignoring Snell's Law. at a trough. The trough will be at a peak. So the two waves will are going to be destructively interfering when they come out. If you add these two together, due to the wave nature of light, you get suppressed reflectance. And that's a really interesting property. You can begin varying the thickness of this layer, and of course changing the nature of the reflected light. And so without going into the hairy math, to calculate this right here, it's definitely possible. It's definitely something that should be done. photon wavelength at the peak of the solar spectrum, we have to design the thickness of our anti-reflection coating to satisfy that equation right there. That's the phase shift we want upon one pass of the anti-reflective coating so that two passes, when it goes through and then back, it's phase shifted relative to the surface reflected light. So just to give us a sense, kind of an estimate, and to give. us some confidence in these engineering methods, what I'd like you to do is to calculate the. thickness of an ideal anti- Reflective coating. bare silicon. And you can see it's rather reflective. So calculate for me what is the optimal thickness of an anti-reflection coating of silicon nitride? And we'll give it a refractive index of, say, 2.1. Let's call it 2, just make our lives simple. And the peak of the solar spectrum we'll again call 550. What should that thickness be? Tonio, I'm sorry, could you repeat the constant again? TONIO BUONASSISI: Sure. is the photon wavelength at the peak of the solar spectrum in vacuum or in air, is 550 nanometers. The anti-reflection coding is enabling the light to be absorbed because it's suppressing the reflectance. So they're 70 nanometers thick. And you gain quite a lot in terms of cell performance. I'll show you some slides to drive that point home in a bit. This is really really briefly-- I'll post these slides online so you can have access to them. to them. If you use the matrix transfer method, as described beautifully in [? Gonchen's ?] textbook, you can calculate the amount of light reflected across a broad spectral range for a given thickness of anti-reflection coding. The important thing to note here is that it really, really matters. This is silicon under glass right here, for example, typical solar cell material in blue. It's better than the bare silicon. Why is it better? Glass has a refractive index of 1.5 or so. Recall that equation that described the amount of reflectance, there was that-- what was it-- n1 minus n2 quantity squared, right? The bigger the delta between the ends, the bigger the difference in refractive indices between material one and material two, the more the reflectance is going to be off that interface. So you can begin reducing reflectance off of a stack of light going both ways by grading the refractive index of the material. And so you get a reduction in the total amount of reflected light when you put silicon under glass. front surface of your sample by using an intelligent combination of the very first equation that we're exposed to in the class today, which was the reflected light as a function of refractive index. And secondly, by engineering by engineering an anti-reflective coating, which oftentimes in the lingo of solar cell science we call it an ARC. And those two things combined give us very low reflection off of the front surface. Probably 5% of our R&D cells that we make at MIT use these sorts of technologies, which are pretty standard in the industry. expressions that we just walked through. It's really important to understand the fundamentals behind any simulation software because you will get out of it what you put into it. You will not be able to pick up on obvious things that you might of-- for example, double clicked on this little material here and find the real component of the refractive index completely wrong. And you might not notice it if you don't have some good intuition which is grounded in the fundamentals. And so it's important that you understand what we've presented today. The absorber is the material, our photovoltaic material, the ones absorbing the sunlight and ultimately going to be generating the charge. So we want to ensure good light trapping inside it. There are fancier ways of light management as well that don't involve light trapping necessarily but light manipulation or even semiconductor manipulation. You can, for instance, change the wave length of the incoming light. One very simple example of this is when you shine red light on a phosphor and then it glows green in the dark. are folks out there trying to do spectral up converters where they take two lower energy photons then somehow convert that into a higher energy photon. And so since our absorption coefficient is dependent on wavelength, if we're able to shift the wavelength of the light around by engineering materials near the surface, we can enhance absorption as well. That is a form-- a valid form-- of light management. If we can eliminate the longer wavelength stuff out here, which is heat, performance of most solar cell suffers when they get hot. a coating on the back to reflect the light back so that it gets a second bounce through the material. I've engineered the front surface, texturized it so that we have not only the benefit of two bounces, double the chance of light going in, but also the Snell's Law working in our favor. And so all told, the one reason why this boost is so big right here is because I'm increasing the optical path length relative to the thickness of my material. And as a result, I'm getting a much larger current output. here from the change of refractive index going through your silicon to that dielectric material in the back. Where you have your metal, you're going to be absorbing the light. In the lab, 24.2%, in commercial production, 22% and change. 22.4%, I think. If you introduce a constant phase shift gradient throughout the device, now you can start doing some fun things. The device design can get pretty complicated for these super high efficiency devices. And they're worried quite a bit about trapping, other things as well. surface of a material, let's say right here, then you can cause each node, each point within your material, to lag by an increasing amount, so that your wave front now bends. And that will cause the light, essentially, if you trace through the points of maximum intensity, say the pink, you'll see that the light is bent. And so it's really exciting. There's stuff coming up every day. This is the point. We can, in principle, if this is hot off the press-- and then of course there's a whole flurry of researchers out there trying to figure out how to use this to our advantage. on light trapping and light management. Mostly it's for photonic devices, but they can be transferred over into solar cells as well. And another example of the photon up/down converters, there's recent reports in SPIE, a lot of interest in the optics community. There was a TR35 award given to a person who studying this topic. So it is, as well, a very exciting and up and coming field. Again, the opportunities there of manipulating light are large, are vast.