HONG LIU: So at the end of last lecture, so we discussed this LSZ theorem, which tells you how to obtain scattering amplitude from correlation functions. OK, so if you want to compute, say, some scattering. amplitude from alpha to beta-- so alpha's some initial state and beta's some final state. Say alpha consists of momentum p1 and PN-- or pm, and beta, say momentum p m plus 1 and pn. And then you can get this scattering amplitude just by taking your momentum-space correlation function, OK, for the n points. When you obtain a correlation function, you don't distinguish what is the initial and the final state. You just have some momentum. This is a function of some arbitrary momentum. But the scattering amplitude, of course, those momentum are on shell. So the way you distinguish the initial. momentum and thefinal momentum is by taking the initial momentum, say to go to the negative root, and the. final momentum to take the positive root. But since the alpha, it consists of minus p1, and then the initial state, you have positive energy. HONG LIU: So for each external momentum-- so here there's a propagator, and just as if that-- when you get-- so this scattering amplitude was corresponding to this one with all external propagators stripped. OK, so that's why you consider the truncated diagram not including the external propagator. And you take it on shell.correlation functions, OK, and then you sum over-- youSum over, say, the truncate-- so you see the relation between these correlation functions and the scattering amplitudes. So they differ by this product. I will explain a few things. OK, so remember this Gn, so let's go back to the definition of this Gn. These momentum-space correlation functions. So this is obtained by doing a Fourier transform. Say-- I think it would be minus sign. So then you want those phi corresponding to the initial state to act on the right. And so this, if you just record the mode expansion, can be written as the following: phi x1 andphi xn. for phi and the phi contains a and a dagger-- and the a pieces acting on the zero will just give you zero, so only a dagger piece will survive. OK, with k it's the on-shell momentum, so k is given by omega k and k. When you do the Fourier transform and then you find just p, then your p just equals to minus k, OK, so that's related to the minus sign there. When your p equal to minusk, then that means p0 is equal tominus k. that sign in the initial state come from. And the same thing with the final state, so for the final. state, then you need to look at the phi x acting on the left to this, and then you do the. Fourier transform. So this explains the sign. It's just from whether you act on the initial. state or act onThe final state. OK. Good? So-- yes? AUDIENCE: Right, so time-ordering of x1 to xn right here? HONG LIU: Yeah. HONG LIU: To derive that theorem, the time-order matters. OK, you can do this for the full interacting theory. Yeah, just use the free scalar as the-- yeah, because when you go to plus or minus infinity,you can just reduce to the free particles. OK. Other questions? OK, good. So this is the first comment. The second comment, each side, we need to here-- from here, weneed to truncate the external propagator. propagators, so that means you also throw away diagrams like this. You can consider arbitrary, complicated diagram, OK, as far as that only happens-- yeah. So such kind of diagrams, they only change the external propagator, but since we truncate the external propagateator, and then they don't matter at all, OK? So the reason is the following. All this diagram do is just modify the properties of the external. propagator. And the only way all these diagrams can modify the. external propagators is to give you an overall constant. truncated them, and so you don't need to worry about them. So Z also has an expansion, just 1 plus order Lambda, et cetera, so the leading order, so Z does not contribute. OK, you can just set it to 1, and when you go to the higher order, then the Z can make a contribution. OK. So you just need to separately take into account the Z, and there's no need to contribute-- to calculate those things separately. HONG LIU: Z is the same for different processes, but it's different for different particles. Z is a constant for all of them, yeah. If it depended on momentum, then it would be kind of useless, right? So we will not go into details of the Z. And that is what is called the "Z" principle. It is the principle that all such things don't change the momentum. OK, the momentum don't changed. Yeah.things, they-- yeah, all these things, essentially, they just modify the-- give you the correction to the external propagator and include it in that constant Z. HONG LIU: This is the self-interact-- yeah, just when the-- when you have an interacting theory, so the particle can interact with itself. It just all comes from this kind of diagram. You can have single particle, and you can have such a diagram like this and all these diagrams. Correspondingly, you have a particle propagating, but that particle can interacts with the virtual particle, its own virtual particle. OK, and so that, this is the rule corresponding to the particle loop. kind of interaction, will affect the property of the propagation but can have the most effect by prefactor, but actually can change the mass, too. But for the-- oh, it can correct for the mass-- and also, that's the subject of the QFT2. I think at most canchange the overall factor by z. Other questions? Good. If you don't have other questions, so let's conclude our discussion of chapter 3 on interacting theories. OK, and now let's discuss how to describe fermions. The Dirac equation is one of the most beautiful equations in mathematical physics. It's actually describing electrons, so it's not only beautiful, but it's actually useful. The Dirac theory is a prime example of how people make great discoveries often for the wrong motivations. But the key is that if you are good enough, you will find something new and that something new will be useful. We'll talk about fermions in the next section of the lecture. We're going to talk about the Dirac equations and its covariance. go to a different frame. OK, yeah, that's what we mean by-- just when you go to aDifferent Lorentz frame, the equation, the form of the equation looks the same. Just different observers in different laboratory, they see the same equation, OK. So your first-order derivative, then, has to have the following form, alpha minus i-- yeah, so this is the gradient operator,Yeah, spatial derivatives. And then you can at most add the constant, OK, so let me just write this constant as m times beta. doesn't make any sense, OK? So alpha and beta, they have to be some kind of constant, OK, but if alpha andbeta are constant, then this is not even a rotational invariant, not to mention Lorentz environment. So alpha is just some constant, so this cannot be LorentZ covariant, even cannot be rotational environment. OK, and psi is the ordinary function. So yeah, so you can have alpha x, partial x, alpha y, partial y, alpha z, partial z, OK. So you can easily convince yourself, when you rotate xyz, this isNot symmetric because alpha is some constant. purely imaginative, OK, just nothing like this before. Like when Einstein wrote down his theory, et cetera, you can still trace-- there some clues, OK. But when Dirac-- this one just really-- [LAUGHTER] --like music, just came out from his mind, OK? It just-- and then he reasoned, OK,. OK, if this is constant which does not work, and then let's make alpha and beta to be matrices. Take them-- OK, so let's say they are n-by-n matrices, then in order for that equation to make sense, then psi has to be a n- component vector. They're just some constant Hermitian matrices. And then, so then he reasoned that for this equation, if we want this equation to be Lorentz covariant, then at least it should have the relativistic plane wave as its solution. If it does not even have that type of solution, then you, yeah, of course cannot be covariant. OK, so the minimal requirement-- so before we really try to see how can we make this into a covariant equation, we say let's consider minimal requirement. The Klein-Gordon equation has the following form. So when we square this star, we just act twice, so essentially, you have-- so you have partial partial t square psi equal to H square psi. OK, and then we try to make this of this Klein- Gordon form. If that works, then we're guaranteed to have a plane-wave solution of such a dispersion relation because this equation has such solutions. OK? So this will be satisfied-- can be satisfied if square of star, OK, satisfies reduced to the Klein-Graham equation. with that kind of dispersion relation. So now we just compare the both sides, so for this to be true, so we just need to have-- so let's compare the second-order derivative term. And then we need alpha i. So we need-- first, when i not equal to j, the off-diagonal terms, they all should vanish, OK, because here there's only diagonal terms. So that means that the alpha i alpha j plus alpha j alpha i should equal to 0. We said the alpha and the beta, they must be Hermitian, so that means that the alpha i dagger is equal to alpha i and thebeta dagger equal to beta. So if we satisfy all these four conditions, and then we will guarantee that that equation star should have the plane-wave solution. And so now you just try to find matrices, satisfy those conditions. OK, you actually find the infinite number of solutions. So you see that to satisfy them needs at least a 4-by-4 matrix, so n has to be 4. HONG LIU: Alpha and the grad, they don't act on the same space. So that derivative just acts on derivatives, and alpha acts on a different component of psi. AUDIENCE: Sorry, so when you have alpha times grad psi, is it-- do you act the grad on each element of psi and then multiply by alpha? Or do you-- like, what's the order of operations? HONG LIu: Oh, it doesn't matter because alpha is just some constant, right? means that psi should be a four- component vector. So alpha equal to 1, 2, 3, 4, OK, and we-- for the moment, let's just take the most general situation. HONG LIU: Yeah, alpha 1, alpha 2, alpha 3, they are all-- they are three matrices. No, alpha are just matrices, so this means that alpha 1 alpha 2 plus alpha 2alpha 1, as a matrix product, should give you zero. matrix. HONG LIU: Just, if you have alpha 1, alpha 2, alpha 3, each component is a matrix. OK, so this is a new object, so we call it spinor. Later we will see that this describes spin-half particles, so that's why we call them spinor, OK? So that'swhy I say this was really genius, because just nobody could have thought of this. OK? There was no clue of such a structure. HONG LIU: You can reduce always-- yeah, just from physical purpose, you can always reduce it to 4, yeah. If you know how to do the two halves, then you can generalize. It's just a convenient way to write these 4-by-4 matrices. Yeah, so one half, essentially, you could-- based on one half,. you could generalize it. Yeah. OK. Dr. Liu? HONG LIu: Yeah? AUDIENCE: So if we take n to be larger, then we describe all the spins? HONG LIU: So that I don't have to write all four components. I just-- yeah. AUDIENCE: Yeah, yeah, yeah. OK. HONG LIu: So I divided these 4-by-4 matrices into four 2- by-2 blocks, and then I specify each block. OK? Good? OK, so for later convenience, let's introduce a slightly different notation. OK, now we have this equation, so we have the form of this. you'd get an equation like this. OK. So now I will denote-- introduce a new notation so that it looks nicer. I'll denote the gamma 0 equal to i beta and then the gamma iequal to i times beta alpha i. OK, and then let's all pull it to the same side. Then this becomes the following equation, then the equation has the following form, gamma mu partial mu minus m psi equal to 0. And so I know this is annoying, but yeah, but this is just a fact of life. most simplest in terms of notation anyway, so that's the convention we use. Now let me just write it in the component form. I have gamma mu, which-- each of them is a matrix, alpha, beta, so alpha and beta, they're always run. OK, so this is a little bit intricate equation, but once you get used to it, it's not that difficult. Yes? AUDIENCE: There's no meaning to the upstairsness or downstairsness of alpha andbeta, right? HONG LIU: Yeah, because these two index are upstairs, yeah. not symmetric, so it's easier to put one upstairs, one downstairs. Yeah, these two indices are not symmetric. So yeah, it takes a little bit time to get used to it, OK, and I know some people develop psychological fears for fermions because you have to deal with those gamma matrices. For a long while, actually, I have this psychological fear myself. [LAUGHTER] When I look at fermion, I want to be away from it because I don't want toDeal with those Gamma Matrices. No summation over i here, OK, because each matrix gamma i square equal to 1. So you can write this more compactly as gamma mu gamma nu anticommutator equal to 2 eta mu nu. When mu equal to nu, when there is-- when they're both 0, then this gives you minus 1. And so this equation, when the later mathematicians, of course, studied this, a mathematician would say this is a beautiful object. So this object is called Clifford algebra. algebra. And so then any sets of gamma mu-- so gamma mu are a set of four matrices satisfying this equation. And then we can write down explicit solutions for those gammas, so that's two representations. So for example, for 1, you're corresponding to gamma 0 equal to minus i. So now this is minus i times a 2-by-2 matrix, OK. And the gamma i is equal to 0, minus sigma i, minus i s Sigma i, 0. HONG LIU: So this is a new space, and so that's called-- this is called spinor space, yeah. Yes? AUDIENCE: How do we know that-- are these the only two representations? HONG LIu: There are infinite number of them. We will talk about that. OK? Good? So now let me make some remarks. Yeah, so first, if you consider the case m equal to 0, and then this is, like, for massless, so when mequal to zero, then when you reduce to this Klein-Gordon equation. same story just here, you just forget about beta. OK, the same story, you forget the beta, and then you only need alpha i alpha j the commutator to be 0 for i not equal to j, essentially just that equation 1 there. And then also, you'd want the alpha i square equal to 1, OK, so for any i. So now these are the conditions for the alphas, and now you can actually satisfy by 2-by-2 matrices. they are all just complex. So this actually tells you that actually the massive particle have more degrees of freedom than the massless particle. And then the second thing is what Dirac essentially was-- Dirac's original motivation. So from Dirac equation, you can show you can derive a current. Just as you can do for the Schrodinger equation. You can derive an equation like this for some j mu and with j 0, with the 0-th component of this thing, positive definite. the meaning of all these different solutions for alpha and beta or for gammas, OK? So as I mentioned, you can have infinite number of solutions. What's the meaning of them? So first, let's imagine when we look at this equation-- so as I said, this is a matrix equation. In this matrix equation, then you have this psi which is a four- component vector. OK, so imagine, just say, consider making a basis change in psi. So now, so psi prime satisfies essentially the same equation but a different gamma matrix. because one is going to change the basis. OK. So you can show any matrices which satisfy that equation, they're all related by similarity transformation. They're just corresponding to a change of basis. So but different forms of the gamma, they may be useful for different purposes. For example, this I, solution I we wrote down before, it's convenient for if you want to take the nonrelativistic limit. And II is actually the most convenient form, the matrix to use. actually in the-- opposite regime, it's convenient for the ultrarelativistic regime. OK, so it depends on which regime, sometimes you use different gamma matrices. So now having introduced the Dirac equation and then the structure of theDirac equation, but still we haven't showed that the DirAC equation is covariant. So we, of course, won't have time to do that today, but let me just remind you how this Lorentz covariance works for the scalar case. Consider such a Lorentz transformation, OK, so and then phi transforms as following, phi prime x prime phiprime. New phi evaluated at the new position should be the same as phi evaluation at the old position. So the phi-- yeah, just equal to phi lambda minus 1 x. So now if you look at the Klein-Gordon equation, let's see how this is covariant, OK? OK, it's the same in any frame. to show, OK, so now we want to show that the Dirac equation has the same property, OK. OK, that's much more nontrivial. Again, it's really ingenious, ingenious, yeah, but we see, actually, it works.OK, so we will do it next time. Next time, we will show you how to do the same thing in a different way. We will do that in a few minutes. We are going to take a break. We're going to have a drink.