Mathematically, a consumer is trying to maximize his utility. And this utility maximization has to be done with respect to some constraint and the constraint the budget constraint we take P 1 x 1; P 2 x 2 should be less than or equal to I. In real life, it is possible that a person derives some satisfaction from having some money left in his pocket, but the way this problem has been framed here the person’s satisfaction depends only on his level of consumption of good 1, and good 2. are taking u naught here. So, what is happening P 1 and P 2 these are market determined that so we are taking because we are talking about consumer P 1, P 2 is its from the market and individual. Now, let us turn this problem little bit you know in the opposite direction; we say that this person wants to achieve this uNaught level of utility which is the same as this u Naught ok. How much what is the minimum level of income he needs to get, this unaught level. And what we are trying to say that this has to be minimized. And how can we what is the idea to minimize the expenditure I should achieve let us say if I am that consumer I should be able to reach to this utility level by spending as less as possible. So, I will write the earlier problem this side. What we are saying minimize P 1, x 1 plus P 2, x 2 such that u of x 1 comma x 2 is 0.1. And what we have here is x 2 here is X 3 ok. P 1 plus x 1 plus P 2 plus x 2 is equal to let us take K, where K is any number. So, for different numbers of K, if we try to draw this because this is a line how did it look like? Student: Downward sloping. Downward-sloping, slope is again going to be equal to minus P 1 by P 2 here also. And similarly, we can draw for different values of K and this is the optimal position. bundle, this is the bundle; let us say x star and here is let us call it also x star in the old problem. What we have done here is take the indifference map and then we have taken the budget constraint. We have started checking with the what is the highest level of indifference curve that can be achieved under this budget constraint and we have figured out that x does not or x naught 0 x star 0 is the optimal bundle. Now what we are doing we are drawing a set of a family of this line P 1 x 1 plus P 2 x 2. Different line corresponds to different value of K. are also expenditure lines I can say. We take any bundle here the expenditure is going to be the same in both of these cases, that is what it represents. In fact, we can overlap what we are doing here we are varying the indifference curve and keeping the budget line fixed. So, basically, these two are dual of one another. If we solve these two, we reach to the solution of the problem of how to get the budget to be fixed and the expenditure to be different. same consumption bundle; it is clear. So, if we solve it what do we get? Here let us say for x 1 instead of using star let me use term M I will explain what does this M, this is x 1 m. What are the parameters P 1 P 2 and I so x 1 the optimal level of consumption of good 1 should be given as a function of parameters in this system and the parameters are P 1, P2 and I is it clear? Similarly, let me write here x 1 H again, I will explains what is H. I is P 1 x 1 plus P 2 x 2. What is e? E is nothing. We are checking we have set up the problem such that this I is equal to this u naught and what we have learned is that x 1 m P 1, P 2 I is. equal to x 1 h P 1 P 2 uNaught. This is an identity. not just equal to. this is always true. I can write it further if you pay attention to this that x1 m P1 comma P 2 and I is e of P 1 comma P2.