Chef Todd Moore shares the seven basic skills that everyone should have to cook food consistently in the kitchen and be proud of the results. If you already have all seven of these skills and cooking techniques great you can work for me on the other hand if you only have one or two ofthese skills that's still fantastic why because I know you'll want to add other skills and learn to cook basic methods. Chef Todd Moore: My chef test highlights the skills thateveryone should possess if they want to learn to Cook anything at any time. know the methods behind all written recipes then you'll be making your cooking a winner every single time so here are my seven Chef tests to reveal their knowledge of basic cooking methods. Use a chef knife correctly and cut vegetables into three specific sizes number two anticipate when oil is about to reach the smoke point number three develop color during sauté number four thicken a liquid to make a sauce number five softly poach an egg number six roast a delicate item like fish and number seven tell when a grilled steak is done. The Magician's hands the way that he wants you to. Once you've been shown the misdirection how the trick works you start looking for this redirection. You can also cook chicken fish steak vegetables pork in the same repetitive method and and the magic will then appear for you so here are the answers to my chef test number one using a chef's knife correctly. The first indicator of an experienced cook from a novice is the way they handle the most used tool in the kitchen it's the chef's knives. Cube It's a tiny little cut that you'd find in chicken salad or soup batonette is a 2in stick that's a/4 in on all sides small dice is a/ quin Cube small dice comes from batonettes as the cubes are always cut from sticks so to pass this test well the result should be three items that are precisely twice or half the size of the others. consistency of cut is consistency of cook so knife skills are very important for excellence results you have failed this test if you give me items of a wide variety of shapes and sizes are all the items cut into the same size. like to cut things up you'll be using fresh vegetables uh anyway uh second in my chef test to anticipate when oil is about to smoke now the skill here is understanding the convective cooking process. When the chef notices the oil starting to change from being perfectly smooth to beginning a convection process then adds the protein product to the pan just before there's visible smoke this is where you get the splattering reaction in the pan. If you give me a chicken breast with a beautiful brown plate appeal that shows your ability to control heat so that the item develops color but doesn't lose moisture or burn you fail this test. one that's lost moisture one that's burned one that shows the lack of involvement in the preliminary steps of the sauté process Chef test number four here's the answer thicken a liquid to make a sauce. Without an understanding of how starches thicken it's difficult to make consistently great sauces this is a skill of someone that really knows how to cook number five Chef test softly poach an. If you give me a cup of milk that looks like mashed potato Poes or cottage cheese you failed this test. egg well this shows the moist convective process and it means that the Chef should have an understanding of the difference between boil simmer and poach a common mistake of Home cooks and chefs alike is always boiling items boiling is not a cooking method once you understand how to control the reaction of liquid in a pan you'll be able to perform a poach of a very delicate item like eggs without making all busted up egg drop soup. When you give me a nicely poached egg one that looks like it should be in a magazine beautiful yoke bright yellow sitting up high on the albumin should be fully intact and look great. a chicken most people can put a piece of meat in for a while and I don't have 3 hours to wait on the chef test anyway but roasting something delicate like fish now this shows the ability to show to control dry convective heat dry versus Mo moist in controlling dry heat. There's a very fine line between the coagulation of proteins the stiffening and shrinking of what you're cooking at 165° F and the 212° fah when moisture starts evaporating the key to cooking with dry heat is being able to live in this temperature zone between 165 and 212 where the food Cooks for drying out. and it's dry it's much smaller in its uh cooked State than it was in its raw State because of the drying effect of the oven this Chef doesn't know how to retain moisture in a dry cooking process Chef test number seven how to tell when a grilled steak is done I mean the best test that I can think of for this is to hand a chef three steaks ask them to cook them to order cook me one rare one medium one well done a lot of people can't do this how you do this. every single time because understanding these methods will allow you to make sense out of any recipe or not even use a recipe. Your increased understanding of how different cooking techniques work not what to cook but how the techniques work and then you'll be creating the things that you want you want them to be. Make sure you get a seed at my webinar [Music] and then come back again and again to try and create the things you want to create. You'll be able to create them again andagain and again.