In this chapter we will discuss two applications, one price control and second taxation, so right. Sir, does this slope of this graph denote anything price demand upon, some price upon some quantity. So, wait little later we will talk about that that topic, right now we are not, we are just talking about movement and shifts. We are not talking about the slope. Slope is also very important very good question but little later, we you have to wait little bit to get the idea. Government can come up with a regulation to fix price ceiling or price floor. Price ceiling is maximum price for a unit of good established by law or by government and similarly price floor is the minimum price. So, price floor typically is minimum support price. What happens typically, let me also add government does not only say in the case of price floor that this is theminimum price. One ways is that government says that because there is a law that you cannot buy or sell the product. Now there are two possibilities that above this particular price or below this specific price. says you cannot you know this is the price below which you cannot buy yourself. If government says that the minimum support price is less than the market equilibrium price what would happen. Excess supply it means there will be a downward pressure. sellers On the sellers to decrease their price of per unit of good, but if government wants to support them then what does the government say. That you bring the goods. It will buy by itself. We will buy it at this particular price. So, what government does that it artificially jacks up the demand in a way that we will buy. devote their resources to produce wheat. So, supply of wheat would increase even further it may increase further. This may be a result of price, that the price floor. Where do we get the price ceiling typically? Petrol or even in the rents. Maximum rent that you can charge is given by the government. You cannot increase the rent beyond a particular level, you can't increase it beyond that level. Nothing will change if that level is above the market equilibrium price. We get excess demand and when we have excess demand what happens there. pressure. There is an upward pressure, but by law sellers cannot increase the rent or buyers cannot pay more. So, then what do we observe in the market. Role of government. Black marketing. Black market you know under the table payment. What we observe is something I can call non-market. Rationing mechanism. For example, petrol the people would like to buy more, but very little amount of petrol is available relatively less amount of gasoline is available at that particular price. This is in a way, it is a non market rationing mechanism you have to wait little longer. illegal you know it is not illegal but just because there are so many people who would love to buy a good at that particular price, but there are not enough supply. Another example is that you have to pay pagadi. Right now that pagadi is something that security deposit that land the house owner or the apartment owners they take from the person who would like to rent their house. But you can think it is kind of a non-market rationing mechanism that they cannot, that the landowner or the house owners cannot charge the market equilibrium price. In Bombay you pay almost the price of apartment as security money, sometimes more than that. So, it is non market rationing mechanism. Now, we can also think about the black market, the rise of black market or in other words illegal trade at prohibited prices. This is not the blackmarket, but this is one kind of blackmarket. Sir, actually the pagadi system. Ha. Like you said some security. So,. sir is it taken thinking that we would earn interest on that caution money and the prices would be rising on its own, you compensate the No see. drop in price. Yes, sir we do have agents like who supply. I am not trying to say that they do they provide us they of course, provide us a service. The idea here is not to defend them, but to explain why it is happening and then what we have is some kind of tie-in deals. Then tie in deals is many people would like to have gas connection. And that is also quite common. You are not interested in buying gas burner at really at the price which is much higher. than the price that you will you have to pay in the market for a gas burner. So, this is the tie in deals, it is not that you are buying the gas burner here. Similarly, when you go for apartments in Bombay, the apartment owner may say rent is this much. You have to take the furniture that I have put in the house, you also have to rent the refrigerator. These are tie-in deals that is what you get. I am not defending their position that they do a right or legal thing. Let us look at what happens when we have a price floor. Of course, you will have excess supply and also you'll have non-market rationing. Can you give me one example of non- market rationing mechanism in case of excess supply of wheat because of price floor? Sir, like the payment is not done at the time of buy, it is done after year or after few months. That can be one, again it is very difficult to discern it because of some other reason. And one more thing we have to pay a minimum wage to the laborers. That is stretching too far. very very, they wait long period to sell their product or when they go to the government unit to sale their product there is a long queue. So, long waiting period is there for offloading their products. What else, illegal market; you will have to pay bribe, illegal trade instead of writing market illegal trade to offload your wheat at government units. All these things happen whenever we have price control. It is to incentivize the production for a few like for wheat or if we talk if there's a new production of potato and if we put price floor on potato, it will incentivize it. We do not have a proper distribution to.production and they can serve the market better. So, what we are doing basically is that we are buying at the minimum support price and leaving grains to rot in open, in absence of proper distribution system. But even when we have proper distribution, why cannot government buy these the items that government needs to provide to poor at the market price and give it to poorest, just a point that you should ponder. But I am saying definitely that there are definitely better ways to cater to the welfare of public.