As the dough ferments it fills up with carbon dioxide expelled by the yeast which is feeding on simple sugars. The gas accumulates in pockets inside the dough held together by the gluten structure. We want the dough to rise up and become nice and light bread so why would we want to punch the gas out it seems that it would defeat the purpose of fermentation normally punching down is performed halfway through bulk fermentation and the punching down or degassing can be accompanied by folding in fact both are done in the kitchen. same step and these two actions go hand in hand not only during folding but also when dividing pre-shaping and final shaping the dough. No matter how gentle you try to handle your dough you will always de-gas it if only a little bit. In today's comparison video we'll make 4 breads they will be made from the same dough but they will all be treated differently. The first one of the four breads will be left alone from the beginning of fermentation until it's baked. The final one will be folded shaped and degassed three times and we won't be fermenting them for the same amount of time. You would almost never make a bread like the one on the left and there's a good reason for it that's why first we're going to talk about folding. folding achieves a couple of things first off it degasses the dough secondly it builds tension into the dough if the dough is weak and loose by folding it we can tighten it this makes it rise higher vertically instead of spreading out sideways. A stronger dough will also be able to hold more gas and take more fermentation before deflating and falling flat and what you're seeing here on the screen is the first fold halfway to bulk fermentation. why are you punching it punching is actually quite aggressive and you should never punch your dough the best thing to do is deflate it by pressing it gently as the dough ferments the gas pockets inside the grow larger and larger and the membrane of dough between those pockets can tear and the pockets of gas can fuse into larger pockets. If this process keeps going undisturbed the crumb of the bread can end up with large bubbles surrounded by denser areas of dough this of course not always a bad thing some high hydration breads are specifically made to have that texture as we punch down or deflate the dough the Gas pockets break down and split up resulting in a more tightly packed and even chrome structure. proof i tried to shape them similarly as i could so that the main difference between these breads would be the steps that we took or skipped now degassing folding and shaping is not just about what the crumb will be like it's also a way of controlling fermentation the loft on the left is almost ready to be baked while the other three they still need about an hour until they go in the oven as we know fermentation builds flavor and it helps develop texture of the crumbs and the crust by degassing the dough we are forcing it to rise back up again it basically has to start over. for one the crust on this loaf separated that could be all those gas bubbles fusing together and finding the path of least resistance and we see a good progression of oven spring the more the dough was shaped de-gassed and handled the highest rows that may seem quite counter-intuitive but as i mentioned earlier tension is what makes the oven spring happen and the dough on the right was the tightest one because we folded it pre-shaped it and final shaped it now let's have a look at the crumb and of course as i explained earlier if the dough is left undisturbed it will result in a crumb with large holes surrounded by denser dough that's exactly what we're seeing here on the bread that wasn't de-Gassed at all. worst and you should not be making bread like that if you want to use this method it should be fermented for much longer and perhaps go in a higher tin at the end of the day it's all up to you make your bread the way you like it make it fit your style and taste experiment try different methods don't just follow recipes ask questions and if you ever get stuck check out more videos in the principles of baking playlists you might find some answers there so what do you think of degas thing do you degas your bread though let me know down in the comments and don't forget to read the blog post linked in the video description.