Bolek Wyslouch is a teacher substitute for Professor Lee. He will talk to you about coupled oscillators. We will work on two, again, simple physical systems, one that consists of two pendula driven by forces of gravity, each of them. And then they are connected with the spring. Each of those pendula,Each of those masses will feel the effects of gravity and effects of a spring. We may, depending on how much time we have, start driving, have driven coupled oscillator. The system is very simple, just two masses, a spring, a little bit of gravity on top of that. The way they behave could be extremely complex, but it can be understood in terms of very simple systematic way of looking things through normal modes and normal frequencies. Once we understand two, we will then generalize to infinite number of oscillators, which is actually-- so this model, which consists of weights hanging under the influence of gravity plus the springs will be then used for many applications of the concepts. And everything is in Earth's gravitational field, g. We assume that this is an ideal system, highly idealized. We only consider motion with small angle approximation, only small displacement. There's no drag force assumed. Of course, this thing here is very far from being ideal, but hopefully basic behaviors are similar. It's approximately ideal. To study the motion of this thing, to understand how it works, let's try to parameterize it, and displace it from equilibrium, and look at the forces. The coordinate system is this. When we start talking about the system in principle in the case of somewhat larger angles, you have to worry about vertical positions as well. So there is also a coordinate y, which we will need temporarily to set things up. So x is, as I say, x is measured from equilibrium. Y is positioned vertically. So to calculate the equations of motion, we have to look at the forces. So let's look at what are the forces acting, for example, on this mass. When the spring is displaced from equilibrium, there is a spring force, Hooke force, in the direction of -- in the usual direction. In this case, it's actually in the opposite direction. There is a tension the spring, which has to be calculated such that we understand the acceleration of this object. This is m acceleration of object number 1 in x direction is equal to minus T1 sine theta 1 plus k x2 minus x1. And in the y-hat direction, we have m y1 direction isequal to T cosine theTA 1 minus mg. can be ignored. The force of spring depends on the difference of position x1 minus x2. If you move mass 1, the spring force is in the right direction, minus kx. So there is no motion x1, so we can conclude from here the T cosine1 is approximately equal. Yes? AUDIENCE: How do you know which way [INAUDIBLE]?? BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: Excuse me. The spring is connected to mass 1. And the force of the spring on mass 1 is k times however the spring is squashed. T is simply equal to mg. So the tension in the spring can be assumed to be mg. We don't have to worry about it. Also the angle can be converted into position by realizing that the distance times the angle is equal to displacement, the usual geometry. The net result is that by simplifying things, I can write down equations for acceleration in the horizontal direction for mass 1. OK? So this is an equation of motion for mass1 in our coupled system. And I could say most of the terms have to do with a motion of mass 1 itself. focus on the mass in question. You take all the forces, you calculate them, and then this coupling will somehow appear in the equations. So we can repeat exactly the same calculation focusing on mass 2. And then the equation which you will get will be very similar. So the motion of mass x1 depends on x1 itself multiplied by something with a spring term and gravitational term and depends on the position of mass 2 only through the spring. And the trick in this whole mathematics, and calculations, and the way we do things is how do you solve those coupled equations? OK? me do everything. Let's write down everything in the matrix form, because it turns out that linear matrices are very useful for that. So let's introduce to them and show vector, which consists of x1 and x2. So we will be monitoring the change of this x2 as a function of time. We will introduce a force matrix k, which is equal to k plus mg over l minus k here. And then we need a third matrix, mass matrix, which simply says that masses are mass of first object is m. as X, the second derivative of the vector capital X, is equal to minus m to the minus 1, this matrix, multiplying matrix k and then multiplying vectors x again. So instead of repeating writing, all the x1s, x2, et cetera, instead I just stick them into one or two element objects. I use matrices to multiply things, and if I want to know x1 and x2,. I can always go, OK, the top component of vector x, lower component of vectors x gives me the solution. Simple. Right? So let's try to use this terminology to find solutions. But hold on. What form of oscillation? OK, all kinds of complex numbers can write, but any particular-- AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: That's the physics answer, all right? Complex notation is a mathematical answer, how to solve a mathematical equation. The physics answer is to find fixed frequency modes us such that the system, the complete system, oscillates at one frequency. Everybody moves together. This is so-called normal mode. introduce variable z, just kind of a two-element vector, which has a complex term, a fixed frequency, plus a phase, a rhythm complex, multiplying vector A. And vector A is simply has two components, A1, A2, or maybe I should write it differently. So vector A contains information about some sort of initial conditions for position x 1 2. And also, we will, because we have this phase here, we can assume and require that is a real number. So A is real. So I have to do-- so I plug this here. So Z double dot is simply equal minus omega squared times Z. OK? And this term is a proportionality constant at any given moment of time. So it goes through the matrix multiplication. So you can just delete this. You can divide both sides. You have signs here. And then I have an equation which is a linear matrix equation, which is M minus 1 K times vector A. And I can rewrite it a little bit again. So this is the equation which we need to solve. to obtain the solutions to at least one normal mode, and we expect that there will be two normal modes, because we have two masses. So mathematically, the way to find out the oscillating frequency is you take a determinant of m minus 1 K minus i omega squared must be equal to 0. So let's try to see how to calculate things. So I take a big object like this. And so in this element here, I have to multiply this matrix times that. The only variable which we have to change parameters of this matrix-- you know, the spring constant and the mass this affects is given. So the only parameter here, which I can change, or adjust, or find is omega square. So I will try all possible matrices of this type until I find one or two that have a determinant equal to 0. But if I find them, this would correspond to the normal frequencies. We need to find which parameter omega sets this to 0, and then this is a pretty straightforward calculation. is basically equivalent to the following equation g over l plus k over m minus omega squared must be equal either to plus or minus. Right? I took a square root of both sides. There are two solutions which corresponds to plus here. The other one corresponds to minus here. So we have a-- so what this says is that if I set my frequency to g over. l, then it will be-- I will be able to set things up such that it oscillates forever at this frequency, one fixed. frequency forever. This is a frequency. It does not depend on the strength of the spring. How is it possible? Somehow spring is irrelevant for this motion. And it turns out that there is a very simple oscillation, easy to see, if basically that this is the frequency of a single pendulum. So basically, you got both pendula going together, each of them happily oscillating by themselves. And the spring is completely irrelevant forthis motion. If I cut it off, the motion will not change. It just happens that two identical pendula are going at their own natural frequency. so it's stretch from both sides. And the whole system oscillates at the same frequency, and because of this additional force of spring, the frequency is actually higher, it's larger. It oscillates faster. All right, so that's the first step in understanding the system. We now know that there are two oscillations and two normal frequencies. The next step to finish our understanding of the system in a mathematical way, to describe it fully, I have to know what is the shape of oscillations. In principle, we know, now, at the end of the day, I still want to know how much 1 moves, how much 2 moves. So we have to put it all together. We have identified the frequency and the kind of, in the matrix notation, shape of the node. But of course, the final solution is a linear superposition of all possible normal modes. And then you calculate a shape of a normal mode. Is that clear? Any questions at this time? Right? This one is minus 5. This one is plus 5 and so on. Whereas in this mode, both of them move together. All right? So let's try to go back to the-- you can get rid of this one. Let's write down x1 and x2 for positions of the two masses. So x1-- so basically, the x will have to be-- I used z there. Sox will be real of vector z. So from an exponent, I will end up with a cosine appropriately. And then I will use the [INAUDIBLE].. This is real part of e to the i omega plus phi. or they go opposite. So to make it more general, I have to give some multiplicative factor there. So if I do everything, I end up with x, the mode 1 will in general have some sort of overall constant C. And the mode number 2 will be C2 cosine omega 2 times t plus phi 2 times 1 minus 1. So the omega 1 and omega 2 are fixed given by the construction of the two coupled oscillators. This shape, 1 and 1, and 1 plus 1 is fixed, because these are the shape of normal modes. arbitrary mode-- this is the most general motion of the two coupled oscillator systems. To describe it in specifically-- defined for a specific configuration, you will have to determine the values of alphas and phis. So what you see here is the following-- you have the green is the normal mode, number 1. They are all stationary. This one is at position 0. This is not the ideal decoupled oscillator, right? OK, and then you see the things start moving. The magenta is normal mode number 2. And blue and the red are the actual pendula. And the motion of blue and red is simply a linear sum of the two. And this is exactly what-- this is the computer simulation that shows you that one of them is going up, the other one down, et cetera. Now, is there a way to disable one of the normal modes? How would you disable a normal mode? Is there a quick way to set things up such that the second normal mode, whichever you choose, doesn't show up in their equations at all? AUDIENCE: You said [INAUDIBLE]. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: Hmm? Audience: [INAudIBLE] BOLesLAW: Yeah, so what you do, is you just change the initial conditions. So you set it up at T equal to 0. I have initial conditions that basically favor or demand that only in this general equation either alpha or beta is equal to0. no shifting of energy from one to another. So you can have all kinds of motions by simply adjusting initial conditions. And those motions can be done a very different way. So do you know-- so this is how we can have different shape of motion, depending on the initial condition. Is there another way for me to change the way this system behaves? Let's say I have exactly this system, and I want to change, for example, the frequency of oscillations. How will I do it? It could be a very expensive proposition, yes? could put it with me some spaceship, and go to a place where the gravity is different, right? Why not? So what would happen? So if gravity changes, then basically what will happen is both this term and that term will change. So let's say, in fact, do I have it in this one here? Yes. Solet's say I do again. So now, let's take it to, for example, Jupiter. Jupiter, g, is much larger. So what do you think will happen when we go to Jupiter? the fact that the energy was moving from one to the other. Do you think this transfer of energy will be faster or slower? Two omegas closer to each other. Any guesses? AUDIENCE: Smaller. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: Take kind of longer. Let's see what happens, right? So we go on the rocket, and nowadays, you don't have to go to the rocket. Just remove one comment. And I went from about 10 meters per square second to 25 meters persquare second. now go to the Moon, which has much lower gravitational acceleration. Let's see what happens. It's a little bit not completely clear what's going on, but you see, actually the motion is kind of a little strange. Look at the red one. The red one is stopping. Then it's going halfway out. It looks kind of messy, doesn't it? And so it doesn't show up here very well, because the parameters have changed so much that I have-- I have those fixed pictures which are-- just a second. the frequency of how the energy shifts from one to the other. And also you can see the frequency going up and down for the same exact conditions. This is now, just a moment, this is a Jupiter. So Jupiter, you see that the frequency itself it's much higher. And the energy transfer between the two things takes longer. On the Moon however, the oscillations actually look really weird. It's kind of, you know, the two frequencies are so far away, and it's really not even a nice oscillatory motion. center mass of the system or just one of the two --? BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: This one, I think, this one is just one. Actually, the one-- on the difference-- it normally doesn't matter. What matters this is the frequency and how these move to the other. OK? Let's just forget about it. Just keep it. So let me now talk about this thing, which is called beat phenomenon, because when you look at the motion of one of those objects, or the difference between them or whatever. plus cosine beta is equal to two cosine alpha plus beta divided by 2. Right? That's the trigonometric identity. So there is-- we have those two frequencies which are playing a role. And for example, at Jupiter, those twofrequency are actually very close to each other, because everything is dominated by the gravity, and we have a very weak spring. So the omega 1 and omega 2 actually are veryClose to Each other. So this thing, this term here, kind of goes omega 1 plus omega 2 divided by t. 2 is like omega, right? 100 plus 105 divided by 2 is about 100. Whereas this one here carries information about the difference of frequencies-- 100, 102, the difference is 2, which is very small. So we have-- so this term here-- it basically oscillates at the frequency of omega. And the other term is much, much smaller. How does this look? Well, it turns out that if you make a sketch of this, if you do signs, for example, it looks like this. like this. OK? So there are in fact two-- when you look at this picture, you can see two frequencies. One which is clear the oscillation of the-- high-frequency oscillation. But there's also this kind of overarching frequency of much smaller frequency, and this is what corresponds to a difference of two things. So the system oscillates. So one of those pendula, either of them, is moving fast. But it's going faster. It's amplitude is larger, and after some time, it slows down to 0. There's this kind of frequency of energy moving from one to the other, which is something called beat. So we see this here. We see it on the pendula. But now what we are going to do is we're going to try to hear it, right? So this is a demonstration which maybe it works, maybe not. So let me-- it will work, OK? So we have two speakers. And they basically go on very, very similar frequencies, all right? And so when I switched on, you should hear-- hear the sound. the original sound. And it's kind of the loudness of the sound overall is changing. All right? This is faster. This is kind of extra, extra sound which you hear is the difference of mainly the frequency is not stable here, so I'll change it. So this is, again, this is a single one, perfectly constant frequency. No change in amplitude, no change in loudness. Put them together, right? That's what they do. So if you have two, and I can adjust the frequency, and thefrequency is close, then this frequency of changing is very slow. So you can actually hear it. they have an amplitude of 1. And clearly, you see that they have a different frequency. So if you take two of those together, same amplitude, just slightly different frequency, and you simply make a linear-- superposition of the two, you will get exactly the beating effect. And this is something that, again, happens very often. There's another demonstration here. I have two tuning forks, and they are very similar frequency. They are coupled because I gave this guy some initial condition. In the experiment, energy is being transferred by this air oscillating here. The coupling goes through the air to the sound here, right? And they have very similar frequency. So they are nicely coupled. But what we can also do-- we can [TONE]. Right? So they're both going.going. Then I stop it. But there's still sound, because the second one picked up some energy, and it took off. Of course, you don't see them. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: I don't have to go to Jupiter to modify it, because this one is just a little mass here, right? [TONE] Ah, cool. So now, this thing is probably-- I know it's a period, a fraction of a second,right? Yes? AUDIENCE: Should both of those sine and cosines have Ts in their arguments? BOLESlaws: Of course always. They are both time dependent, yeah. sort of early on, to instead of, so far, when we talked about pendula, we describe their motion in terms of motion of number 1. It turns out we can rewrite the equation into some sort of new variables, where, so-called normal coordinates, where you'll simultaneously describe both of them and then kind of mix them together to have a new formula. So you do change of variables. So instead of keeping track of x1 and x2 independently, you define something which I called u1, which is simply x1 plus x2. equations, which I conveniently erased and make a sum or difference, it turns out that this coupling kind of separates. So I will end up having two separate equations for this one. So in general, the equation of motion would be-- would look like, so let's say I can write down m x1 plus x2. And this immediately-- and it looks-- if I now write it in terms of normal coordinates, then I have that m u1 double dot is equal to simply minus mg over l, u1. The determinants needed no matrices, no nothing. We just added and subtracted the two equations, and things magically separated. So you can always have a linear combination of parameters for arbitrary size coupled oscillators system where you combine different coordinates, and you basically force the system to behave in a way in which it induces the single oscillation, single frequency. So this is a very powerful trick, but usually for most cases, you can do that only after you have solved it, after you've found out normal modes, et cetera. then you can say, ha, ha,. I can I can introduce normal variables and make things simpler. But at the end of the day for complicated systems that work is the same. But for simple systems like this one where there is a good symmetry, you can do it. Anyway, so I think we are done for today. And on Tuesday, we'll continue with forced oscillators. All right? Thank you. "I think we're done for day one. We'll continue on Tuesday," he said.