Aristotle was born 384,15 years after the trial of Socrates. He was sent by his father to go to college in Athens. He spent his life thinking and then he died. There is, obviously, more to his life than that. But, to some degree, this captures some of the way in which Aristotle has been perceived over the centuries. That is to say, the ultimate philosopher. It's time to move on to the next chapter in the history of political philosophy. Aristotle spent four years at the Platonic Academy. He remained attached to it for the next 20, until the death of Plato. He left Athens, first for Asia Minor and then to return to his home in Macedonia. He had been summoned by King Phillip to establish a school for the children of the Macedonian ruling class. It was here that Aristotle met and taught Phillip of Macedonia's son, Alexander. You all remember the recent movie of a year or two ago about Troy with Colin Farrell about Alexander. Who played Aristotle in that film, do you remember? Aristotle wrote disciplined and thematic treatises on virtually every topic, from biology to ethics to metaphysics. Unlike his intellectual godfather, Socrates, he wrote nothing but conversed endlessly. Unlike Socrates, rather in staying to drink the hemlock, Aristotle left Athens and was reported to have said he did not wish to see the Athenians sin against philosophy for a second time. In any case, Aristotle returned to Athens later on and established a school of his own, a rival to the Platonic Academy. Aristotle appears from the beginning to look more like what we would think of as a political scientist. He collected constitutions, 158 of them in all, from throughout the ancient world. Above all, Aristotle's works, like the Politics and the Nicomachean Ethics, were explicitly intended as works of political instruction, political education. Unlike Socrates, who famously in his image in Book VII of the Republic, compared political life to a cave, Aristotle takes seriously the dignity of the city and showed the way that philosophy might be useful. Aristotle's extreme reluctance, his hesitance to speak to the issues of his time, are perhaps the result of his foreignness to Athens. Yet, for a man as notoriously secretive and reluctant as Aristotle, his works acquired over the centuries virtual canonical status. For centuries, Aristotle's authority seemed to go virtually unchallenged. Others would have known came to an end. What did Aristotle think of these changes? What did he think was going on? He is silent. Are you? The authority of Aristotle no longer has quite the power that it once did. The attack began not all that long ago, really only as late as the seventeenth century. A man, who we will read later this semester, named Thomas Hobbes, was one who led the pack, led the charge. In the forty-sixth chapter of Leviathan, Hobbes wrote, "I believe that scarce anything can be more repugnant to government than much of what Aristotle has said in his Politics" man is a political animal, Hobbes believed, could only result and did result, in fact, in regicide, the murder of kings. There are certainly echoes of this reading of Aristotle as a teacher of participatory republican government in the later writings of democratic thinkers from Tocqueville to Hannah Arendt. Who was this strange and elusive man whose writings seem to have been enlisted both for the support of monarchy and for republics, even for a universal monarchy and a smaller participatory democratic kind of government? animal. "That man" he says "is much more a political animal than any kind of bee or herd animal is clear" Why is it clear? "For we assert," he says, "nature does nothing in vain and man alone among the animals has speech" In other words, he seems to be saying that it is speech or reason, logos, that is able to both distinguish and create certain moral categories, such as the advantageous, the harmful, the just and unjust, and things of this kind. Aristotle appears to give two different accounts in the opening pages of the book that you might pay attention to. In the literal opening, he gives what looks like a kind of natural history of the polis. The polis is natural in the sense that it is an outgrowth, the most developed form of human association. In what sense, we could ask ourselves and I think you probably will be asking in your sections, in what sense is the city by nature? InWhat sense are we political animals by nature?" Aristotle says that man is a political animal by nature. He says participation in the life of the city is necessary for the achievement of human excellence. A person who is without a city, he says, who is apolis--without a city--must either be a beast or a god. In many ways he is advancing civilization in some way, says David Frum, author of "The Art of War," published by Simon & Schuster, $24.99. To order a copy of the book, call the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. on 08/05/2014. He isn't saying that man is political by nature. To say it's natural for us to do so is not to say we engage in political life spontaneously and avidly, as you might say spiders spin webs or ants build anthills. He is not a kind of socio-biologist of politics, although he sometimes appears this way. In some ways, to the contrary, he says we are possessed of the power of speech. It is speech that makes us political, he writes. Aristotle says reason or speech, not instinct, is what makes us political. He makes his argument, he says, because logos entails two fundamentally human attributes. The power to know is our ability to recognize, by sight, members of the same polis or city. It is speech that allows a sharing in these qualities that make us fully human, he writes. But to say, of course, that man is political by nature is not just to say that we become fully human by participating with others in a city. The form of association that leads to our perfection is necessarily something particularistic. A society based simply on the mutual calculation of interests could not be a real political society for Aristotle. We cannot trust all people, Aristotle seems to say. Trust can only be extended to a fairly small circle of friends and fellow citizens. Only a small city, small enough to be governed by relations of trust, can be political, in Aristotle's sense of the term. The alternative to the city, the empire, canonly be ruled despotically. There can be no relations ofTrust in a large, imperial despotism. Aristotle argues that freedom does not mean living as we like. It is informed by a sense of restraint and awareness that not all things are permitted. In many ways Aristotle there offers, as does Plato, a certain kind of critique of the modern or even the ancient democratic theory of freedom, which is living as one likes. You can see these opening pages of the book, dense argument being made.about that when you have your sections or when you talk about this text with your friends. What is Aristotle saying about us? condensed in very deep ways, carry a great deal of freight. There's a lot in there that needs to be unpacked. We need to avoid the temptation, in many ways understandable as it might be, to airbrush or sanitize Aristotle, to make him seem more politically correct for modern readers. The question is what did Aristotle mean by slavery? Who or what did he think was the slave by nature? Until we understand what he meant, we have no reason to either accept or reject his argument. Aristotle asks: How is it that some people came to acquire this capacity for rational self-control that is necessary for freedom and others seem to lack it? Is this hierarchy, again, a genetic quality? Is it something we're born with? Or is that distinction something that is created by nurture and education, what we would call today maybe socialization? If the latter, if this hierarchy of intelligence or of the rational is the result of upbringing, then how can slavery be defended as natural? kind of egalitarianism, so to speak, built in to the conception of rational animal and political animal? Yet, at the same time, Aristotle seems to regard education as the preserve of the few. The kind of discipline and self-restraint necessary for an educated mind appears, for him, to be unequally divided among human beings. It follows, I think, that the regime according to nature, that is to say the best regime, would be what we might think of as an aristocracy of the educated. the preserve of the few, of a minority capable of sharing in the administration of justice and in the offices of a city. Would you agree? Unappealing to us, perhaps, for that reason, very contrary to our intuitions and the way we have been brought up. But before we dismiss Aristotle's account as insufferably inegalitarian and elitist, we have to ask a difficult question. What else is Yale, but an elite institution intended to educate, morally and intellectually, potential members of a leadership class? Think about that. Aristotle might, as a natural aristocracy? I leave you with this question to think about. Before we reject Aristotle as an antidemocratic elitist, take a look at yourselves. So are you, or you wouldn't be sitting here today. Think about that and I'll see you next week. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @jennifer_newton. Back To The Daily Mail home.