Professor Steven Smith: Let me start today by asking the question, "what is political philosophy?" In one sense, you could say political philosophy is simply a branch or what we call a subfield of the field of political science. Yet in another sense, political philosophy seems to be the oldest and most fundamental part of politicalScience. Its purpose is to lay bare the fundamental problems, the fundamental concepts and categories which frame the study of politics. In this respect it seems to me much less like just a branch of political Science than the foundation of the entire discipline. Political philosophy is the oldest of the social sciences. It can boast a wealth of heavy hitters from Plato and Aristotle to Machiavelli, Hobbes, Hegel, Tocqueville, Nietzsche, and so on. Study of the great books or great thinkers of the past can easily degenerate into a kind of antiquarianism, into a sort of pedantry. We find ourselves easily intimidated by a list of famous names and end up not thinking for ourselves, says the author. books, risk overlooking the issues facing us today? What can Aristotle or Hobbes tells us about the world of globalization, of terrorism, of ethnic conflict and the like? Doesn't political science make any progress? After all, economists no longer read Adam Smith. I want you to remain alive to them throughout the semester. Yes? Okay. One reason I want to suggest that we continue to read these books is not because political science makes no progress, but because these works provide us with the most basic questions that continue to guide our field. that were asked by Plato, Machiavelli, Hobbes, and others. We may not accept their answers and it's very likely that we do not, but their questions are often put with a kind of unrivaled clarity and insight. The fact is that there are still people in the world, many people, who regard themselves as Aristotelians, Thomists, Lockeans, Kantians, even the occasional Marxist can still be found in Ivy League universities. These doctrines have not simply been refuted, or replaced, or historically superceded; they remain in many ways constitutive of our most basis outlooks and attitudes. This course will be devoted to the study of those "academic scribblers" who have written books that continue to impress and create the forms of authority with which we are familiar. But one thing we should not do, right, is to approach these works as if they provide, somehow, answers to the problems of today. Rather, the great works provide us, so to speak, with a repository of fundamental or permanent questions that political scientists still continue to rely on in their work. Again, we still think in.influences, are usually the slave of some defunct economist. terms of the basic concepts and categories that were created for us long ago. In political philosophy, it is never a sufficient answer to answer a question with a statement "because Plato says so," or "because Nietzsche says so" There are no final authorities in that respect in philosophy because even the greatest thinkers disagree profoundly with one another over their answers. We are called upon first to read and listen, and then to judge "who's right?" "how do we know?" The only way to decide is not to defer to authority, whoever's authority, but to rely on our own powers of reason and judgment. What is justice? What are the goals of a decent society? How should a citizen be educated? Why should I obey the law, and what are the limits, if any, to my obligation? And of course, the all important question, even though political philosophers and political scientists rarely pronounce it, namely, quid sit deus, what is God? Does he exist? And what does that imply for our obligations as human beings and citizens? Those are some of the most basic and fundamental problems of the study of politics, but you might say, where does one enter this debate? The concept of the regime is perhaps the oldest and most fundamental of political ideas. Broadly speaking, a regime indicates a form of government, whether it is ruled by the one, a few, the many, or as more common, some mixture of these three ruling powers. Regimes are necessarily partisan, that is to say they instill certain loyalties and passions in the same way that one may feel partisanship to the New York Yankees or the Boston Red Sox, or to Yale. Fierce loyalty, partisanship: it is inseparable from the character of regime politics. Henry Adams once cynically reflected that politics is simply the "organization of hatreds" This raises the question whether it is possible to transform politics, to replace enmity and factional conflict with friendship. Is such a thing possible? It can't be ruled out, but such a world, I would note--let's just say a world administered by international courts of law, by judges and judicial officials. tribunals--would no longer be a political world. The regime constitutes an ethos, that is to say a distinctive character, that nurtures distinctive human types. Every regime shapes a common character with distinctive traits and qualities. So the study of regime politics is in part a study of the distinctive national character types that constitutes a citizen body. It is only possible within the structure of the regime itself. It consists of the entire way of life, the moral and religious practices, the habits, customs and sentiments that make a people what they are. moralism and religious life, our defensiveness about democracy and so on. All of these intellectual and moral customs and habits helped to constitute the democratic regime. And this regime--in this sense the regime describes the character or tone of a society. What a society finds most praiseworthy, what it looks up to, okay? You can't understand a regime unless you understand, so to speak, what a people stand for, what they look up to. This raises a further set of questions that we will consider over the term. The Federalist Papers by Alexander Hamilton even begins by posing this question in the starkest terms. Hamilton asks the basic question about the founding of political institutions. Are they created, as he puts it, by "reflection and choice," or are regimes always the product of accident, circumstance, custom, and history? The idea that regimes may be created or founded by a set of deliberate acts raises a further question that we will study, and is inseparable from the study of regimes. Who is a statesman? What is a stateman? In its oldest sense, political science simply was a science of statecraft. What are the qualities necessary for sound statesmanship? How does statecraft differ from other kinds of activities? Must a good statesman be a philosopher versed in poetry, mathematics, and metaphysics? Or is statesmanship a purely practical skill requiring judgment based on deliberation and experience? Is a streak of cruelty and a willingness to act immorally necessary for statecraft, as Machiavelli infamously argued? Political philosophy is an imminently practical discipline, a practical field. Its purpose is not simply contemplation alone: it is advice giving. None of the people we will study this semester were cloistered scholars detached from the world. Plato undertook three long and dangerous voyages to Sicily in order to advise the King Dionysius. Machiavelli spent a large part of his career in the foreign service of his native Florence, and wrote as an advisor to the Medici. Hobbes was the tutor to a royal household who followed the King into exile during the English Civil War. his name always Jean Jacques Rousseau, "citizen of Geneva," and was approached to write constitutions for Poland and for the island of Corsica. Tocqueville was a member of the French National Assembly whose experience of American democracy deeply affected the way he saw the future of Europe. The study of regime politics either implicitly or explicitly raises a question that goes beyond the boundary of any given society. A regime, as I've said, constitutes a people's way of life, what they believe makes their life worth living. Political philosophy is always guided by the question of the best regime. But what is thebest regime? Even to raise such a question seems to pose insuperable obstacles. The best regime will always favor a certain kind of human being with a certain set of character traits. This issue received a kind of classic formulation in Aristotle's distinction of what he called the good human being and the good citizen. For the good citizens you could say patriotism is enough, to uphold and defend the good regime. Aristotle says the good citizen is not the same as the good human being. The good citizen loves what is good simply, not because it is his own, but because it's good. Abraham Lincoln said Henry Clay loved his country "partly because it was his own country" Lincoln's point was that Clay exhibited, at least on Lincoln's telling, something of the philosopher, what he loved was an idea, the idea of freedom. That love of the laws of your own country simply because they are your own is both necessary and sufficient. idea was not the property of one particular country, but it was constitutive of any good society. The good human being, it would seem, would be a philosopher, or at least would have something philosophical about him or her. But of course the best regime lacks actuality. We all know that. It has never existed. The philosopher can never be truly loyal to anyone or anything but what is best. Think of that: it raises a question about issues of love, loyalty, and friendship. unnecessary or redundant. It would wither away. Political philosophy exists and only exists in that... call it "zone of indeterminacy" between the "is" and the "ought," between the actual and the ideal. This is why political philosophy is always and necessarily a potentially disturbing undertaking. Those who embark on the quest for knowledge of the best regime may not return the same people that they were before. But there is some compensation for this, I think. The study of political philosophy may be the highest tribute we pay to love. see you back, and have a very good but thoughtful September 11^(th). See you back on 9/11/11. I'll see you back in a week or so. Thanks for your support and good wishes. I love you all, and see you on 11/11 /11. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. See you in a month or so, and I'll be back to see you in the U.S.