in this video we're going to discuss what externalities are in economics. An externality is when you do something that affects the well-being or the good of another person or a company but you're neither harmed or rewarded for what you did to that person. The externalities can be positive they can be negative. A negative externability is whenyou've harmed someone you've done something to somehow impose a cost on someone or some some company or something and you haven't reimbursed that person or paid them any money. the children are getting sick but if the company hasn't done anything to reimburse that family or somehow you know paid them or done something then they're basically creating a negative externality. As they produce the chemicals they're they're creating the sludge that that is getting in the river and it's it's harming these people but the people aren't being made whole so another thing would be let's let's say that you live in an apartment complex and your neighbor on the other side of the wall really loves to play Britney Spears music at 3:00 in the morning. at 3: a.m. and you said okay you know what I'll deal with this but I need you to give me an extra 50 bucks a month toward my rent and then you work out an agreement that's different but we're assuming here they haven't done anything to reimburse you they're not paying you. Now a positive externality is where you are doing something that doesn't harm someone it actually benefits that other person you're doing something good that just as a side test like it's as a tangent it's actually helping some other person or people. If you're not receiving the full social benefit you're just getting your own private benefit basically things where there's a positive externality the good is going to be under supplied. If you were actually paid if people said hey I really like what you did you might be more likely to get a flu shot and and and just if you even think with your house let's say you've you you you live in a neighborhood and there's other homes that are nearby and you do a good job maintaining.so forth so I'll just get this flu shot but you're actually helping other people as well right. your lawn and you mow your lawn and stuff but you don't really spend a l a lot of time making your house look pretty now if your neighbor is trying to sell their house they have a for sale sign up they might appreciate if you went out and really did a great job maintaining your home they would really just love that because then when people come to see their house which is for sale that would increase the value of their home right if the neighboring properties like yours look really really nice then that would help them sell their home. where you have a negative externality like pollution or something like that it would be overs supplied relative to what is socially efficient or optimal. Where you have an over-supply of something like pollution, for example, you would have it over supplied in a way that would be socially efficient and optimal. For example, if you have pollution, it would have to be over supplied to avoid it becoming a problem. This would be a way to reduce the amount of pollution or other negative externalities in the environment.