John Stuart Mill was the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency that's grounded in science on the one hand, and respect for individual rights on the other. We're not going to actually get to the rights-UTility synthesis as it's expressed in politics by John Stuart Mill until next Monday. What instead I'm going to do today is explain how the transition for classical to neoclassicals utilitarianism really went on in all fields of thinking about the human sciences. in philosophy that are going to be my principle focus in today's lecture. What you're also going to get is everything you ever needed to know about neoclassical economics in 45 minutes. At the same time, more or less, there were very important developments in moral philosophy that I just want to alert you to, that we're going to return to later when we come to consider Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. And this movement that I'm mentioning here is the doctrine that would come to be called emotivism. It was associated with a man by the name of Stevenson who wrote several books advocating the emotivist doctrine when he was an untenured professor in the Yale Philosophy Department. His doctrine was that when we make claims like murder is wrong, we're making claims that express our emotions, our emotive reactions to propositions. All we're doing is expressing our tastes, our emotional reactions and that there is nothing more to say about ethics than that, he says. He says it's an endpoint in a philosophical evolution that really begins in the seventeenth century. Hume's famous for the idea that an ought cannot be derived from an is; that there's a fact-value problem. But he thought, nonetheless, people are pretty much the same, and so if you can figure out what makes one of them tick, you can find what makes all of themtick. And that was most emphatically Jeremy Bentham's view. It's presupposed in everything we discussed last time. If you think about the idea of doing interpersonal comparisons of utility, and making the judgment that taking that dollar from Donald Trump and giving it to me would be better, that's what Bentham would have said. it to the bag lady increases her utility more than it decrease his, you're assuming that they basically all have the same kinds of utility functions. Stevenson questioned that idea radically. He said, "We don't actually know. We should take Hobbes much more seriously in his critique of Aristotle than he was willing to take himself" And so that was thought to be a radically relativist doctrine because it seemed to undermine the possibility of making ethical judgments of any sort across people. That is a doctrine to which we will return, as I said, when we get to the anti-Enlightenment and, in particular, Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. But today we're going to focus for the rest of our time on the economics of the transition from classical to neoclassical utilitarianism. And I'm going to ask you to suspend your disbelief and just follow me through the ABC's of neoclassicals price theory. And it's not until the end of this narrative that you'll start to see why the transition in economics was essential for the Transition in political theory. by-product is, you're going to get the whole of ECON 101 reduced to a single lecture. Because indeed it is true that enormously complex and subtle, and as sophisticated as the neoclassical theory of microeconomics is. It's all built out of the three ideas that I'm going to spell out for you in what some of you might initially regard as laborious detail. But I think you'll see what I'm getting at once we get towards the end of today's discussion. lot of wine to get a second loaf of bread. If, on the other hand, you were choking on your six loaves of bread and dying of thirst the reverse would be true. And these are what are called indifference curves in neoclassical economics. And indifference curves basically imply exactly as the name suggests that you would be indifferent among the mixes of Bread and Wine anywhere on this curve. And this curve is always shaped that way, concave toward the origin. Anybody want to tell us why? What is it reflecting?  neoclassical economists didn't want to do that for a different reason than anything I've talked about in these lectures. The problem they wanted to solve was to understand the behavior of markets. They wanted to be able to more precisely to predict what prices were going to be in markets. I'm going to elaborate to you much later on when we come and talk about Marx, and the labor theory of value and its limitations, but that's for a future lecture. For today's lecture all you need to know is that in Bentham's system we had cardinal scales. Pareto, Marshall, and Edgeworth thought you could do this just with ordinal utility. For Bentham's system to work, for example, the government would have to have a kind of utilitometer and run around sticking it under people's tongues to measure their utility. So moving from cardinal to Ordinal utility is going to turn out to have huge ideological consequences, which I'm going to unpack for you towards the end of today's lecture. All you need to concern yourself with is the fact that they wanted to be able to understand the nature of markets of how market prices move. we would know about this person A, as I said, is that they prefer four to three, three to two, two to one, one to zero. But we can't say anything about how much they prefer those things because these distances don't actually mean anything. All we get is an ordered ranking. One other thing we can say is, that this is a no-no. These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. Student: Because at the intersection they should have the same utility. The preferences are assumed to be transitive. So if you prefer A to B and B to C, you must prefer a to C. So we cannot have these indifference curves crossing one another. Now, instead of one person and two commodities, we're going to think about two people, okay? We're creating a diagram with two people on it. As I promised you earlier in the semester, anything I do with a diagram I will also do verbally, so if you find this in any way confusing just listen to the narrative and then we'll see whether you find it confusing. you get it that way. But so now we have a diagram with two people on it, okay? So this is person A, and this isperson B. And these axes, the X-axis, here, is A's utility function. We don't know that A's happier than B from what I just said, right? These distances don't mean anything,right? So it looks like A's happiest than B, but that's misleading. If the different distances are taken to imply in your mind, disabuse yourself of that thought right away. he said, "Let's draw a line north-south through the status quo," okay? And we'll imagine that there's a finite source of utility. One thing we can say is if you can anywhere into the northeast quadrant both of them are better off, right? So if we go from X to Y we know A's utility has gone up. We don't know by how much, but we know it's gone up so they're both better off. On the other hand, if we went anywhere in here, this quadrant, southwest as it were, obviously they's both worse off. use, yeah, let's use J. If I put a point here, J, we would say that A's gone down and B's gone up. Now, to make this a bit more real imagine in here this is the sphere of market transactions. This is where A and B will go voluntarily, right? So A will say to B, "Well, I have all this wine, and you have all that bread, how about I swap you a bottle of wine for a loaf of bread?" And you say, "Okay." can say that's Pareto inferior because they both don't want it, and both of them would resist it if the government tried to do it. So that's all well and good. Well, that leaves these two other quadrants. We can say nothing at all, at least nothing scientific. And then he says in his famous 700-page book called The Manual of Political Economy, he says, "People are going to misinterpret me" "We will never have a scientific reason for moving into either of these quadrants," he says. just have no way of knowing because we don't allow interpersonal comparisons of utility. Perhaps they are, perhaps they aren't, but we just don't know, okay? So that is the Pareto principle. The whole of neoclassical economic theory was constructed depends on this idea of indifference curves. A is trying to get up on those indifference curves, and B is try to get along on these indifference curves and there's no scientific way to tell whether B's loss is as big as A's gain or the reverse. A proposes to B swapping a loaf of bread for a bottle of wine and B agrees. They go to Y, and then A says, "Well, I'll give you another loaf of Bread for a Bottle of Wine" And B says, 'Forget it," and then they go to Z. When no transaction occurs, you know they've hit that frontier. So, the Pareto principle says that in a market system they'll move toward the frontier and when they get there, they'll stop. of course, they may have gotten there some way else. They might have gone from X to G over here, and then they would have done a new one. And that would just reflect shrewdness in bargaining, or how much people cared lower down their indifference curves. But once they wind up anywhere on this indifference curve they're not going to move off of it because now there is no way of improving one person's utility without diminishing the next person's. That's it. That is neoclassical economic theory in a nutshell. diagrammatically, and then if anybody doesn't get it we'll wait up and I'll go through it more slowly. But basically now we're putting the two previous diagrams together. And so you'll see why this is helpful once we get to the end of it. So A is here, and A has indifference curves. This is our first picture, right? We have wine. We have bread. A's indifference curves are the dotted lines, okay? A is trying to get that way,. that way, that way and to keep going all that way. B is looking at bottles of wine, loaves of bread, and B has now got the solid indifference curves. So B wants to go this way, as I said, southwest; A wants to going northeast. So this is an indifference curve for B. Now, it's going southwest instead of northeast just because it's looking in the mirror. So A would improve if he went this way. And B would improved if she went this. way, okay? So this shaded area here, this big football, is the Pareto superior set on the previous diagram. The Edgeworth box diagram just puts all of the pictures together. There's nothing conceptually new in it at all. It only becomes relevant to our purposes because it will enable us to start thinking about distributive questions, which is what we're trying to do in this case. The only way that A can go this way would move B off his or her indifference curve, and this one coming this way, okay? So at Z, A wants to go thisway, but the only way A can move B is to move B this way. I will get to in a minute. All you have to do is take the previous, the Pareto principle diagram and imagine it with a mirror and think of B as upside down coming toward A, and then it just all fits together. Very clever. Okay and the one thing I would say, this line here is what on the previous diagram was the P Hareto possibility frontier, right? This line is all the points of tangency between--like there is one, there isOne, there's one. a harder bargain early on, they might have gone by a different path and would have wound up at a different point. This is the Pareto possibility frontier which Edgeworth called the contract curve. It's where they will make a contract to get to. They will agree to transactions that get them onto that curve, but once they're on it they stay there, okay? That's the basic intuition. So market transactions into the Parareto superior zone, and eventually they stop when things are Pare to optimal. that. All I'm saying is if the government chooses to redistribute, there's not going to be a scientific principle to tell them how. So just to make the point dramatic, let's suppose--we're going back to the Edgeworth diagram. Let's suppose this is the status quo, and A has nothing and B has all the wine and all the bread. We know they're on the contract curve because B has nothing that A wants, right? So the Pareto efficient outcome is for the bag lady to starve. John Rawls says utilitarianism doesn't take seriously the differences among persons. But neoclassical utilitarianism takes the differences between individuals hyper-seriously, so Rawls' point doesn't actually apply. When you allow interpersonal judgments of utility and interpersonal comparisons you get the radically redistributive doctrine that Bentham then tries to fend off with his distinction between absolute and practical equality that we talked about last time.bag lady starves to death. The trouble with utilitarianism, says John Rawls in His Theory of Justice, is that is doesn't takes seriously the Differences among Persons. We don't care who has the utility. The bag lady should starve in this example rather than have something redistributed to her by the state, forcibly taken from Trump. So classical utilitarianism ignores the differences among individuals; neoclassical utilitarianism fetishizes the differences between people to an incredible extreme. But notice from the point of view of the history of ideologies what has happened in this transition from classical to neoclassicals utilitarianism. We've gone from a world in which the doctrine of classical. utilitarianism was a very radical idea that would legitimate huge redistribution. which the radical fangs of classical utilitarianism have been ripped out and it is now a doctrine that is very friendly to whatever status quo happens to be generated in a market system. So it ceases to be this radically redistributive doctrine, and in the process imports into utilitarianism a very robust, some would say, hyper-robust doctrine of individual rights. We'll see how that played out in political theory when we come to look at John Stuart Mills' harm principle next Monday.