The Peloponnesian War is over. No sooner is it over than another kind of trouble starts. The irony of that is really quite extraordinary. Power has a certain life of its own. The capacity to be able to do something without somebody preventing you makes you think about what you might do in ways that you never thought about before. When you didn't have the power to do it, this is what happens to the Spartans. They find themselves presented with choices that they could take. something they couldn't forget, they were desperately outnumbered at all times by people who hated them and whom they lived off. So, the notion of leaving with an army from the Peloponnesus at any time was always a questionable proposition, even though sometimes it was necessary. For the first time there were lots of Spartans, who had lots of money and of course, as you know, not only was that not a characteristic feature of Spartan society normally, it was forbidden. The laws in Sparta did not permit coins. Some Spartans wanted to contest control of the Aegean and of the coast of Asia Minor. This would require money but would also make money available, he says. In a certain sense, Spartans who took this point of view had it in mind to take the place of Athens as the great imperial power. That was a possibility. But in any case, many a Spartan would have been deterred by that prospect, and again by the prospect of having to have a fleet, because there was no. way to pursue this third policy without having a fleet that began to approach the power of the Athenian fleet when it had been strong. It meant using not the traditional Spartan military advantage--hoplite soldiers fighting infantry battles, but also rowers and expert naval people. I don't have the time to go into a detailed account of how naval warfare was carried on in the Greek world, but it's easy to forget that in addition to the rowers of whom there were 170 in each trireme, they made the thing move. They were that and they were more than that. By the way, it's a very nice word, because all the words that have to do with governor, government, govern all derive ultimately from the kubernetes. So, this would have meant that all kinds of people who were not Spartiates would be critical for the success of such a mission. So many a Spartan felt that was too much of a derangement of Spartan life and didn't like it for that reason. But you could still be in favor of a middle policy which would mean extending Spartan power or maintaining Spartan power on the Greek mainland. of the first rank, at least somebody who could sit equally at the table with the Spartans rather than subordinate to them. The fear that some Spartans surely had was that if the Spartans simply stayed in the Peloponnesus, Thebes would become the master of Attica. When you have a power which is superior to that of the other states, but you don't conquer them, the question is do you want to relate to them as the Greeks would have said as a hegemon? part of the war they won two important battles of which the final battle was critical, the Battle of Aegospotami. If you really look at the whole story it's not at all clear that the Spartans ever developed the kind of system that would produce a navy. So, that was a practical limitation. Well anyway, however that might be, the man of the hour in 404 was Lysander, the great victor of the Peloponnesian War. His policy was the extreme policy, the "let's conquer it all" policy. he did, as a few others like him in the last years of the war, rose to be a general and the very best general of all. But he was a man of extraordinary ambition, and the ancient writers tell us that he had developed the notion of actually bringing about a revolution in Sparta. If he was going to do anything like that, even if he was only going to try to retain the position he had achieved of tremendous influence and power, he would need to have a command and money. His policy for Sparta was very much a policy that fit the needs of Lysander. ten men chosen from the local people who were friendly to him, who were reliant on him, his people, his puppets, if you will. To make sure that they were safe he placed a Spartan garrison, or at least a Peloponnesian garrison in that city led by a Spartan commander called a harmost. All of these people, the harmosts, the decarchs were all his creatures, not anybody who had any independent power or influence, simply his people who did the job for him. Empire was different from the Athenian Empire in a variety of ways. The Spartans had simply betrayed the Asiatic Greeks whom they had engaged in the rebellion against the Athenians. In many cases, frequently, these governments established by Lysander were tyrannical and rapacious. The oligarchs whom he had restored to power in Samos loved him so much, and were so grateful for what he had done, that they held religious ceremonies on the island and literally worshipped Lysander. This is the first time in Greek history that anybody had received such treatment. this elevated his influence and power, everybody wondered at him and so on. On the other hand, it presented a problem, because you can imagine how that went down among the aristocrats of Sparta. So, there was jealousy and resentment and fear at Sparta that something bad was going to happen to the Spartan way of life. Pausanias and his tradionalists bided their time for the opportunity to put a spike into this development. There were other things that were flowing from what I've already described that were threatening the traditional character of Spartan life. The Law of Epitadeus was a new law about inheritance in Sparta. It allowed people to buy someone right while they were still alive. People who had been raised as Spartans and expected to inherit their father's property would sometimes find that they had been cut out and now they were Spartiates by birth, but they lacked the necessary wealth, necessary land to provide for them. If you wrote somebody into your will, you were in effect giving him money after you died. So, meanwhile he could serve you and be your political supporter. for their meals at the common mess and so they could no longer be Spartiates in the full sense. A term was discovered for them, they were called hypomeiones, which means inferiors and some of the guys who rose to power late in the Peloponnesian War as generals. So, there is Sparta coping with these various problems and trying to decide how to handle their future and I'd like to shift the scene now to Athens. Athens, which had been the greatest empire that the Greeks had ever seen, had been reduced now to total defeat. fear that the same fate they had visited upon some states that had defied them. In both places, the Athenians killed all the adult males on the island when they had finally put an end to the siege and sold the women and children into slavery. The Athenians had every reason to fear that that might be what happened to them. Instead, with Lysander very much in charge, they placed in power a small group of oligarchic Athenians just as he had the same kind of people in the rest of the empire. the great rhetorician and sophist Gorgias and he was also in the circle of Socrates, along with Plato and Xenophon and various other bright young men of the upper classes in Athens. Also, he was a poet, an orator himself, a philosopher and so on and some of his fragments remain for us to look at. But one thing that he was by 404 was a bitter enemy of the democracy. He had been exiled or had voluntarily taken exile, in order to get away from the democracy, and was determined now that there should be no democracy in Greece. kind of idiotic idea that a democracy would come up with so that democracy itself was seen to be not just--how can I put--Let me say it was seen as inherently wicked. It violated what seemed to be the truth about human beings and which was very much a part of all Greek tradition from the first time we hear about it in Homer until--well forever. The Greeks thought a division into two kinds was the right kind, the most important kind, a division between the high and the low, between the good and the bad. guys and therefore you shouldn't have anything to do with ruling anybody. So, that was the basic widespread view of what was natural in the Greek world. Now, you add to that that they've just lost this terrible war and you could point to what seemed to you to be both a wickedness and foolishness. How in the world could anybody think democracy was a good thing after that? Lest you think there's something special about that, that's such a characteristic of the human race. had to do with the rightness or the wrongness of wisdom of the foolishness of the kinds of arrangements that you had. Critias, in any case, was determined that Athens in the future would not be a democracy. In fact, it looks like he was very much taken with the virtues of Sparta, because Sparta had won the war. So, it's easy to say the characteristics that the Spartan state had must be good ones, because they can do the most critical thing that a state can do, win in competition with the other. Lysander had in mind to establish in Athens the closest facsimile he could of the Spartan Constitution. He was trying to do something like that, but it was going to be narrow, a smallish number of people were going to control the city. Lysander agreed to the idea of making the Thirty compose of twenty men who were Critias' men, very extreme oligarchs, but allowing Theramenes, an Athenian general, who was very clearly not an old fashioned democrat. But Athens, of course, was also inhabited at that time by all of the exiles who had been sent into exile during the democracy. The Thirty ruled between September of 404 and May of 403, just a matter of months as it turned out. They established a council of 500--well, that's the same number as the Athenian council, but it was quite different. It was made up of extreme oligarchs; they were given judicial powers. The Thirty began with an act that was not unpopular by putting to death all the sycophants that they could find and identify, but they also put to death well known leaders of the democracy. The Thirty limited citizenship, active participation in the government of any kind to only 3,000 Athenians out of what would have been at least 21,000 and probably more. Only these had citizen rights. The rest of the Athenians did not. And so that's why Krentz suggests that this is not an accident; that it's a conscious effort to model the future Athenian state upon the great successful, admirable, Spartan state. That's why Theramenes didn't like that. troubling for the future for Theramenes. He pointed out the contradiction, he says, how clever is this? Here you are, a minority in the state, and instead of trying to bring on more people to make yourselves stronger, you're driving out people and guaranteeing that you will have more people against you than you have for you. Well, pretty soon people objected to what the Thirty was doing, made complaints, and the Thirty began to go after them. Sometimes when things got really bad, when the Thirty needed money they actually put people to death just because they were rich, so that they could take their money away and this of course increased the amount of resistance on unhappiness. So that finally a small, I want to emphasize small, very small group of Athenians fled the city and went into exile to neighboring cities. The cities that were most receptive to these anti-Thirty, anti-oligarchical,Anti-Spartan people were Corinth, Megara, and Thebes. The answer is, they are both angry at the Spartans and I think fearful that the Sparta that is arising now will be a menace to their autonomy. of Athenians and the one town that was most important from this purpose was Thebes. The leader, the most important of the leaders of this group of exiles, they wished to restore the old democracy. He and another important politician by the name of Anytus actually began a counter revolution and the. with only 70 men they went from Thebes to a natural fortress in the mountains between Boeotia. The sources differ but the accounts that seem to be most plausible are most plausible. and Attica, a placed called Phyle, and built a fort there to which they hoped other discontented Athenians would flee and join them in the resistance. I'm using the word resistance, and it brings to mind of course an analogy that has always struck me as helpful in comprehending the situation confronting the Athenians at this time. To my mind, it is helpful to think about France in June of 1940 after the Germans had defeated France and occupied part of it and left the other part unoccupied, but absolutely beholden to the Nazi Regime. Now, a Frenchmen had three choices, just as the Athenian did. One possibility would be to join up with the new regime. Others would do what Thrasybulus did, and in France it was the De Gaulle who did this. people's minds. It was a terrifying prospect to tackle this regime, which looked like it was unbeatable. The Spartans ruled the world. What could anybody expect to change that situation? Just as the Nazis looked like they were in business for the thousand years that Hitler had claimed he was going to have. So, it didn't look like you were a very courageous man if you joined De Gaulle. They thought he was a goddamn fool, there was no chance, this was idiocy. They tried to win. as much as they could in collaborating with the Germans just to make their--the fate of the Frenchman less hard and to help France in the future in that way. That's the way it was with most Athenians; most Frenchman and most Athenian didn't do either of those things. They kept their heads down and tried to live their lives as best they could. I think what you need to understand is happening and this all puts what Thrasybulus and Anytus, and their friends did in a very special kind of a light. went to fight. Others, like Lysias the orator, used his money to hire mercenary soldiers to fight for the Thrasybulus democrats as well. Well, the first test came in the month of January. There were these seventy guys or so up in the fortress on Phyle. By now the Thirty were worried enough about this nascent army to send an army of their own, much bigger, to try to get them. And really the British--the English fleet didn't do anywhere near as much damage to the Spanish fleet as did the winds. of the Protestant Wind, which had come along to save the new English faith against the forces of the Pope. Well, if they can invent a Protestant Wind I think it's okay for me to speak about the democratic snow that fell on Phyle that went. That's just what happened. A big snow storm came up, and so when the Forces of the Thirty came after Thrasybulus, they just couldn't get there; they were fought off and they had to retreat. As they retreated the seventy came down after them and chased them, and killed them as they fled, and did a certain amount of damage. forces in the state had come, and we might mention also that the ancient sources estimate that something like 1,500 Athenians may have been killed by the Thirty tyrants. Well, that's a very large percentage of the population when you think about how many Athenians there were. And finally, that caused so many of their relatives and friends to turn against the Thirty and to join forces. When the Thirty brought an army out to try to defeat him there he defeated them. They were forced to flee to Eleusis on the northwestern frontier of Attica, and the democrats were in position to take control of the city again. A commission sent from Sparta to sit with Pausanias sat down with these Athenians and worked out a reconciliation for the future. There would be an amnesty for anybody, no matter what, except for the Thirty themselves. Small groups of people who were thought to be especially responsible for the nasty things that had happened in Athens were not summarily put to death. They could submit their accounts at ansettlement. The Thirty were the police force, so to speak, the head of the security forces in Athens and so on. Thrasybulus and his friends in control in Athens. They reinstated the Democratic Constitution pretty much as it had been before all of this had happened. They kept closely to the amnesty; they did not in fact, prosecute people that they should not have done. Aristotle in his Constitution of the Athenians goes out of his way to praise this successor Athenian Regime. The idea of sharing citizenship with anybody who was not, so to speak, a member of the family, was beyond what they would contemplate. as they could, to achieve stability. It's a very rare thing. What the Athenians did was very abnormal. It was evidence, I think in part, of a great deal of wisdom on the part of the key leaders at the time. I think there was a general kind of good feeling that made that sort of mass execution something that seemed foreign and too undesirable. So, if we look at Athens in 401, the democracy has been completely restored and I'd like to draw my comments about this to a close by focusing on Thrasybulus, a man, who I think probably none of you had ever heard his name when you came into this class. A Roman historian of the first century B.C. wrote the following about Thrasybulus: "If excellence were to be weighed by itself, apart from luck, I believe I would rank this man first of all" A few years before 180 A.D., Pausanias the great travel writer of antiquity, wrote his guide to the famous and historic places of ancient Greece. "His is the first grave and after it comes that of Pericles," he says, "in every way the greatest of all famous Athenians"