JUDY HOYT: We're going to begin this lecture on handout number 14. We'll be moving now to chapter 7. This will be our first lecture on chapter 7 on the topic of dopant diffusion and profile measurement. Today I'm going to give an overall introduction to diffusion in silicon. And here I'd like toGive an introduction to the basic concepts of why we care about the details of diffusion in Silicon. And what's being shown here is obviously a silicon MOSFET. of the doped regions. The placement of those regions determines many of the so-called short channel characteristics of MOSFETs. The doping of other materials, not just the silicon itself, but of the polysilicon gate affects things like gate depletion and limits how well the gate voltage controls the channel potential. So we really need to understand the placement of these atoms. Let's go on to slide 3. We know that the resistance in ohms can be calculated by the product of rho, the resistivity of the material, and the length of the resistor. In semiconductors or in silicon, we typically don't have a cube or a chunk of material. We're usually measuring the resistance of a thin sheet in the near surface region. So the resistance in rho L over a.bar divided by the cross-sectional area through which the current flows is known as the resistivity of the cube. This resistivity is given by, essentially, the electric field divided by. the current density in the material and is called the resistive. the width of the square are equal-- in this case, equal to W. The sheet resistance is just given by rho over the resistivity over xj. If the doping concentration throughout the sheet is non-uniformly doped in depth, then we can still calculate the sheet resistance. But at this point, we need to integrate. So it's 1 over the integral of the carrier concentration N minus the background doping concentration NB-- so that's just the net doping concentration-- times the mobility. function of the doping concentration. We integrate that over from 0 to xj. You can do that numerically, essentially, for an arbitrary doping profile. Experimentally, we measure the sheet resistance using a four-point probe setup. We'd like the resistance of the regions that are extrinsic to the device, such as the contact resistance, the source and drain resistance, to be no more than about 10% of the channel resistance. That is, we'd like to have the intrinsic resistance of a channel dominate the overall resistance. In general, as we scale devices, the channel length becomes shorter and the channel resistance goes down. We similarly need to scale down these extrinsic resistances of the source drain and the extension regions. To reduce those resistances, we would like to increase, in general, the junction depth xj. However, there's a problem that if we make the junctions deeper, it will make it easier for voltages at the drain to affect the current flow in the channel. So this two-dimensional spreading of the electric. has control over. field from the drain can attract carriers from the source, even when the device is supposedly in the off state. So we end up with something called drain-induced barrier lowering if the junctions are too deep. This results in, for device designers, kind of a fundamental design tradeoff for MOSFETs that is a design trade off between the series resistance versus the DIBL or the ability of the gate to control the current and turn the device on and off. And you can see the effect of these conflicting requirements to a certain extent by examining this chart. 1997 Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors. As we go smaller and smaller channel lengths out further in time, that's scaling down to shallower and shallower junction depths at the channel. And at the same time as we're scaling these junctions to maintain the good electrostatic control, the drain extension concentration-- so that's the doping concentration in the extension regions-- is going up dramatically. And that higher doping requirement is arising from the fact that we're making the sheet shallower. There's a fundamental physical limit on how much dopant we can put in the silicon and how much it will be electrically active. We need to find new ways to activate dopants to higher levels if we're going to be able to manage this design tradeoff. Being able to scale the device really amounts to, in the front-end processing to a large extent, to being able to control very precisely the shape of the doping profiles where the dopants end up. And what I'm going to spend some time in the next few slides is giving you examples from the present literature on device scaling. detailed device physics, but it's just to give you a flavor for why studying dopant diffusion is such an important topic. So let's go on to slide number 8 and talk about a topic called the short-channel effect. And this basically takes place when the distance between the source and drain-- that is the channel length L-- becomes comparable to the MOS depletion width in the vertical direction. And then that the source-drain potentials themselves from the sources and drain regions end up having a strong effect on the control of the current in the device. down these three terms, roughly, to calculate the threshold voltage. The third term, which is represented on the second equation by the bulk charge QB prime over WLC ox. That term ends up being smaller than it would be in the long-channel case. And this QB prime is smaller, and that ends up affecting-- that third term being smaller affects the Vt. Threshold voltage actually goes down. And it's essentially because charge sharing-- that some of the charge under the gate is balanced by the charge from the source-drain regions. This, I've got a reference on the bottom. There are a number of books, but this is one by Taur and Ning where you can look at this so-called Vt roll-off effect. And you can see, indeed, the threshold voltage is dropping or rolling off going towards 0 as we decrease the channel length-- same trend for the pMOSFET. And that's an effect that needs to be controlled as we scale the devices. And the way we partly control that is by controlling the dopant profiles underneath the gate. gate or the n-type regions under the gate in the pMOS in the channel region. So this is just a schematic cartoon picture of cross-section of a MOSFET. And this channel doping profile engineering is referring to these dark red so-called halo regions that are marked here that go around the perimeter of the source-drain extensions and this lighter red retrograde well regions. These two-dimensional dopant profiles are engineered or designed to minimize these short-channel effects. This is an extreme case of scaling, where we're trying to scale the MOSFET gate length down to 25 nanometers dimensions. In order to do this, there's a paper by Taur, Wann and Frank in 1998-- the so-called the super-halo profile. And you can see this is designed to create a fairly complicated two-dimensional boron doping profile. So, again, this is an example of how you need to control the doping profiles in order to optimize the device design. put reasonably high boron doping against the source-drain regions to help stand off the field. And so that's refers to this halo design-- very sophisticated. And there's also the doping of the source and drain regions themselves designed to be quite abrupt in both the vertical and the lateral dimensions. So what exactly are the effect of these doping profiles on electrical performance? Let's go on to slide number 13, which shows the short-channel threshold voltage roll-off and basically how the Vt varies with channel length. is not that sensitive to the vertical junction depth, as you can see by comparing the diamonds to the stars. So this lower variation of the Vt with L effective or with channel length allows a larger design window, which we need because there's always going to be some process variations in the channel length across the wafer. And this enables the technologists to push the channellength down to smaller dimensions. So it's not so much a fundamental improvement in device performance, but it really enables you to manufacture circuits with these shorter channel devices. refer to different lateral source-drain gradients. For lateral gradients larger than about 4 nanometers per decade, the Vt roll-off is just too large. The threshold voltage is approaching 0. You wouldn't be able to make a 25 nanometer MOSFET-- so, again, illustrates the importance of controlling the lateral doping profile and of controlling diffusion processes themselves. So given that brief introduction to the electrical effects, let me go on now on slide number 15 and talk about dopant diffusion fundamentals. really become large. In silicon IC processing, there are two different steps that we refer to in diffusion historically. The first step was so-called predeposition. And what this refers to is that you had an initial step in which the dopants were introduced into the silicon wafer with a required integrated dose into the substrate. The second process in creating a region of the wafer. with a certain doping is what is typically referred to as the drive-in. This is a subsequent anneal after the pre-dep that then diffuses and redistributes the dopant, giving the required junction depth. right resistance and giving you the right profile or surface concentration, hopefully. So, again, schematically we have two processes going on here. The first one would be the ion implant step or the pre-dep, which would result in the bright orange or the red region. And that has introduced a controlled integrated dose of atoms per square centimeter into the silicon. And then without introducing any additional atoms but keeping the dose constant, we then diffuse in-- or drive in-- that profile. It gives you a very precise control of the number of atoms that are introduced per square centimeter into the substrate. It also gives you very accurate depth control. The problems with it, of course, is as the implant process occurs at high energies, it actually damages the crystal to a certain extent. But unfortunately, the damage itself can enhance the diffusion rate. The dislocations or extended defects associated with the damage can lead to junction leakage, which is not desirable. We'll talk about how that affects the profiles in chapter 8. control the shape of the profile to certain types of shapes. And low-dose predepositions are very difficult, and that's a major limiter. So, as I said, except in very special cases, people typically use ion implantation for the predeposition step. Let's go on to slide number 18. In that case the dopants are typically introduced at their solid solubility limit. So you have some atmosphere of gas, say, that you introduce the wafers at high temperature into this gas atmosphere. And at the surface, you would end up with the solidsolubility of that dopant. get of these dopants if you did a predeposition at that temperature. At 1,000 degrees, you can get something like 3 to 4 times 10 to the 20 electrons per cubic centimeter by introducing arsenic into the lattice. If you introduce more arsenic than that, it may still be below the solid solubility, but you won't get any more electrons. It's not electrically active. It may not precipitate until you get up into the 10 to 21 range. out for a couple of reasons, mainly because it points to the fact that as we increase doping, we don't always get an increase in the electron concentration, and therefore a decrease in resistance. OK, so let's go on to slide number 21. And we're going to consider macroscopic models for diffusion. Later on, we'll talk about the more atomistic diffusion mechanisms and effects. And hopefully, you've read part of chapter 7, and you know that Fick's first law, which describes how the flux or the flow of dopant depends upon the doping gradient. steep you get a large flux, and therefore a large movement in the profile. As you get near the top of the profile, the concentration gradient is getting small, and then the flux is a little bit lower. The proportionality constant is called the diffusivity D. It has units of length squared per time or centimeter squared per second. And as it turns out, we'll see that D is related to the atomic hop rate or the jump frequency over some kind of energy barrier. Fick's second law describes how the change in concentration in a small volume element is determined by thechange in the fluxes into and out of that volume. The negative sign in this Fick's first law indicates that the flow is down the concentration gradient. In all the other cases and most of the cases we'll end up using in this course, we'll have to do numerical solutions. But for now, let's look at a couple of special cases where we can solve this equation by hand. In a steady state solution to the diffusion equation is a linear equation. So we can just simply integrate this equation twice, and we end up with a linear profile over distance. In fact, when we did the solution of the diffusion of the oxidant through the oxide during thermal oxidation, this is the equation that we actually use. This is implicitly the solution that we were assuming. And I think you'll recognize-- from the last few lectures, you'llrecognize on the lower pictures this steadyState solution is either in the thin oxide regime, we get a straight line. profile of the oxygen through the oxide during thermal oxidation. And again, in that case it's a concentration profile that's not changing with time. So, basically, the boundary conditions are that we have essentially a delta function at time t equals 0 and that the dose-- the integral of this delta function-- is a constant. And we find that the solution that satisfies Fick's second law is written down by this equation. The concentration is a function of x and time can be time. given by that constant dose Q divided by 2 times the square root of pi Dt times the exponential of minus x squared over 4 Dt. So that's what's known as a Gaussian profile. And the important consequence of this are that one, of course, the dose Q remains constant. That means then that the peak concentration-- so the concentration at the origin-- is going to decrease according to the squareroot of Dt over time. So the peak Concentration goes down. And in fact, what we do is we often call this distance-- we give it a special name. the profile. So let's go on to slide number 27 which shows pictorially the time evolution of a Gaussian profile. The left hand plot is on linear y-axis and the right handPlot is on a logarithmic scale. So, first, let's look at the left. And we there are three curves shown here. The red is for time t equals some time t 0. The blue curve is 4 times t0. So it's dropped by a factor of 2. And same thing by looking at the green curve. In semiconductor processing, linear scales for dopants are not all that useful. We often care about how the dopant falls off over many, many orders of magnitude of concentration. If we can assume that there's no dopant loss through evaporation or segregation at the surface, we have a relatively simple trick for solving this. See what the broadening actually looks like on slide number 28 and talk about the second case, which is a fixed dose Q, just like we talk about, constant in time. that the annealing takes place over a long time so that the initial profile is reasonably can be reasonably approximated by a delta function compared to the final profile. If those two assumptions are hold, then we can essentially solve it by assuming that we have virtual diffusion. We have a symmetric diffusion with an imaginary delta function of equal dose Q on the left-hand side. So, in fact, if we go on to slide number 27, that same the graph is shown at the top. surface where we have no loss from the surface. Again, it's a Gaussian profile. And the third case, essentially, that we can solve analytically is called the case of an infinite source. And what this is essentially an infinite. source of dopant which is made up of small slices, essentially each diffusing as a. Gaussian. So how are we going to solve for this? Well, actually, we do it by using the solution we had obtained previously. linear superposition of solutions for each of these thin slices. So we break up this infinite source on the left-hand half plane into a series of very, very small thin slices, each of which has a certain dose. And in fact, after some time t, we know how to write down for that little slice what the profile looks like. In fact, it's a Gaussian. So, now, if each slice then of all these slices can be added up, their Gaussians associated with their diffusion, we can then find the diffused profile. along the x-axis. That exponential squared over 4 Dt. So we're summing up all these Gaussians at the bottom of slide 30. The solution which satisfies Fick's second law is written down at the top of slide 31. The concentration is actually equal to concentration C prime over 2 times the quantity in square brackets 1 minus the error function of the argument x over2 times the square root of Dt, where the second equation and third gives you the definition of what we mean by theerror function. function is what the shape of this profile can be calculated according to. So let's look at slide number 32, which, again, the error function solutions are made up of a sum of Gaussian delta function solutions. And what you see is that here in this plot, the initial profile is shown in the dashed line in green. The subsequent profiles are time t equals t0 in black, 4t0, in blue, and 9t0 in red. And that the dose beyond x equals 0 continues to increase with annealing time in this infinite source sort of solution. above the solid solubility of the dopant. Then, in that case, at the surface of the silicon wafer the concentration of the dopamine is fixed. And the dose is given by this integral, which can be done integrating from 0 to infinity. So, again, now we see that this dose or the number of the integral of these curves on the right-hand side is increasing with time according to the square root of Dt. So we're getting a higher and higher dose into the sample. side the two different types of classical processes that we talked about in terms of their diffusion profile shapes. On the left is the predeposition case where we have, say, a constant surface concentration, assuming the pre-dep was being done by a gas phase in diffusion. And that at the different times, you can see the twice square root of Dt is 0.1, 0.5, and 1 micron. And so you see what's happening over time at the same time. shorter time. We have a certain peak concentration. That peak concentration is then falling or dropping for the second profile. And the profile is broadening, and then it falls again, and the profile broadens further. So that's for Q equals a constant, integral is constant, and left-hand side is for the surface concentration is a constant. That's just to get your eyes calibrated for complementary error function versus a Gaussian type of solution. Let's go on to slide number 35 and talk a little bit about dopant diffusion coefficients themselves. of the pot that are dopants in silicon. So, for example, if you look at boron, it has an activation energy here of 3.5 electron volts. And the prefactor is about 1.5. Thing to note is that n sub i-- the intrinsic carrier concentration-- is very large at process temperatures. When we get above that-- when the doping concentration is larger than n subi-- we'll talk about next time there's some interesting Fermi level effects that come into play. Boron, the only really available p-type dopant, is relatively fast. It can be up to a factor of 10 or 20 or 30 faster diffusion coefficient than the slower diffusers such as arsenic or antimony. So this gives you a rough idea of, when we talk about doping diffusion, what we're going to have to worry about a little bit more would be the fast diffusers-- say, boron. The other thing I want to point out with respect to this plot on slide number 36 is that earlier versions of the text had an error in this corresponding figure. The placement of dope regions is critical because it determines many of the characteristics of short-channel MOSFETs. The time evolution of a doping profile, if the case is simple, is governed by a fixed loss-- the so-called diffusion equation. That's why we spent so much time calculating in great detail dopant diffusion, as we'll do over the next three or four lectures.right values. One way to check that, of course, is to back to slide 35 and actually compute directly with a calculator the diffusion coefficients. of cases where there are analytic solutions. We talked about the diffusion of a Gaussian profile with a fixed dose. We apply this diffusion to a constant surface concentration. And finally -- we talk about the diffusion of a complementary error function, which we apply for a constant level of surface concentration. The diffusion of this error function can be applied to a fixed level of surface concentration, or a constant level of substance on the surface, for example.