The six Vital Signs are pain oxygen saturation temperature heart rate respirations and blood pressure. Before you start you want to perform hand hygiene and provide privacy to the patient and tell them what you're going to be doing. If they do have pain ask them the quality what does it feel like and where it is at so hi Ben my name is Sarah and I am your nurse and I'm going to get your Vital Signs and I'll be getting your hand hygiene as well as your hand movements. first thing I want to ask you what your pain rating is are you having any pain rate on a scale of0 to 10 yes pain in my shoulder and it's a three okay and what is it feel like it's just a sharp pain when I raise my arm okay now I'm going to get your temperature there's several ways you can take a temperature every facility has a different system set up so use what they have but you can taking it orally you can takes it axillary you cantake it tanic in the ear or you can taken it temporally or rect um rect is the preferred route usually on your pediatric patients but in adult patients normally we do it orally. we're going to do turn your thumb Omer on make sure you're using the proper sleeves if you have any sleeves for it clean it everything like that follow your hospital protocols and have the patient lift up their tongue and put the probe underneath the tongue and have them close the mouth with the tongue over the probe and hold it there until it beeps a normal temperature is about 97° fit to 99° F okay and take the thermometer out and read it and his temperature is 98.2 and then clean it properly per Hospital protocol. In a second I'm going to show you how to actually count the heart rate using the radial artery. While I'm counting the heart rates I count that for 30 seconds if it's regular and then the next 30 seconds I count the respirations which I look at the rise and the fall of the chest and that equals one breath. If you tell a patient you're going to count their respirations they change the rate of breathing so it's good to conglomerate those two together so you can get a more accurate reading. groove right there or you can use the brachial artery which is in the bend of the arm where the anticubital fosset area is. You can also use the cored but here we're going to use the radial. Count for 30 seconds if it's regular if it is irregular count for 1 minute. A normal pulse rate in an adult is 60 to 100 beats per minute okay the heart rate I got 60 and his respiration were 16 now we are going to get his blood pressure. may have to learn how to do a manual one now my previous video and a card should be popping up I go over the two-step method if that's how you're being instructed. In this video we're going to go over  the one step blood pressure of how to obtain it manually so what we'regoing to do we are going to palpate the brachial artery this is in the bend of the arm and make sure you ask the patient which arm you can take their blood pressure in because you don't want to take it in arms with if they've had blood clots. to 200 mm of mercury or until you don't hear that braak your artery anymore okay we're blowing it up to about 200mm of mercury. We're listening for that first sound and that first s sound will be our top number of our blood pressure which is our systolic. That is how you check bottle signs now whenever you're done remember to let the patient know what their bottle signs were and um do hand hygiene and clean your equipment before you go to the next patient so be sure to check out all my other videos on nursing skills.