Dynamics plays a very important part in automotive design. There's a trade-off between how comfortable the ride is and how tightly the car handles. The subject that we're studying applications homeworks and exams I know that I mean beyond that followingYeah trajectories so missiles stuff like that anything to kill people you need Dynamics what else build a what building a car okay that's good good and what for that's actually that's right but what for well actually in automotiveDesign. MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu. in Dynamics there two sides to it one is here's the system what is its trajectory going to be in other words how will its various degrees of freedom behave over time if you you know stretch it and let it go and it goes twang you know boing right and you want to figure out how it goes in time that that's analysis. H actually suspensions of cars tend to be passive although some suspensions are active but actually in a car cruise control right cruise control is called C control. going to uh go in a certain way right but then cruise control puts in this you know this artificial foot essentially on the throttle and it tries to maintain the speed at a constant level right so we're doing Dynamics end of the course we're going to solve the dynamical equations dou4 is controls where you actually try and put in extra things like cruise control so to make the uh system behave in a way you want it to behave so if you have a rocket open loop right it's called open loop and open loop system is a system that doesn't close the loop. The thrust is only for the first few minutes of its um journey and then it's ballistic ballistic means trajectory it's all Dynamics after that you control it initially to make sure it's pointing in the right direction compensates for wind Etc. A lot of missiles there's a little bit of fuel left so in the end you can do some adjustment right but a bistic missile most of its journey is ballistic okay okay. In the last class we did um I should also warn you I'm a little woozy today uh I had some serious drugs this morning prescription drugs and the result is that I might I think Sam. was saying if I might start babbling but you won't notice because I Babble anyway right so all right Sam didn't say that I said that I bet but anyway s was very respectful okay so uh in the last class we did uh uh we did a problem essentially the whole Pro class was we looked at you know the skier situation and there's a handout AJ's published right on the web where we do the energy formulation and we solve the problem. So today we're going to kind of flow the accelerator a little bit we've been slow and steady we've kind of pounded the concepts in.  angular momentum concept is our stepping stone into Dynamics of rigid bodies because then you can start looking at two and three particles more easily so we'll start with that. Any questions about the last class comments ridicule jokes nothing okay all right so so today we're going to do angular momentums we're still in points Point masses but this is the stepping stone the link to rigid bodies then we'll do a problem we're very problem oriented in this class and then we're Going to do yet another problem but we'reGoing to do multi- particle okay now just a couple of announcements uh one is that pet is that dog. 4 was due uh is due on Wednesday the 10th and the reason is there's no class next Monday and um we posted the solution to that problem from class uh just one last thing I won't have officers today only because you don't want to hear me Babel I'm really sick um but I'm also going to change my officers um several people suggest so the timing isn't right um so we'll talk about the end of class but I I might go to like a Monday off M um like later on a Monday or maybe Wednesday later or something like that. just hang out like at 3:00 p.m. on a Saturday is that something that you you folks would find useful okay we'll do that okay um so here's what we going to look at what no okay we're going to see our first angular momentums and torqus today. Let's say that you have a particle Point Mass heading that way some direction and let's define its velocity we'll call it a v p okay so I have um two questions both of which you probably know the answers to the first is what is the angular momentum of that particle just from your memory go ahead say it aha. point right so let us say I could have done it around o but here's the deal when you do angular momenta it's very useful to pick some point that's convenient you'll see this a lot right if I'm trying to calculate the angular momentum of that door I prefer to do it about the axis for various reasons right forces vanish all sorts of cool stuff happens so I need to tell you which point I just want to to pick a random point and do it that that way so let's say it's Q. going to write it with a little H okay don't don't ask me why angular momentum is written as H I guess it's angular momentum something right it's a vector I'm going to write little H because I'm referring to the angle momentum of a particle. It's a little U notational thing for me that when we refer to multiple particles we use capital a single particle write little so little F. okay this are just definitions no profound concept here um of particle P about Point Q very important what else do I need to say? it will be useful just take it from me for the time being I need the a here because there's an a here. If I use a different velocity to you know it's going to be a different angle of momentum. I'm going to write torque on a particle with a tow because Little T looks like time so I write as a tow torque on the system write to the capital T going forward okay now I missed something there what else do I need to say on point B or particle P what else with respect to Q now do Ineed a frame no and why is that anybody say againe that's right we assume we do it from inertial frame. The MIT way is to do it exactly right using all the mechanisms we've used and guess what you're going to find a stray correction term which you can only ignore in some cases. torque is not always equal to rate of change of angular momentum there's a correction term there are conditions under which it's a rate of angular rate ofChange of angular Momentum but not always you understand because you know it's an analogy so it all kind of makes sense. So let's uh write it out so um we have defined a uh so let's take the derivative of. derivative do I need to say which frame I'm taking the derivative in yes and this thing is going to be I need I'll put it out big let say scaler does that make sense I got to take the deriva to the right side there two pieces to it I need the uh chain Rule and yeah nothing special right everything is completely reasonable according to the laws of math and physics that we've learned so far now. What is this folks what is this this this thing acceleration right so this isGoing to come out to be M or in fact I can re you know I can just kind of write the terms simply like this. Rqp is an ugly term right what do you do with this guy here's what we're going to do. I'm leading it on a path which you would think I mean I'm not doing anything wrong why I'm doing that will be obvious in a second okay everybody Lauren everyone yeah okay so this I can write as this this thing a d by DT of r o minus r oq cross M A VP you understand I haven't done anything wrong I'm just going down. be clear this whole thing is this term and this is thisterm now let's let's write this The Next Step what is this what this m a acceleration of P or acceleration of p with respect to a hm H it's the force on particle P right cross product rqp yes now so I'm just going to put a dotted line so you know that that's what this is is this I don't think you'll disagree let me just write some draw some lines I'm trying to save space as I said. it just looks a little nicer make sense and now I'm going to write the final step what is the cross product of something so what what will this so we have to Let's expand this right associative. What is mavp is a linear momentum right so it's the momentum of particle p with respect to a right plus what is this guy look here what is it okay so so far I've done things that might be like why is he doing that but you you can't disagree with what I did now let me show you why I did that all that. of all engineering graduates who take a car class in Dynamics Berkeley Stanford Princeton might not even see this there is this term and you need to know about it okay it just so happens the term vanishes in many situations but it's key that you know see for Force f is equal to D by DT of P momentum completely coer Crystal Clear when you come to angular momentum it's say artifice yeah there's this funky term which vanishes okay so question to you when does this term vanish okay so let's give it a nice official sounding name how about we call it pesky ter that's nice. The correction term vanishes it's kind of silly but the reason this will become important is that when you look at rigid bodies it it actually you will end up doing something so this is a silly term but these are the two conditions yeah Q is fixed. If I'm taking the moment angular momentum but myself it's going to be zero right but it's also not going to being changing. It just so happens that we often take angular momenta momenta about things like this point of this door about this point. a so let's say there's a car right. Let's say I'm sitting here and I'm calculating velocity with respect to me and but I'm taking angular momentum with respect. to the car that's when the problem occurs. If I're sitting in a car and calculating the angle the velocity with. respect to a car then everything's fine you understand okay why is this important let me tell you why this is important in Dynamics inertial frame my arms robot this is one link. This is one degree of Freedom this is another link. it's not Kosher can't do it if I do I need to include that term right and you you've got a figure that a simple thing like my a robot is a very typical Dynamics application okay common mistake okay now that we've done this let's try and figure out why angular momentum is useful let's solve a problem any questions about this any questions bottom line if you're taking angle momenta about moving points be careful bottom line many conditions it'll be okay we'll elucidate we'll Express we'll we'll nail this conditions. A lot of MIT grads old friends work all over the world very important positions around the world for example the foreign minister of the new British government is an MIT grad. One of my friends Works in a congressional he she helps Congressional analyze things from a physics point of view so you know when Katrina occurred someone asked if it would be possible to change the temperature in the when when a hurricane approaches to dissipate the temperature. She did some analysis and showed that you need something like a nuclear weapon but like you know the most the largest the largest. nuclear weapon ever conceived to even you know impact it by like 2% because the energy in a in a hurricane all right I told you I'd Babble all right let's do a problem here's a problem so imagine a um a table right you notice I've drawn it in perspective you know what perspective is right it's very cool it wasn't intentional but looks good I see everything in perspective right now okay I have a hole on this table right so this is a table and and um it's frictionless hockey puck basically a point map attached by a string and the string comes through the hole. call this Theta the initial length is L one and the initial velocity is we'll call it a scalar because this is how I'm defining the problem of V1 when we actually solve it we might have to define a vector okay. As the thing's going around this person is going to pull the string down and as it kind of goes around it's going to spiral in and end up it's a new length L2 and the question is what is V2 going to be okay so I'll let you uh let resolve this for a second. that stuff let's let's examine it from a uh from a basic you know intuition point of view from what we studied so far first of all when is linear momentum conserved forget this in general linear momentum is conserved when what condition occurs no external Force right so let's study this guy this particle as it moves around does it feel an external Force. As the particle moves around kind of intuitively which direction is it accelerating in kind of cental right so it's has an acceleration in this direction what else is happening maybe there's a potentially a tangential acceleration kind of an Oiler acceleration as well potentially right kind of thing. is so where does force get applied on this the string so the string is applying a tension force on this right are there any other forces gravity is not an issue here are thereAny other forces no so the only Direction it can really accelerate in in fact is what towards this in this direction right so there is a force onthis so is momentum conserved in any direction linear momentum how about tangentially yeah yeah yeah tangentially it is conserved right it is Conserved tangential it's just not conserved towards the center but the problem with the tangential momentum is when it's here the tangentials momentum is conserving this way but then when it comes here it's the directions change so direction is always changing right right.  linear momentum conservation is a vector equation which is the vector linear momentum is conserved right. If if it's not conserved in One Direction but there's no force in the other it's still conserve in the the other direction understand so.that's basically what it is you understand so let's so is angular momentum conserved let's think about it is there any talk on this particle yep go ahead well there are no forces in the tangential Direction on this are there right isn't the velocity changes ah but the velocity.  linear momentum is conserved instantaneously but not continuously because because the direction is changing so we need some rotational momentum which is what this guy is get it. There is no torque on this particle at any point in time it's just a very long way to say listen things going in circles and the only force is radial if we take a cross product it's going to vanish which is why this is such a convenient formalism right because we're taking a cross products here right so it works in. rotation so it works in things where Works in situations where the force or something always points to the center get it I'm don't get a feeling that everyone's convinced there's a frisen of disbelief doubt anybody or it could just be that it's the morning okay tell me do you get it yes or no yes okay so torque is zero now what is the right hand side of this equation so that means that the right side is equal to zero which means a d by DT of ah p q is equal Z. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. The whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem now you know the irony is this problem you could have done before you took this class. momentum at length L2 V2 equate the two and get V2. Theta dot Theta one dot so I'm solving a slightly different problem here with the ma is but it's the same same problem in terms of math okay so if in of I giving you the initial velocity if I give you theinitial angle of velocity then you know you can just write just to make it more interesting L1 B1 cross AQ right angular momentum. A Omega B cross is theta. I do all the math the angular momentum as I get get it is a vector l^2 Theta 1 do s right so initial moment angle momentum is equal to final angular momentum. If I have the length of the cord the angular speed is going to double and the reason it's more interesting it could because when you watch a skater you know do the uh what's what's it called the twirl you know when figure skaters kind of rotate spin spin thank you yeah spin when they spin. I just want to write that okay so that's uh angular momentum conserved you've also seen by the way that angular momentum is a vector in the it's a cross product. It's a vector out of plane in 2D you see that okay is energy conserved for this particle why not? So where did the energy come come from yeah that's because you were doing work by pulling it right potential energy is constant so the can energies because you can also do this with energy by theway right but for that you need to formulate the problem differently. using angular momentum which we did or if you formulated the problem you had a lot of details you could formulate it using energy we're not doing that for example. For energy you need a little more detail of what I'm doing here right any questions can you get the angle the from the we did in fact we did right if you think about this angle the angular momentum the angular angle the energy term would go into the Energy term. The only thing is does the particle have a velocity towards the center yes or no well not necessarily. momentum formulation actually came precisely from FAL to ma. I just gave you a canned way to do it instead of doing it you know each time you have a question I meant ABP I think yeah it was meant to be AVP thanks for catching that I told you I'm on drugs okay and there's a master missing as well there you go and the mm will cancel out okay go ahead yeah it could have a velocity inwards yeah because it's a good question but I'm taking the question. and state it very clearly and I said it fast when I talking about energy so great question if the particle has an inward velocity when I look at that V2 State the L2 State then I missed some terms if however I State you which I I did not state I screwed up I made a mistake if I state to you that listen you start at length L1 is just going in a circle right and then I pull it in and thenI bring it to an length L2 and I stop pulling. is equal to ma there's nothing all this is f is equal ma right so far we've done nothing Beyond it energy comes from f isequal to ma these are all just tricks okay okay so with that now let me solve a multi-particle system so this is a stepping stone into uh into uh rigid body Dynamics in the fullest Glory so what we're going to analyze now is this system this is all think of this in the horizontal plane right like a skating rink um and this is an inertial frame. they always point in in the horizontal Direction in the on the Whiteboard right so they little Gyros they you point that way or maybe they're magnets and there's a big magnet at that end so it's only being pulled in that direction okay and the question I ask now is how does this thing behave so let's examine this first of all how do I parameter or to use the more technical term what nonstandard coordinates do I need to describe the configuration of this dumbbell let me make a proposal to you. p and particle Q is that reasonable it's perfectly reasonable but do I have a kinematic constraint and what would the kinematics constraint be H yeah it's a they connected by a rigid body so they can do whatever they want as long as the length between the two of them remains constant right by the way if instead of a rigid bar if I had a string connecting them what would  the kinematic constraint be? H is equal to R to R so it's equal to to R all right. time dependent and non-time dependent constraints right I mean imagine in the Str with changing length right over time right and by the way that does show up for example temperature something strings you know that does shows up but don't worry about all that the point is if I went with four non-standard coordinates X and Y of this I would have fourNon-Standard coordinates and one kinematic constraint right is there a better coordinate system General a non- standard coordinate system you can think about anybody clao are we assuming that CU will be on the same line okay all right. just say that we use the center of the bar as the kind of the XY location of the dumbbell and then use the angle of the Dumbbell. By picking the minimum number of non-standard coordinates I don't have to explicitly spell out the gtic constraint got it okay now however going forward just to make our math easier I'm going to assume that the same mass doesn't make any much. The problem just makes our lives easier later yep claudo if they had been different would you have placed them the point in theCenter of mass for reasons that are not clear yet. different you'll find out later I would have picked the center of mass which would not have been the geometric Center Center okay but you don't know why so I can't tell you why. A lot of terms cancel out that's the only difference I could still have by the way I could have picked a point on that line anywhere. There would still be reasonable generaliz coordinates there wouldStill be three just the math is easier that's it okay so I don't have to pick theCenter of mass but I pick thecenter of mass. understand the uh um right totally understand the reasoning behind kinematic constraints I'm going to call this point c r o That's when one vector now this angle of this thing is Theta and I'm defining um because this thing I've rotate a lot right uh I just you know it's a little confusing but let me just draw it for you like this if I had if if the way I had drawn it I hadn't rotated that dumbbell so much if I drawn it like this it'll make more sense. this R OC which is some component this way plus some components this way and an angle that we know the configuration of this dumbbell at any point in time. We're going to figure out how it behaves what it trajectory is going to be over time we won't solve it we write the differential equations to solve it right. You'll see that they come out to be very beautiful and you'll see out of the primordial soup you'll recognize the shape say hey that's a moment of inertia we'll do that. from a free body diagram point of view I'm not going to do it right now but very simply there are each bar applies a force on the part on the particle I'll do it later on because I want to the kinematics first so I'm breaking my own rule I'll doing the free body diagrams later on okay let's just do the k cinematics first all right so R of part the position of particle p is equal to r o Center plus since the length of the rod is 2 R I can just write it as did I do that right make sense. cool formula and tell me what's the acceleration of particle p a c yeah look at all the terms is is there a b acceleration of P that's zero What's the next term isthere a CH Stone no right because the points p and Q are rigid they're not moving with respect to frame B right they're attached to frame A. Is there a centripedal term yes and that's going to be what what well that's the oiler term so there'll be an Oiler term as well right. Point got it so we figured out the accelerations of these particles it's very cool in principle now we should be able to equate those ex multiply them by m and equate them to the forces do a free body diagram we should we done right nothing really special here any questions about this anybody okay so I'll just write it out now I won't do it because we have only about 2 minutes left but let me do this this side this white board sorry now let's do the free body diagrams on each particle. stick if I have something at the end of a stick can I apply like a you know does it only have to be a force inwards right. Next week we'll pick up on this and essentially what I'll do is I'll take components and write F equal to ma right I'll write f is equal toMa in two directions here. I'll get four equations one of those equations will turn out to be the same so we get three equations three unknowns we'll solve it and we'll end up with essentially what what what. we'll show is that the acceleration of the center of mass is uh related to the total force and the angular acceleration of. the whole rigid body is related to torque and we'll show it okay and then we'll generalize it. Define angular acceleration and moment of inertia and a more General sense okay so let's stop here because we are over time. We're going to take a break. We'll be back in a few minutes. We've got a lot to talk about.