HONG LIU: So, first, we talk about chiral fermions. So, say, under Lorentz transformation, lambda, the Dirac spinor fields transform as S. S is given by omega mu nu, sigma, mu, nu, OK? And the sigmamu, nu is driven by the commutator of the gamma matrices. OK? So, one natural question is whether you can actually restrict to a smaller part-- say, to a subset of psi-- whether they still have well-defined LorentZ transformation. And the answer is yes. turns out to be, no, you actually don't need to have four complex components to have well-defined Lorentz transformation. Actually, you can reduce it, OK? And so there are two ways to reduce it. One is called chiral fermion, and the other is called the Majorana fermions. So we first talk about the chiralfermion and one way to do it. So, for this purpose, we will look at the specific representation of gamma matrices. i 0, 0 sigma i-- again, the small sigmai is always the Pauli matrices. And then you can also work out the sigma Ij. Then you find the is given by minus 1/2, epsilon ijk, then sigma k. So do you see something? Yes? AUDIENCE: They're block diagonal. HONG LIU: Yes, they are. So if sigma is block diagonal, then that means this S is also block. So that means, if I write psi x into two component vector, HONG LIU: You don't need four components to be able to transform under Lorentz transformation. At least two components can already transform. So this tells you, in a sense that the LorentZ covariance only requires two component spinors. But that doesn't say it's a Lorentt transformation. Yeah. To write down to write down. The upper two components by psi L and lower two componentsby psi R-- are two component complex vector. That means, under S. Lambda, psiL and psi R do not mix. So they just transform among themselves. HONG LIU: We already said before, if you have a massless case when m equal to 0, and the Dirac equation reduces to the two components, and it's enough to do two components. And so that means that, actually, you should be able to do it with two component. So it is not a Lorentz symmetry, actually. It is not Dirac theory to have four component, it is. It's the massless particle. So the hint from before is that the Massless only require two components and that's what we're talking about. The property that you can reduce to two components should exist for all choice of gamma matrices. So, now, let me tell you how to do it for the general gamma matrix. So if we can do it in this choice of Gamma matrices, then we should be able toDo it in any choice ofGamma matrices and so on. Any questions on this? You can ask me any questions on any of these points, and I'll try to answer them. I'll be back in a few minutes. to separate the psi into psi L and psi R is more subtle. You no longer-- is just simple the upper two component or lower two component. So we have to do a little bit of work, OK? Actually, we don't need to do much work if you actually find the right trick. And so the beautiful trick to do this for any choice of gamma matrices is that you can introduce the following object-- what is called gamma 5. So gamma 5 is defined to be i gamma 0, gamma 1, gamma 2, gamma 3. So the i there is for the purpose that if you-- you can check yourself-- that the gamma5 is actually Hermitian.  gamma matrices whose indices are not the same, they anticommute. So you multiply them together, in the end, they can be either 1 or minus 1. Just turns out, for this choice of i, it's 1, OK? So yeah. And then you can also check the gamma 5 anticommutes with any gamma matrix. Gamma 5 actually have 0 trace, OK?" "Yeah, because this runs over all gamma matrics," he says. "So the one in which-- yeah, so if you take with some gamma mu, and that particular one, which is the same as gamma mu" HONG LIU: gamma 5 squared, squared to 1, is Hermitian, which means its eigenvalue is either plus or minus 1, OK? So have eigenvalues plus, minus 1. And then from the property that this is traceless, they tell you the number of the eigen Values, which is plus 1. They should be the same. Otherwise, they won't cancel. So I can introduce a projector which, for historical reasons, is called PL. It's defined to be 1/2 1 plus gamma 5. And this will project into an eigenspace with aminus 1. I was dreaming. So PL squared equal to PL, PR squared. Yeah, thank you. So, indeed, you see-- so, from here, from this definition, you can check this is true, OK? This is a one-second check. So then, by definition-- OK, so now this psi L, psi R, which is now defined for any choice of gamma matrices -- so, again, they have to two independent complex component. And so they call the chiral spinors-- sometimes also called Weyl spinors. So this is the analog of psi L and psi R here for the general choice of Gamma matrices. The sigma mu, nu is just the sum of two-- the product of two gamma mus-- have even gamma mus. So the gamma 5 will compete with them, OK? So Gamma 5 will commute with them. And then that means-- so we commute with S. That means, under transformation, S will not change the eigenvalues of gamma 5. And, similarly, we say-- OK, so that tells you that psi L and psi R-- they transform separately because the gamma 5 commutes with Lorentz transformation. And so each eigenspace, they transform separately from each other. In that case, it's very simple, OK? But in other representation, gamma 5 can be more complicated. Good. Any questions on this? Yes, you have a question? Yes? AUDIENCE: Another way to do that, as you said, would be to try to find the unitary matrix that shows-- under which this arbitrary representation is equivalent to the chiral representation. by a similar transformation. And, indeed, the gamma 5-- gamma 5 in the other representation are related to this one just by a similar transformed, too. Yeah, so I will use that language when I talk about Majorana spinor. So, in this case, it's sufficiently simple. So you can write it as psi dagger partial sub 0, plus i sigma i, partial i, psi L. OK? And then you can just write this in terms of psi L and psi R. sorry. Yeah, actually, psi R dagger. So in the chiral representation of gamma star-- in this space of star, and then we have two components. Then I can write this psi and the psi L and psi R into two components, OK? And then, yeah. So this is just ordinary sigma matrices. And so this is the expression you get. And this behavior is actually general. You can write it in arbitrary representations. But, of course, in arbitrary representation, I can no longer use this sigma i. you don't have coupling between the psi L and psi R. So, again, this is reduced to our previous statement that if you have a massless case, you can describe using a two- component spinor. So here, indeed. But, here, there's also something extra. So what do you see-- something extra here? Yeah. Did somebody raise your-- yes. AUDIENCE: Why are we now taking the psi equals psi L plus psi R instead of before we had it as psiL and Psi R? basis but apply for the general.basis. So here, actually, something profound happens because, when m equal to 0, when you don't have coupling between psi L and psi R, you actually get the extra symmetry, OK? So, now, I can actually transform psi L and psi R separately. So these are called chiral symmetries because they transform the left and the right separately. Yes? AUDIENCE: I'm a little bit confused why you can't write psi. HONG LIU: In the general case, I can write psi equal to psi L and psi R. But in these spaces, using this notation, I cannot. So, now, you have a new symmetry equal to-- which you can transform them separately. And the chiral symmetry actually has also very important effect in particle physics-- for example, the pions. The pions has to do with-- I don't know what it is, but it's a very important part of physics. Without the chiral symmetries, there's no pion. Symmetry is only present in the classical level but not in the quantum level. And, again, that plays a very important role in particle physics, actually. It's also important in many condensed matter systems, like liquid helium, et cetera. Will not go into detail. The pions-- they essentially come from the Chiral symmeetries. And actually understanding how the pions come from them was a Nobel Prize to Nambu. HONG LIU: If tilde is just some other constant, then you multiply gamma 5. So, here, we can rewrite a little bit differently. We can consider rewrite this alpha L and alpha R in terms of the following. Let's consider the two transformation-- one transformation, psi L, and psi R transform the same. And the other transformation is that they transform oppositely. They transform in the opposite phase, OK? So I write the alpha-- and this writing is like that. HONG LIU: In physics, actually, the massless case actually gives you very much richer structure, normally, than the massive particle. Mathematically, it's because the representation of the Lorentz group is very different from the massive case. In Euclidean space, you continue gamma 0 to gamma 4. And then you reserve gamma 4 for that. Then the gamma 5 is the next one you take.this? Yes. Other questions? Yes, I'm happy to answer. HONG LIU: In the Dirac spinor, which we have talked about so far, is four components. In the chiral spinor we talked about, you have two complex components. The next one I'm going to talk about is the Majorana, in which case, I would argue, we have 4 times 1 real component. And, now, let's talk about the last case-- this case, which is-- you have four real components, OK? So what do you do? Again, we follow the similar strategy to see whether it's possible to have fourreal components. not compatible with Lorentz transmission, then we were finished, OK? So this shows that this remains real. So such a spinor is called a Majorana spinor. So it has four real components. So you can quantize it, which, I think I will give it as an exercise for you to do. And then, in this case, then the fermions are its own antiparticle. You have particle and antiparticle, so this is the analog of the real scalar in the spinor case. HONG LIU: We have chosen a very specific representation for gamma matrices, which psi can be chosen to be real, OK? But how about for the general representation? So now we talk about the general Majorana spinor-- yeah. AUDIENCE: This doesn't really feel equivalent. It is still equivalent to the other representations? HONG LIu: Yeah, yeah. We will talk about that. Majoranaspinor also plays a very important role in modern-day physics. People suspect a neutrino could be a Majorana spinner. real in the general basis, OK? Because when gamma mu is generally complex, clearly, you cannot set the psi equal to psi star. That does not make sense. You have to find another equivalent equation to do, essentially, the same thing. So you have to introduce this C. So if you find that the transformation between the general gamma mu and the gamma mu m, and then you can use that to find the B. And once you find the A, you can then impose the Majorana condition. complex conjugate of this equation because gamma mu m is real. So that means that, since gammamu m equal to gamma Mu m star, but if we take complex conjugates of that equation, means that the C star gamma mu, C minus 1 star is equal to C gamma mu. So, now, we see that B-- this actually makes sense. This is actually the matrix we take gamma mu to gamma mu star. So B is the matrix to take star, OK? Good. Any questions on this? But, in principle, you don't have to choose them to be unitary. OK, so, now, let's double check. So let's check that star star-- so we show that, here, in this representation, this is compatible with Lorentz transformation, OK? So we still need to check star, star is compatible. So it means that the psi prime star should be equal to the same as B psi prime. So that means this iscompatible with LoreNTz transformation. B when you act on sigma mu B minus 1. So that gives you minus sigmaMu, nu, star, OK? So this is obvious because sigmamu, nu has i there. So the minus sign comes from the i. And, otherwise, the B takes each gamma matrices there into star. And then that means that the S star, lambda, which is given by exponential 1/2 omega mu, nu. Now this is equal to-- yeah, you can just plug this in. we get a very nice relation that, under Lorentz transformation, is generated by this B. And, now, it's just immediate, OK? And now, when you have the psi prime equal to that, let's just take the star of this equation. So that is equal to B S Lambda B minus 1 and B S-- B psi. So this isequal to B psi prime-- precisely what we were trying to show. Good. Any questions on this? OK, so,now, let me give you an explicit example of this matrix B in the Majorana representation. I wrote down before, so if you stare at that expression, you find that gamma 0, gamma 1, and gamma 2 are imaginary, pure imaginary. And the gamma 2 is real, OK? So this pure imaginary means, when you take the star of them, you get the minus sign. So, now, if we look at this equation,. so if this is pure imaginary, youget the star. You get theminus itself. And then, essentially, youGet the minus self means the B actually anticommutes with gamma mu. But this is real. It means B needs to commute with this guy. Then what is B? AUDIENCE: Gamma 2. HONG LIU: Exactly. So B, in this case, can only be gamma 2, OK? And then we can work out, what is the Majorana condition in this basis-- so, essentially, this condition. So that means that the psi star should be equal to gamma 2 psi, OK?!? So that's the majorana condition here. And this is now independent of massless or massive particles. psi, and there should be another one, right? So is that one? HONG LIU: I don't quite understand your question. Say it again-- what? AUDIENCE: OK, [INAUDIBLE]. HONGLIU:OK, OK. Other questions? Good. OK, good. So let's now go to the next topic. We only have a few minutes, so we can only just make some general comments. So so far, mostly, we have been talking about continuous symmetries. But there are also discrete symmetry, OK? we have-- so this real scalar theory-- we can see that before. So this theory has a discrete symmetry because this is invariant under phi. It goes to minus phi, OK? So this is often called the Z2 symmetry. There are also spacetime discrete symmetries. So you can have t goes tominus t. You can also have the so-called parity. You take t. Then you revert all the spatial direction. So comment that you can ask why we actually reverse all three directions. just reverse one direction or reverse two directions, OK? That seems also to be a discrete symmetry. And indeed. So if you just change the directions, say, in the x direction, that's also a discrete symmetries. But if you change-- if you do the reflection in two directions,. that's equivalent to a 90-degree rotation. And so it's part of the continuous symmetry, so it'm not independent. And now, when you change all three. directions compared to change one direction, you differ only by changing two directions. So that means changing all three directions and changing one direction-- they differ by 180-degree rotated. you take that phase to be pi-- say, exponential i pi-- and then you take to be minus phi. And so, in that case, this is part of the continuous symmetry. But, here, there's, nevertheless, another discrete symmetry. Can you see what is the other independent discrete symmetry here? Yes? Good. You can exchange phi to phi star, OK? It's a complex conjugation. And this is often called charge conjugated.