After you watch this youtube video you can access the free quiz that will test you on this medication. The name specifically the family name of the drug because this tells us how the drug works on the body. The medication works in the early part of the distal convoluted tubule that's found within this nephron and what this drug is going to do is it's going to prevent this transporter. The transporter is called the sodium chloride co-transporter and it is considered a cyanide sensitive transporter so hence why this drug works so well. from being able to do its job and just as its name says is that this transporter transports sodium and chloride from the filtrate to go back into the blood to be reabsorbed by the body. Thiazide diuretics are not as potent or as powerful as loot diuretic like furosemide and the reason for that is because each type of diureic that you have is going to affect different structures within this nephron. Without them working properly the kidney fails to do their job. and there are millions of these little nephron structures within each kidney and they function to filter the blood and manage the amount of water ions and waste in the blood. Each part has its own unique role for tweaking this filtrate which is why certain diuretics work on certain areas of the nephrons. The parts of the nephron include the afferent and efferent arteriole. and the proximal convoluted tubule. This area is going to reabsorb water ions etc and the parts that we've talked about hang out in the renal cortex of the kidney. by that descending limb of the loop of Henle and the collecting duct so once it leaves the proximal convoluted tubule it's going to go down into the loops. The distal convoluted tubules is where the thiazide diuretics works specifically in that early part. One of the side effects of thiazides is that it can increase calcium levels and also it plays a role with secretion of potassium into the filtrate then it left the DCT and it's making its journey to the collects ducts. sodium and chloride ions from leaving the filtrate and going back into the blood and hanging out in the blood. Because we're not going to be receiving that sodium we are going to potentially lower the sodium levels in theBlood leading to hyponatremia. calcium is affected by a particular channel known as the t RP v v channel and because we inhibit this sodium chloride coat transporter it's actually going to inhale how this channel works so it helps the body reabsorb calcium. be beneficial and we're going into a little bit for what this drug is used for but patients who have recurrent renal stones that are composed of calcium can actually benefit from this. Patients who have low calcium levels we can possibly throw in a thiazide to help increase the reabsorption of calcium in the blood which can hopefully help increase their bone density. As a nurse you want to watch that calcium level. Thiazide diuretics can cause hypokalemia and that was similar to our loop diuretic they also can lower the potassium level so they share that. channels are influenced by aldosterone. Aldosterone causes the body to keep water and sodium in exchange for potassium. The patient could possibly experience metabolic alkalosis due to the loss of those hydrogen ions so remember that and patients may have to take potassium supplements. If they're on other medications which we'll talk about here in a moment and educate them about foods that are rich in potassium and they want to definitely keep those in their diet those are diuretics can also alter the blood sugar. Thiazide diuretics can increase uric acid levels which can lead to gout attacks. These drugs alter how the proximal convoluted tubule deals with your ate and it actually increases how urate is reabsorbed which can increase your gas levels and lead to gaol attacks so you may need to monitor those uri acid levels. High uric Acid levels for a male tends to be anywhere anything greater than seven and four females greater than six. If you see a uricacid level of 15 that is not good that means that they have high uric acids levels. These medications can do is they can be prescribed a lot of times with ACE inhibitors and this can help actually increase the function of the heart and help the patient feel better. Thiazide diuretics can be used in the treatment of renal calculi which are those renal stones that are composed of calcium now let's talk about nursing responsibilities the side effects and education pieces for the patient who may be taking a thigh-high diuretic so whenever you have a patient taking a thiazide you really want to be watching out for signs and symptoms of dehydration. is you can look at their vital signs how is their blood pressure if it's hypotensive low that's the salts less than 90 that probably means that we've removed a little bit too much fluid volume from their blood. The heart rate will be increased as well we're tachycardic from where the heart's trying to compensate for that loss of fluid volume. We can also look at the eyes and O's you want to make sure you are strictly measuring that and the patient can help you with that. because if they're gaining weight instead of losing weight we made not very effective with this diuretic they may need something else. A lot of patients with heart failure may be on these medications and we want to teach them to weigh themselves every day and to write it down to keep track. If they've gained more than like three pounds in one day that could mean that they're retaining fluid and they may be having heart failure exacerbation and will need to go to their doctor to get treatment. on digoxin and their potassium level goes too low it can increase the risk of digoxin toxicity. A normal lithium level is about 0.5 to 1.2 millimoles per liter so remember these two drugs if we go into these hypo conditions either hyponatremia or hypokalemia with those it can cause toxicity. No exams love to ask about the hyper conditions that these drugs can cause our hyper hyper Cal C Mia the high calcium level hyperuricemia. the high uric acid level and hyperglycemia again teach your diabetic patients to monitor their blood glucose really closely while taking a thigh. Avoid giving doses of diuretics at night because we want our patients to sleep at night we don't want them up using the bathroom all the time so make sure you're not doing that. orthostatic hypotension this is where the when the patients maybe they've been sitting or lying down they get up they can fall they become dizzy you want to teach them to change position slowly. weight or losing weight so we play a huge role with that as well okay so that wraps up this review over thighs I diuretics. thank you so much for watching don't forget to take the free quiz and to subscribe to our channel for more videos. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @bbcopinion. Follow our Facebook page and our YouTube channel for all the latest from CNN.co.uk and CNN iReport.