Jake Xia: This is the second time we are having this class. We had it last year in a smaller version. That was for six units of a credit, and we had it once a week. And mostly practitioners from the industry, from Morgan Stanley, talking about examples how math is applied in modern finance. And so we got some good response last year. So, with the support of the math department, we decided to expand this class to be 12 units of credit and have twice a week, as you know. WebEx.is has added math lectures focusing on linear algebra, probability to statistics, and some stochastic calculus. The purpose of this course is really to give you a sampling menu to see how mathematics is applied in modern finance. Last year when we finished the class, we had a few students coming to work in the industry. Some work at Morgan Stanley, some work at elsewhere. And so hopefully, this will give you enough information to decide this is a field you would like to pursue in your future career. really, to prepare you some basic background knowledge about the financial markets. Some terminologies will be used, which you may not have heard before. So before I get into the introduction, I always like to know who are actually in the classroom, so let me ask you a few questions. You just need to raise your hands so I know roughly what kind of background and where you are. So I would say 80% percent. How many graduate students are here, just to verify? Yep, that's about right, 20%. And how many students are in finance and business major? Just one. and the Sloan school here. So anyway, thanks for that. We will be doing a bit more polling along the way, mainly to get feedback of how you feel about the class. Last year we had it online, so if you feel the class is going too fast, or the math part is. going too slow or the finance part is a bit confusing, the easiest way is really just to send us. emails, which you will find from the class website. So Anyway, I will start today's lecture with a story, and a quiz at the end. Don't worry, it's not a real quiz. Just going to ask you some questions you can raise your hand and give your answer. my personal story. I want to tell you why I tell the story later. But the story actually was in the mid '90s. I just left Salomon Brothers -- that was my first financial industry job -- to go to Morgan Stanley in New York. So the first day, I sat down, I opened the trading book, I found something was missing. So, I turned around, I asked my desk quant. I said, where is the vega report? So, let me show you. Volatility is a measurement about a book or portfolio or position's sensitivity to volatility. At Morgan Stanley this is not called vega, it's called kappa. Kappa is actually a Greek letter. So the footnote about why it's kappa is on the same page as the explanation of what volatility is. That's all you need to know right now. I'm not going to ask you questions later. So, what is volatility? Which again, you will learn more in rigorous terms how it's defined in mathematics. called kappa at Morgan Stanley. Kappa is also called vega by some uneducated traders at the Salomon Brothers. They have mistaken vega as a Greek letter after gambling at Vegas. So obviously, I learned how to call kappa very quickly. And I called it kappa in the last 17 years, but you will hear people calling it vega. But anyway, so that's my first day atMorgan Stanley. But why did I tell you the story? What point I try to make? So this story is actually-- when you think about it, mathematical or quantitative finance is a rather new field. from mostly under-educated traders. Some of them typically joined the firms in the mail room and became trader later on. That's typical career path. And to nowadays, if you walk on the trading floor, you talk to the traders, most of them have advanced degrees. So what has changed over the last 20 or 30 years? I myself, personally, was probably one of the data point experiencing this change. And I certainly didn't expect I would be doing this when I was at MIT, but I did that in last 20 years. everything are changing very rapidly. Even nowadays, they're still changing. So with that, I will give you some background on how the financial markets actually started, and that's really the history part of this industry. In early days people need to exchange goods. Then it becomes centralized. There are stock exchanges, futures exchanges all over the world where these products will be listed as securities on these exchanges. That's one way of trading, which is centralized. Obviously, in the last 10, 15 years, now we have ECNs, electronic platforms. typically specialize in local products, local company stocks, local bonds, and local currencies. So again, what's in common? That's the question you need to ask. And the currencies, money itself, are also traded. And that's where different currencies issued by different countries. So, there are different products. How the stock get listed on the stock exchange? It goes through IPO-- Initial Public Offering process. And equity or stock is one form of trading. What are other forms? Loans. Actually, debt products are more generic than equity products. has money to lend out, someone needs to borrow money. Loan is really a private agreement between two counterparties or multiple counterparties. Commodities, actually, you know. Metal, energy, agriculture products are traded, mostly in the futures format. When you actually buying and sell, you build a warehouse to take them. You ship a tank to store above the ocean. And the real estate, you're buying and selling houses. And when you look at bonds, every government will issue large sovereign debt. Before 2008 financial crisis, large amount of CMBS-- basically, it's a commercial real estate backed securities, mortgage securities, and the residential, as well. And further of all of these, you heard probably a lot about the derivative products. So, that started with swaps, options. And the structure of the products, it become more tailor-made for either investors or borrowers to structure the products in a way to suit their needs. And some of the complexity of those structured products become quite high and the mathematics involved in pricing them and the risk management become rather challenging. After 1933 Glass-Steagall legislation, there were two main types of banks. Commercial bank is supposedly, you're taking deposits and lend out the money. Investment bank supposed to focus on the capital markets, raising capital, trading, and asset management. So that's how banks are organized. Outside banks, other players, basically, the asset managers, are obviously a very big force in the financial markets. So the really bank.type of player is really the investment bank. The investment bank is the player that is really bank-like. question a lot of people ask is, is this a zero sum game? I'm sure you've heard this many times. A lot of times, it depends on the specific products you trade, the market you're in. But why do we need financial markets? This comes back to what I described before. There's a need for it. It's really the need to bridge between the lenders and the borrowers. So, investors who have money need to have better yield or better return, better interest. Banks and so-called dealers play the role of market making. What is market making? So, when you or some end user wants to buy or sell, typically, if there's no market, you don't really find the match. And so the trade between lenders and the borrowers, is again, essentially the main driver of the financial markets. The dealers step in the middle, make you a price. Say, this stock, I make you price. $0.99, and that's my bid. brokers. So, brokers don't really take principal risks. Mutual funds, who actually manage public investors' money, typically in the long-only format. Insurance companies has large asset. They need to generate a return, generate cash flow to meet their liability needs. Pension funds, same thing. As inflation goes higher, they need to pay out more to the retirees, so where do you get the return? Sovereign wealth fund, similarly, endowment funds-- they all have this same situation, have capital and needs to deploy. are different types of strategies, which I will dive into a bit more. Hedge fund play the role in the market-- they basically find opportunities to profit from inefficient market positioning or pricing. And the private equity is different type of funds. They basically look to invest in companies and either take them private or invest in a private equity form to hopefully improve the company's profitability, and then catch up. And governments obviously have a huge impact on the market. So, to summarize the types of trading, the first type is really just hedging. have some exposure. Let's say you borrow money, you bought a house, so you have mortgage payments. Or your corporate has a large income coming from Europe. So, you have euros coming in, but you're not sure if euro would trade stronger to the US dollar in the future, or trade weaker. If you think it will be stronger, you just leave it. But if it will trade weaker, you may want to hedge it. And so that's the hedging type. The second type, as I mentioned, is a market maker. In the new regulation, obviously, proprietary trading is banned, right? And so the third type is really the proprietary trader, the risk taker. These are the hedge funds or some portfolio managers. They need to focus on generating return and control the risk. So, that's where the beta and alpha, the concept comes in. matched the S&P 500 index fund, R(b). That's a return of that index. So you can find a correlation between those two time series. say, this actually-- somehow it came out. It's supposed to be alpha and beta, but it turned out to be the letters. So, in a short description, beta is really-- just think as correlated move with the other asset. Alpha is really the difference in the return. You want to beat S&P 500, so you want to basically have certain tracking of this index, but you Want to return more on top of that. So let me just go in bit of details of how each type of trade actually occurs. So, you invest in the Australia Ozzie, Australian dollar. The Australian dollar may become weaker to the yen. You may lose all your profit, or even more. And further, if everybody plays the same game, then when you try to exit, you have the adverse impact of your trade. So, let's say you think that's the right time to do it, but then at one time, you wake up, you said, huh, I think too many people are doing this. I want to hedge myself. Even if you are not a finance guy, you work in a corporate, you just do you import, export, or building a factory, you have to know, actually, what the exposure is. Risk management, nowadays, becomes pretty widespread responsibility. It's not just the corporate treasury's responsibility. So, that's on the hedging side. If you're entering in a merger deal, and one company is buying another, you need to hedge your potential currency exposure and your interest rate exposure. stock, I think a lot of people know pretty much where it is. But if it's not transparent, so what do you do? So, if instead of asking you where Apple is, probably you're going to tell me $495 today. So you're probably less transparent. So that market maker comes in to provide that liquidity, and then takes the risk. They manage the book by balancing those Greeks, which I mentioned earlier. That's called delta. Gamma is really the change of the portfolio. Take the derivative to the delta, or to the underlying spot. "VaR" concept is also, obviously, a very important concept. And we talk about the volatility exposure was vega. And on top of that, what are the tail risks? What are the events that can actually get you into big trouble? So people use value at risk. Then capital. How much capital are you using? It becomes a veryimportant issue nowadays. And balance sheet. You have asset, you have liability. How do you leverage? How much leverage you have? Before the crisis, for example, lot of the banks leverage up 40 times. Trading is about finding relationships between prices, and trying to profit from those relationship mispricing. Not many people focus on arbitrage, because lot of people are gut traders. If you trade gold in the States, the gold price happen in Asia and in Europe matters, right, because you're trading the same thing. And that's just a simple example. But a spot price versus forward price, that's a deterministic relationship. It's a mathematical relationship. If that relationship breaks down, you can also profit. So there are many examples mathematical relationship which gives you the arbitrage opportunity. Math is very effective, because when you, your bank, your corporate, you want to buy some financial instruments, you have to know where is the price. So it goes through those fundamental analysis. And there are special situations. Some companies are going through particular difficulties, assets are priced very cheaply. So, there are firms out there -- you probably heard Bain Capital and many others -- where they focus on these private equity and special situation opportunities. So what have all of these to do with mathematics? Where does math come in? How do you use math? So, I want to give you some aspects of that. adjust to your assumptions to fit into the market. How do you price all these instruments? And when I say pricing, it's not in the narrow definition of just coming up with the price. When you build a pricing model, you also generate the risk parameters of these instruments, and how do you risk manage them. So math is very useful in risk management, which I will give you some -- not quiz -- questions after this slide. You can see that risk management itself is very challenging. It's not a purely mathematical question, but yet, math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have. come back, you'll have more in your bank account. Obviously, that's not going to happen. The robotrader, a robotic trader, is a dream. It has its place or its use, but it's a fast evolving market. You have to constantly either upgrade your research and adjust your strategies. There's no such thing you can build and leave it alone. But I just want to mention that because maybe towards the end of the term you will feel, hmm, I came up with this brilliant trading strategy. I think it's going to make money forever. facing two choices, choice A and a choice B. Choice A being you have 80 chance to lose $500. You have 20% chance to win $500, right? That's choice A. Or choice B, you basically just lock in you have 100% chance of losing $280. Let me ask you, for whoever likes to choose choice A, please raise your hand. One, two, three, four. About six out of say, let's call it 50. So, can I ask you why you think choice A makes sense? When the stock goes up, makes bit of money, the natural tendency -- for especially someone is new to the market -- is to let's take profit. Trading is really all about how do you risk manage, have the discipline, and how to manage your losses. The natural tendency of a lot of people is, well, I think there's a 20% chance to come back, and I'm going to make $500 more. Why do I want to lock in to stop myself out at 280? So even if you have the Discipline to get out, that's great. though the expected value-- I think lot of people said, you lose expected value, which is $300 in choice A, but you would still not to choose choice B, because you don't want to lock in the $280 loss. So, that's really the common behavior, which mathematically may not make sense, but lot ofPeople still would like to do. And also, really, when you think about it, depends on your situation. And let's say, you think the market-- I'm giving you the stock example again. If you just think the fundamental picture has changed. You really don't think the stock should go up anymore. A lot of people don't really want to choose choice B, because they don't want to lock in the loss. The answer, I think it can go you either way, as you said. I mean, the last day of the class, hopefully we'll have much deeper discussion on this. It's not unique. I think we can talk a bit more along in the class. Yup. Well, let me just leave it here. Anyone want to give me a reason for choice B? AUDIENCE: Higher Sharpe. your bank account balance is-- let's say you are a freshman student. Your choice will be very different from someone has $100,000 in his bank account. And also, your risk tolerance, how much you can tolerate. I'm not going to give you say, this is right or wrong. But with that, let me move on and give you some homework. So, before I give you the homework, I want to make a few more comments. Do people always learn from their experiences? In science, we collect evidence, we build models. try to trade on those, how do you really build models? Is the market really efficient? What part is efficient? How do you apply those theories in your day-to-day risk management or trading activities? And sometimes, people tend to oversimplify. So learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning during this class. So suggested homework, optional. Go to the course website, read what we have put up for the financial glossary. we got maybe-- how about this? We still got about 15 minutes or 12 minutes left, so I'll pass it to Vasily, then maybe we can leave five minutes for some questions. VASILY STRELA: [INAUDIBLE] mentioned that, Apple trades, that now it's $494.4 Yeah, just a couple of [INAudIBLE]. Well, first of all, no offense to people who were [INA UDIBLE], but I just wanted to give an example. every time. So, if you want to differentiate this functions and get a derivative, then this derivative will be quite noisy. And so, instead of getting the true derivative, you might obtain something quite different from true derivative just because there is a confidence interval around any point. So obviously, there is somewhere balance, and the question was, is there an optimal shift size to get the derivative? And that's what-- uh oh, the slide got corrupted. There was an answer. optimal size, that would be your numerical derivative of this blue function. While if you use an optimal shift size, which [INAUDIBLE] computed, it would be much smoother and much better. So, that's one of example, and that's what he did. And we actually are implementing it in our systems and plan to use it in practice. Another project was actually quite different. And it was about electronic trading and basically how to better predict prices of currencies and exchange rate. We put syllabus there, a short list of literature. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there. Jake's slides are there already. So, any questions? We like to get your emails so we can put you on the website for further announcements. But it's probably easier if you put your email on the sign up sheet, so that we can [INAUDIBLE]. VASILY STRELA: Yeah, but please visit and sign up here, because there will be announcements to the class.