New racecraft in town that's fast and designed to Perfection. E1 racing series that aims to prove the potential of electric power in the Marine industry. Will Smith is here he is who owns our team and uh we're looking to throw down hopefully some some some points. We are the pioneers of a brand new series so this is electric Hydro foil powerboat um there's nothing like it this is the first uh invention of its type here that we're racing in E1 Series. good times to get our first win all right have fun all right yeah you did hear right Will Smith owns this team and he isn't the only celebrity backer before the main event tomorrow first some competition between the team owners in the red Hollywood Legend Will Smith and in the orange and purple tennis champion laughing ital copy that ready to [Music] go these boats can reach 50 knots that's around 93 km per hour so how do they reach those speeds the key bit here is getting up on the thin bits of the foil and staying above the water to have the speed that's right. keep the boat happy but uh it always wants to stay unhappy so it's a challenge being a pilot in the race bird with the boat back on dry land there's a question I'm desperate to ask can we get in and have a l thank you it's tight yeah it is very tight yeah yeah I think Will Smith had a bit of a hard time getting into there can we fire it up of course we can yeah we we can't go to the full full load because we're in the garage but basically turn the Master on so it just takes a little while to boot up. drawing too much power while and while they're lift and that lifts them up onto the foils. While they're on the foil we can then obviously play around with the lift which is on the left hand side of the of the wheel. The trim on the right hand side and it's we're just altering that by a few points depending on wave conditions. This sport is still in the very early stages the nine teams have the same boat but they're working out how to push the tech. E1 is a brand new racing concept. It's foiling boats with an electric motor in a format that's never been done before. The E1 concept is basically a big figure of eight but it's a little bit more complicated with the long wrap and the long motor. The drivers themselves explain to us how this competition Works than some of the drivers themselves and who better to explain to them how it works than someof the drivers itself. The first E1 race will take place on Friday night. stars and things like that so you'll see a series of uh single point turns and then turns that have larger apexes we're racing some really spectacular locations on the sea in lakes and we're really trying to push the foiling technology to the max so every team has a male and a female pilot and it's up to the team to decide which pilot will go first um after the first race they'll alternate from there qualifying down in a single boat format so we're all about maximizing our one lap time and then we go into the semi-finals and the finals which is head-to-head racing. to it when you're really cooking and flying and um it's really unlike anything it's unlike any boat any jet ski any watercraft the course is a very simple Loop but those green boys mark an extra special part of the track and the teams have to choose very wisely when you take that turn you have to take the Long Lap one lap during the race. If you nail the timing depending on where you're at in the pack you can either pass other Pilots or you can stay out in front. as we go there's no set plan and it completely depends on where we are during the race and yeah it can change in a matter of minutes [Music] at the end of the day you know the teams really have to work together both Pilots have to be consistent you know One Pilot can be really fast if the other one is slower then it may come down to the wire. Having two very consistent Pilots that can work together is how you're really going to win let's po that champagne [Applause] hope it continues for many years to come. We are proud to be a part of the history of the city. We hope to see it continue for many more years. Thank you for all your support and good wishes. We will continue to support the city in any way we can over the next few years. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, click here for more information on this story and to read the rest of the article.