Scientists are warning we are on course for devastating changes to our climate. Researchers are now starting to understand that it's also already affecting our mental health. In the UK one in four adults and one in 10 children experience mental illness. There's growing evidence that dealing with a changing climate is adding to that burden. The patterns of change in temperatures in particular are very Stark in 2022 we had the hottest year on record where daytime temperatures soed over 40° for the first time in history the past hour or so we've had the UK Met Office have the hottest day on record. Charles and a team of researchers set out to study how the extreme heat affected people's well-being over half of the the people they spoke to experienced negative impacts on their mental health due to the heat. A lot of this impacts could be linked to sleep disruption lack of sleep was one of the most commonly cited impacts they saw their parks and local grain areas totally dried out by the Heat. It triggered climate anxiety a lot of people manage their stress by going for a run or doing something outdoors and when you're able to do that the pressure just mounts and mounts. Clayton has interviewed numerous doctors and scientists who are looking at how the changing environment is affecting our minds brains and bodies. You don't even need to be alive to experience some of these effects a study of expecting mothers who experienced Hurricane Sandy in 2012 the huge storm that hit New York showed that in unborn children who did experience that storm girls as early as preschool were 20 times as likely to experience anxiety. Boys were 60 times more likely relative to those who had not been exposed to the storm in utero to express some kind of ADHD. Charles's research also saw the heat affecting men and women differently often due to societal factors such as traditional gender roles. People on Lower incomes and other disadvantaged groups groups were more likely to feel the negative effects of extreme heat because it was harder for them to keep their homes cool. People with more income have more resources to cope during the sorts of periods right this is true within a given City. It's true across countries around the world in the case of Hurricane Katrina for example the huge storm that struck new orans and in the United States in 2005 an academic study that looked at the experience of low income people. people in that storm showed that about half of these folks had some kind of post-traumatic stress and that's relative to 5% of the general population. Direct effects of climate change on people's mental health there's also knock on effects like loss of income and Rising prices which inevitably have implications for people's well-being. Although the impact of a changing climate on our mental health can be profound both Clayton and Charles's Rec search has shown that there are things you can do to support your wellbeing engaging with nature so spending more time in Green Space. people use that as a way to cope with stress so this is very beneficial social connection is a really big one as well. We are not separate from our environment we are connected not just to the world around us but of course to one another and it and it is only in working with one another that we're going to be able to move forward [Music]"It's a very exciting time for us. We're looking forward to it," says singer-songwriter. "It's going to give us a lot of energy. It's a really exciting time"