HONG LIU: This is a key relation between the bulk and the boundary. The more you go to the interior of the space time, then corresponding to the lower energy process when viewed form the field theory. So here, the same process is happening here compared to happening here, and here corresponds to the IR process, and the [INAUDIBLE] boundary corresponding to UV process. This is the IR-UV connection between the Bulk and the Boundary. It's called the IR/UV connection. the boundary theories. And also, this gives you an intuitive understanding where does this actual dimension come from from the field theory point of view. Then from a field theory perspective, this actualdimension can be considered as a geometrization of the energy scale. So any questions regarding this? Good. So now let's talk about some further aspects of the duality. The duality is that once you realize there's such relation, since the two sides are completely different objects, so the game is that you really have to do lots of guess work. We have N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory. And then here, you have type IIB string in Ads5 times ds5. So here on this side, there is a conformal symmetry which we explained before because this is a four dimensional theory. On this side there's precisely the same group, which is isometry of Ads5. And you can write down the transformation on both sides. For example, this special conformal of a d dimensional series SO d, 2. HONG LIU: In N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory, there's also global symmetry we discussed before. This is global symmetry associated with space time. And there is also global internal symmetry, SO6 internal symmetry. And the others, like translation or rotation, et cetera, it's clear. And we will not be explicit. You can also actually map the supersymmetry between them. And this can be considered as coming from the D3 brane. HONG LIU: So there's a 4 supersymmetry, which just comes from N equal to 4. But the conformal symmetry generates another 4. So all together, you have eight [INAUDIBLE] as the supercharge. And similarly, you find-- I will not do this side. But in this case, for example, the low energy limit. Let's just talk about the lowEnergy limit of this theory. So this all together is 32 real superchargers. the low energy limit, as we said before, just has to be super gravity. Then you find you actually have exactly the same amount of supersymmetry in this geometry. But the interesting thing is that by definition, the supers asymmetry on the gravity side is actually local. So if you look at this correspondence between each other, then you actually see a pattern. So now let me make some remarks. On this side, all these symmetries are global symmetry. But on the other side, they are local symmetrie. for each global symmetry in the field theory side, there's a corresponding local symmetry on the gravity side. If you talk about diffeomorphism, then this is a huge group-- certainly much, much larger than what we are talking about here. So why we are only talking about isometry? Why we don't talk about other parts of the diffeomorphicism, only talk about isometric? So what's special about the isometry?" he asks. "The isometry is important for the following reason," he says. "It can be considered as a subgroup" asymptotic geometry of the space time. So these are not ordinary diffeomorphisms. So-called large transformations is that they don't go to the Identity at infinity. And of course, this is precisely the large gauge transformations which leaves the asymptotic invariant. So in a sense, these large gauge. transformations can be considered as the global part of thediffeomorphism. So any questions on this? Yes? AUDIENCE: What does it mean that those those are the large transformations? isometries are local? What do you do with isometry [INAUDIBLE]? HONG LIU: These are just coordinate transformation. A coordinate transformation is always defined point by point, right? Just these are specific coordinate transformations. AUDIENCE: And what happens to gauge symmetries [INAudIBLE]. HONGLIU: No. The gauge transformation in the Yang-Mills part, you don't see it. Gauge freedom is just redundant freedom. You never see it on the other side. HONG LIU: Large gauge transformation means the gauge transformations which don't vanish at infinity. And those large gauge transformations essentially is like the global part of the u(1) gauge symmetry. So even on the gravity side, in some sense, you should think of them as global symmetries. And they are large gauge Transformations, not ordinary gauge transformations. The ordinary gauge transformation is just corresponding to redundancy of degrees of freedom. And that should not be reflected on the other side. HONG LIU: Conformal symmetry of the component of the field is the Minkowski space. So on this side, you have isometry of AdS, and on the other side you have conformal symmetry. And any internal gauge symmetry, say if you have some u(s) global symmetry here, then this will be mapped into a u(1) gauge symmetry. That is the gauge symmetry being gravity side. And it's always the case that global supersymmetry here would be corresponding to the local supers asymmetry here. previously we said, from the relation of the d-brane, so the G Yang-Mills square here is related to the 4 pi GS here, string coupling. So the N is the gauge group N. I should say the flux N. And then here is corresponding to you have SU(N). So this R, this curvature radius is related. to the alpha prime squared and the gs in this way. And so on this side, the dimension parameter is given by R squared divided by alpha prime. the relation between the parameters. So on the gravity side, we said these are the two parameters. And of course, you also have this N. And we can also, instead of using GS, as we said before, you can also use the Newton constant. So the 10 dimensional Newton constant is length dimension eight. Then the dimensionless parameter would be GN divided by R to the power 8. And the GN is related to the GS and alpha prime by this formula. So now you can just use this relation to exactly translate this into Yang-Mills coupling. expanding 1 over N squared. So as we said before, we often do dimensional reduction on S5. Let me get a five dimensional Newton constant. So fivedimensional Newton constant is equal to the 10 dimensional Newton Constant. And the difference is the volume of S5, we wrote this down before. And then from here, you can just work out. G5 has dimension 3. Then G5 divided by R cubed, again only related to N given by pi divided by 2N squared. The classical gravity limit is the same as QFT, Quantum Field Theory in curved space time. So gravity does not fluctuate. But your matter field can fluctuate, h bar equal to 1. So in the type IIB super gravity, there are many, many such kind of matter fields, and this is all in the unit of R. And here, when I write these relations, I have all set h barequal to 1, and then alpha prime should go to zero. So this means the string effect is not important. they all should be treated quantum mechanically. It's just that you should consider this small. So let's consider what this means. So GN small as a dimensionless parameter, this translates into field theory side if we use this relation. So that means N goes to infinity. So this is the large N limit of the Yang-Mills theory. And then alpha prime goes to zero. This is consistent that on the gravity side, the fluctuation in the geometry is very small. And now, we see that the decoupling of the string effect requires on the field. theory side the strong coupling. This is also something roughly we said before. If you look at just those [INAUDIBLE] diagrams, of course you don't see a space time interpretation. And I already alluded before that the continuous surface can emerge if that diagram becomes sufficiently complicated. The strong coupling, then the diagram with many, many vertices will dominate. And then the most dominated diagrams are those diagrams with not a lot of vertices. And they essentially are going to continue to limits. side is simple, we can just deal with quantum field theory in the curved space time, which we know how to do. But on this side, it's highly non-trivial because this is an infinite coupling limit. So this will tell you that the strong coupling limit is described by classical gravity. So that means that we can actually use classical gravity to, in principle, solve problems which are strongly coupled. So also, of course, there are corrections beyond this. So quantum gravity corrections on this. side, so this is a classical gravity limit if you take those parameters to go to zero. essentially the semi classical. gravity limit. Here I should call semi classical gravity limit because we still treat the matter fields essentially as quantum. So from now on, so we will mostly just consider the semi Classical gravity regime in the gravity side. Because essentially, we know very little about the string theory in this geometry. And also, I will often use the phrase which applies to the general correspondence, and not necessarily just N equal to 4 super Yang-Mills theory and the type IIB string theory. I just use the language assuming there's a general correspondence. group, say of this SO(d, 2). And similarly here, because here, the SO( d, 2) is the isometry group which lives in infinite invariants. And again, you should be able to organize your [INAUDIBLE] space using the representations of the SO('d', '2') And those representations, of course, should be the same. So if there's one representation here, then there must be a [INAudIBLE] representation here. theory, there must be a corresponding bulk vector field in the gravity side. And similarly, if you have some symmetric tensor, then this must also be related to some symmetry tensor. If the theory has some other symmetries, say some global symmetry or supersymmetries then again, all those fields and the state, they should transform on the representations of those symmetrie. They should all match together. Yes? AUDIENCE: So we proved that the super Yang-Mills theory really lives on the boundary of the AdS? HONG LIU: No. We did not prove that. you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. Yes? AUDIENCE: I thought one of the motivations for thinking about the holographic duality was to try to escape [INAUDIBLE] theorem. And all of a sudden, it strikes me, so we're trying to get on the boundary spin to massless particles. Then they will also exist in the bulk. HONG LIU: Sorry. In the field theory side, there's no massless spin to particles. on that. You can say I don't need to worry about that whether this is on the boundary or bulk, et cetera. These are just some different theories. I want them to be the same. HONG LIU: But, as I said last time, if you believe this bulk and boundary relation, then this is powerful because then, you can immediately deduce that the Yang-Mills theory on the S3 times time then is related to the gravity theory in the global AdS. will give you a direct way to argue that. Also, in your p-set, you have checked this holographic bound. And so that's a confirmation of this. Yes? AUDIENCE: So what does the massless [INAUDIBLE] field on the right map to if it's the same representation of SO(d, 2)? HONG LIU: Sorry. Say it again. We are going to talk about it. So even though this relation was discovered in '97, actually in the '80s, people already worked a lot to consider this type to be supergravity on this space. On the string theory side, you always have this dilaton. And on the N equal to 4 super Yang-Mills theory, that's a local operator. And it turns out that operator is mapped to this Dilaton. So I won't go through those details. But let me just mention the most important such kind of mapping for these two theories. And actually does have consequences for the general story. So the mostimportant mapping. And then you can immediately see they actually map to certain representation of operators. theory side, we have this SO6 gauge symmetry. Then we have the SO6 conserved current. And it turns out this, on the gravity side, just maps to sO6 gauge field. And then another universal operator on the field theory side is the stress tensor. And this is mapped to-- turns out, to the metric perturbations. It's a deviation from the AdS metric. But physically, this is also natural. Physically, alsonatural. a few minutes. So now, given this mapping, any operator is due to a bulk field. Then you can ask some immediate questions. For example, the quantum numbers of these operators will map to the quantum number of the bulk fields. And that's something I said you can check their symmetries. So do you have any questions regarding this? So for local operator on the field theory side, so once we have this mapping we can immediately ask questions related to operators on this side, and try to ask what's the counterpart on the other side. we will discuss a bit later. But now let me discuss another natural question. And the natural thing to do is to deform your original theory by adding this operator to the Lagrangian. So this phi 0 is often called the source. So immediate question you can ask-- and when phi0 is equal to constant, then this corresponding to a change in the coupling for this operator. But in general, you can make it space time dependent. And then this deforms my theory away from the original theory. And if this operator is not there, then you just add the new coupling. operators coupling without if we say phi 0 is a constant? HONG LIU: Sorry? AUDIENCE: If phi0 is a Constant? Hong LIu: No. O is the operator. It's the local operator. There is no other operator this operator O coupling with. The meaning of operator is that O is a sum of the product of fields. So example is O in the scalar field theory. If a scalarField theory has a gauge field, then I can write O as trace F squared. guesswork is based on some very small clues. Good physicists do is that they can see non-ordinary things from ordinary things. So here, I will try to deduce the answer to this question by starting from this relation. Let's forget about p for pi. And now, we've talked about before GS string coupling can be considered as the expectation value of the dilaton field. Let me actually call it capital Phi. And similarly, for space time like AdS with a boundary, and the value of this dilaton can be identified. with the value of the dilaton at the boundary of AdS. HONG LIU: Phi in principle can fluctuate. And its expectation may also be able to fluctuate in the space time. But the only sensible way to talk about expectation value is to. talk about its value at the Boundary. It's the same thing for flat space. And in the AdS, which is also space time with a boundary, than we can associate the constant parts of the expectation value as the value at. the boundary. The Yang-Mills theory coupling with the value of phi at the boundary of AdS is related. This is the coupling or source for the Lagrangian of N equals to 4 super Yang-mills theory. And this corresponding to you essentially change the boundary value of dilaton because these are related. And the second is that phi 0 O, in the boundary theory, adding a. delta G, says the Lagranter of N equal to 4superYangMills, deform the boundary set. phi 0 O in the boundary theory must be related-- now I'm generalizing this story. The bulk field phi due to O has a boundary value phi 0. If you want to preserve the symmetry of the original Lagrangian, then you can choose a certain O. But in principle, you can choosing any O. You can break the symmetry if you want. Impose this kind of boundary conditions. Then you may break AdS symmetry too. So now we have answered this question. And then, of course, this just provides the answer. methods. Now I'm saying because I already know it's true. But in real life, what you will do from this example, you will say, ah, this must be the case. Then you will start trying to find examples to check it. And we will describe it later. I will not contradict myself in my later discussion. So if we assume this, I can also use this to argue. I can use this identification to make star and star star natural for any duality, not only N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory and type IIB gravity. J mu. For simplicity, let me just take it to be u(1). Then I can deform the boundary theory by adding a source for this J mu. And a mu is the source. And then according to this identification, the A mu must be A mu. So this is a bulk vector field. But now we can argue why this should be a gauge field. And to see this is very easy because since J mu is conserved, then this coupling-- so let me call this star star star. mu, this A is the boundary value of A. So that means this capital A, that means the dynamics of this A mu should also be invariant. So we deduce that somehow, this must be some subset of the bulk gauge transformation. Similarly, you can do this for the metric for the stress tensor. So for the star star, again, we can add h mu mu x x. Then star to the power 4 also must be a subset of some bulk gauge. T mu mu to the boundary Lagrangian. And this is the source to the stress tensor. This is when h is very small. When we consider the information, we always consider the source is small. But now, we can argue this thing, mass corresponding to boundary value of the metric in the gravity side. So this is a very general statement valid for any correspondence between the gravity and the AdS metric. And now, from your knowledge of quantum field theory, when I add such a term to the field theory,. it's the same. and the field theory. And that also tells you that if you have a theory which due into a higher dimensional theory, and then that theory has a stress tensor, then this bulk theory must have gravity. So you can say, if any field theory is due to a theory of one higher dimension, that theory must involve gravity-- nothing about quantum gravity. Let's stop here. We're not going to get into quantum gravity right now, we're just going to talk about the theory of gravity.