Adam Martin: How do you go from something you're interested in learning about an organism to actually identifying genes and mechanisms that are important for that? At the end, I'm going to tell you how you can try to figure out the genes and mechanism that are involved in determining the behavior of an organism. And on my title slide here, I have three fruit fly mutant phenotypes that you can see, and each of them is a different type of gene. And each one has a different effect on the behavior. of these mutants defined genes that were subsequently found to be present-- or homologous genes were present in humans and were shown to play important roles in human biology. So later on in the lecture, hall kind of explain what each of these phenotypes is. But first, I want to just highlight the importance of model organisms and their use in biology. You've been seeing them already. I've talked a bit about flies, we talked about Mendel's pea plants. I just now have a compendium of model organism that I'm going to throw up to tell you about. The roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, are the heroes of today's lecture. The mouse is our lab mascot, but it's also an important genetic model. Human cell lines are important, but you have to understand that they're sort of an in-vitro system, and they're not functioning in the context of an entire organism. So it's really unethical for us to do a lot of different types of experiments on humans. Most of them are fairly small, and they're easy to house large numbers of them in a lab. They're often cheap to house in the lab and work with. Also, they develop fast. And maybe most importantly is the fact that we are related to each of these model organisms through evolution because we all arose from a common ancestor. The rate-limiting step in genetics research is the time it takes from the conception of an organism to the time that that organism can reproduce sexually. the human-disease causing genes have a homologous gene in the fruit fly. So we're similar to these model organisms, such as the fruitFly, in particular, genes that are important for understanding human disease. So genetics really plays a fundamental role in biology and the discovery of new biological mechanisms. And I'm going to take you through a type of approach that's called a "forward genetic screen." And I'll get to the orchestra in just a minute, but I briefly just want to define what a forward genetic screen is. are involved in a specific process, but you want to identify them. So in a forward genetic screen, you don't know the genes and mechanisms involved. So you have to, then, infer what a possible phenotype would look like if you broke genes that were involved in that process. So the mantra of geneticists is that we are going to break genes and then look at the result and see if it gives the phenotype we're interested in. In this case, we're looking for a phenotype that you would expect if you affected a certain process, if you disrupt a process. regulator of this orchestra, if you will? And so conceptually, what a genetic screen would involve is taking hundreds, maybe thousands, of orchestras like this one, and just shooting an individual in this orchestra. So then the logic of Drosophila genetics, you would then name that gene uncoordinated and infer that that gene has some important role in coordinating the different sections of the orchestra. And rather than taking a gun and shooting members of the Orchestra, in genetics,you try to identify mutations. induce mutations. So we're looking for mutations. And these mutations could be spontaneous mutations, meaning you didn't do anything to induce it, but they just appear as a variant in the population. In the way we can induce mutations is by using some type of mutagen. For example, you could have some sort of chemical mutagen that increases the error rate in DNA replication. Or you could use radiation to induce DNA damage, and that essentially accelerates the frequency of mutations that occur in the genome of an organism. In model organisms, we can actually find these types of mutations. There's a specific class of mutant that was called "wingless"-- where the flies have fewer than two wings. This particular mutant defines an entire signaling pathway, which is important in stem-cell biology and is also over activated in cancer. But obviously, we don't have wings, so this gene didn't get discovered in humans. It was discovered in flies, and then only later on, it was inferred-- or it was discovered that there was a gene for wingless. is a related gene in humans. One of the other phenotypes I showed you is called "notch" Normally, a fly wing has a nice, smooth margin. notch mutants have wings that have this chunk taken out of them at the end. But again, there's a human notch, and human notch is involved in human diseases, such as cancer.. How can you have a concerted effort to identify genes that have that function in a given process? I'm going to tell you about work done by Eric Wieschaus and Christiane Nusslein-Volhard. treated the males with a mutagen to induce mutations in the gametes these male flies would then be passed to subsequent generations. And they mated the mutagenized males to females, and then they went on to look at-- to isolate individual F1 progeny. To see random mutations, you have to take individual flies. Now, are you're going to see a phenotype in this F1 generation? So Miles-- is it the Malik or Miles? Sorry. ADAM MARTIN: Miles. can get an F2-- multiple F2 males and females that will have the same mutated chromosome. From each of these lines, you're going to cross siblings to each other. So you're doing a sibling-cross. What fraction of the progeny for each of those sibling crosses should be homozygous for the mutant chromosome? Yes, Steven. ADAM MARTIN: One-fourth, exactly right. So Steven's exactly. So now, you have males and female. And now you can look an F3. right. A quarter of the progeny should get two copies of the mutated chromosome. So 25% should be homozygous recessive. And so you can screen this F3 progeny for each of these independent lines, and look for flies at some stage of development that are defective in patterning. It turns out all of the mutations they're interested in are lethal, so they have to look at the larval stages for ones that have a defect inpatterning. So this is what a screen looks like. Drosophila larvae looks like. And you can see it has a segmental pattern here. But you see there are these segments that alternate between smooth cuticle and hairy cuticle. And because there's a lot of hairlike projections here, it reminded the researchers of a hedgehog, and so this mutant became known as "hedgehog" And the hedgehog gene was the founding member of an entire signaling pathway. That plays important roles in human development and also, human cancer. the sonic-hedgehog gene is important in cancer. And actually, there are now a number of drugs that are being developed to target the hedgehog pathway. One was approved back in 2012 for use in treating basal-cell carcinoma. There's currently another drug that's in phase-II clinical trials for treating some forms of leukemia. So this is a story that goes from identifying this weird fly mutant all the way to clinical trials, developing drugs, whose purpose is to inhibit this signaling pathway. whether or not a cell lives or dies during development. One fate that Horvitz, Sulston, and Brenner saw is that sometimes, cells-- their fate was to just die. And this was defined as "programmed cell death" because it followed a very stereotypic pattern. This also is called "apoptosis" So what really enabled this work is the biology of C. elegans. And, here, I'm showing you C.  elegans zygote. This cell divides into two cells that are different. is called AB, one is called P1. And we know exactly what the fates for the descendants of both these cells are based on the work of Sulston, Brenner, and Horvitz. Every worm has these 947 cells. That's showing you what happens to every single cell in the development of C. elegans. They know when every cell divides and what the daughter cells of that division will turn into. In other words, they know the entire lineage of this animal. Robert Horvitz's lab identified a pathway of genes that were involved in cell death. The cell-death process starts with a live cell. That live cell dies such that you then have a dead cell. After the cell dies, the remnants of that dead cell are engulfed by neighboring cells. This is the last step in this process is engulfment. And this gene is called ced-1. There's the first cell- death mutant that was identified. "Ced" stands for "Cell Death abnormal" so C-E-D is short for "ced" CNN's John Sutter shows how scientists screen for mutations that affect cell death in worms. Worms are hermaphrodites, meaning they are both male and female sex organs. When a worm self-crosses, a quarter of the progeny will be homozygous recessive for the mutation. Sutter: Is this necessarily a mutant that's involved in cell death? Can you think of an alternative explanation for why you're seeing this behavior in the worm? The answer is yes, of course. would lose these sort of bubble-like structures? What else could be happening? When you do a screen like this, and when you do science in general, you have to think through all the different types of possibilities. So one scenario here is you could have some type of revertant, or you couldhave a suppressor mutation. Maybe you have a mutation that bypasses the function of ced-1 such that now, the cells can engulf the dead cell. Or the alternative scenario, the one that we want, is that we've affected the cell-death process and identified something that is a bona-fide cell- death mutant. if this is a bona-fide cell-death mutant, then you should have extra cells. And it turns out the ced-3 mutant blocks all 131 of these cell deaths. So there's an active mechanism involved in the cell death. Any questions about how these screens go in the crosses before I move on? OK, so I have one more story to tell you about, and this relates to behavior. We all behave, some of us better than others. So how is it we can go from something as abstract as behavior to specific genes and mechanisms that control? Adam Martin: circadian rhythm is a behavior. We are awake during certain parts of the day and are asleep at night. If you're hidden from the light-dark cycle, you continue this cycle for some amount of time. Martin: There's something intrinsic in our system such that we want to exist on this 24-hour wake-sleep cycle. He says a genetic screen can identify genes that are important for circadian rhythm. The Nobel Prize-winning work was done by Konopka and Benzer. you need an X chromosome and you can't have three X chromosomes. But your females are all attached XY. So the females actually get their X chromosomes from their mom, which is the opposite of the way it normally works. And males getting their X chromosome from dad because the attached X strain has a Y chromosome. So it's a little bit of a genetic trick that, in this case, served the researchers a generation on their screen. But to establish a line of flies that have this mutation, they then took these. F1 mutated males, and crossed them, again, to attached X flies. So now, you have multiple males, all of which are mutant. The mutants that the Benzer Lab identified had altered period of the sleep-wake cycle, and therefore, the gene was named "period" So this screen identified a gene called "period." This is a gene. And the gene in humans is associated with familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome. So defects in the genes that were identified in Drosophila are relevant to human sleep disorders.