Ahern: So the exams are not graded. The TAs have exams of their own and I have told the TAs that, fingers crossed, I would like to have exams back sometime on Friday. That may not be until afternoon, I don't know at this point. But the aim is to get things back by Friday. When exams are available, what I will do is I will send an email out to the class announcing that they're available and announcing where to pick them up. exam. Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side, really unusual. "I find most students are honest. I've only had a handful of situations where in this class, where I've had dishonesty as an issue," Ahern says. "There's just too many eyes here and not enough of our eyes," he says of his class. "So that's why I videotape those" Ahern: How many amino acids can form zwitterion? None. That's not trick. There are no amino acids, everything, so think about it. Ahern: What did you have in mind for the last question? The one about the Kcat? Oh,Yeah, yeah, yeah. okay. So the question, and by the way, I will post the key outside my door after we give the exams back. I don't post those now because students get all anxious until they see their exam. Ahern: How can you have two apparent Kcats? and the answer is it depends on how you calculate the concentration of the enzyme. If you take Vmax and divide it by the total concentration of enzyme, you will see a reduced Kcat compared to the uninhibited enzyme. Why? Because much of that concentration of. enzyme is not active, it's inhibited. However, if you take the inhibited out of it and you take. Vmax to divide it, you'll see exactly the same Kcat as if you have an uninhibited. enzyme. where time is sometimes a factor, and so I was going to have 3 of the longer answer questions and I decided not to do that and I made them shorter. So I had 2. There's trade offs in all these as I've told other classes. So one of the things that happens is the fewer the questions I have, the more points each question is worth. And so I have to try to strike a balance. And this balance, I think works fairly well. I'm glad to hear there weren't too many at least who indicated time problems. Yes, sir? be large and I can do what you recommend there. My concern is, well, what I always see is there's a bias. Everybody decides to do this question over here. And it seems to me that when I have that bias, it suggests that all of the questions aren't equal in difficulty and so that kind of makes me think well maybe that's not the way to go. But I have considered it and I have done it on some occasions. And I won't rule it out. Ahern: If you're going to spend a fair amount of time on something, it should be worth more points. The working of the problems, which usually is the time limitation, isn't as much of a factor because you've seen how to do these sorts of problems before. So I rarely, I won't say never because you, in a class of this size, I could never say never. But we're working problems, we have to work through problems and that's why. give an exam where I ask you to sign their name and people would say they didn't have enough time. But literally, I rarely have much of an issue with the other two exams. And usually I'll tell you. When I ask that question to this class, I would say I've seen as many as 2/3 of the hands go, 'I didn'thave enough time' So I was very careful to try to make sure I didn't ask you too many things. It meant I had to have 20 point problems because we have to have a 100 point exam. same manner that the enzyme is binding a substrate. And so the parallels of those with respect to concentration and so forth, that's really the reason you see those two curves being essentially the same. Everybody's all [Ahern makes groaning noises]. Alright, I hope everybody got how I start my lecture. Right? Student: No. Ahern: No!? Student: I said if you said something about starting the exam, we would give credit. Or starting the class, we'd give credit, yeah? S1 proteases are a class of enzymes that are called S1. They're called serine proteases because they all use serine in the active site. So they all have the catalytic triad. But there are some related proteases that have things like that that I want to spend some time on. And I'm going to talk about some of those today. But before I do that,I want to talk a little bit more about S1 proteased because so far all I've told you about them is that they are aclass of enzymes. Using genetic techniques today, it's very easy to alter the genetic code for any of these proteases and change which amino acid is presence at any given place. Doing that, researchers have changed, for example, a serine residue of 221, which is the serine, gives it its name, to an alanine. Or changing the histidine position 64 to anAlanine, or changing aspartic acid at position 32 to analanine or changing all 3. And when they do that, and they compare the activity, so this is the log of Kcat. like these are half, this is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 orders of magnitude, meaning that the wild type is 10 million times more active than the enzyme that has its serine changed to an alanine. So obviously that serine is a very important residue. What this graph also tells us is that histidine is also very critical. And that's not surprising because, as you saw, in that catalytic mechanism, histidine had to pull that protein, protein, proton off of the serine to make the alkoxide ion. the water as if it didn't have a proton that could be pulled off in the first place. So these are important. When we look at removing the aspartic acid, we still see about 5 or 4 or 5 orders of magnitude lower. That tells us it's not absolutely essential for its catalysis although it does play some importance in that. But this tells us that that as partic acid residue is not as important as the other two. The other 2 are much more important. [inaudible] such as this where you can replace the serine, histidine, or aspartic acid with something other than alanine and perhaps increase the function. Ahern: Okay, so it's actually a very good question. The question is A, would I see activity? and B, might it even be better? And his question is also good because when we think about the process that gave rise to this proteases in the first place, they were mutation and selection. of like what these individual ones are here. Some mutations actually give rise to more functional enzyme. That's how enzymes evolved evolutionarily in the first place. But histidine to alanine here, that's a pretty big change. What if I put something like let's say a tyrosine here that might have a lot of electrons and ability to perhaps influence that proton. That might have an intermediate effect or some other effect. Make sense? Yes, sir? Student: Why is it just as ineffective when you replace as three as when you take off one them? Ahern: Very good question. Why is this one the same as this? Why would that be? good question but remember we have a very little activity and we have the rest of the structure of the enzyme intact. We have the binding site, we have an environment in there that maybe, in addition to the specific amino acid we see in an environment there that's favoring to some extent these activation and breaking of peptide bonds. So that's an interesting observation. What I want to do now is show you some related proteases. Subtilisin is a protease, it's an S1 prote enzyme, but there are other proteases that aren't S1 that behave very much like S1. Ahern: The nitrogen on histidine withdraws the electron from the sulfhydryl group on cysteine, which is then nucleophilic and attacks the substrate. Ahern: It's actually removing the proton. The histidine is removing theproton from the sulfur left behind with extra electrons. Those extra electrons are nucleophobic, they attack the peptide bond and very much like we saw, and I'll show you a mechanism in a second, very muchlike what we saw with the serine proteases. Ahern: mechanistically, this class of proteases is essentially identical to that of the serine protease, at least for our level of understanding. But those similarities aren't all the way through like we see with the cysteine proteases. Ahern: We extract a proton using the electrons of the aspartic acid residue, creating a reactive hydroxide ion. This acts as a nucleophile. The nucleophile attacks the peptide bond just as we saw before. for example, the serine proteases, we made an alkoxide ion, right? We had that oxygen atom that had an extra electron. It attacked the carbonyl group that caused one part to fall off and what happened to the oxygen? It became covalently bound to the other change and that chain is therefore stuck at the enzyme. That oxygen was attached to the rest of the enzyme, right?! So we're not going to see a fast step and a slow step with this. is not attached to anything. When water attacks that carbonyl group, the bond breaks, it's free. One step, bam. Student: Does this reset itself by [inaudible] stealing the hydrogen off... Ahern: yeah, yeah. Is that how it resets itself? Student: How does the enzyme reset itself? How does it get back to its original state? How do you do it? A Chern: I'm not trying to compare speeds, I'm just saying we won't have two steps. The 3rd class of proteases are called metalloproteases. These enzymes derive their name by virtue of the fact that they use a metal ion as their way of holding on to a water molecule. The most common ion that's used is zinc. The water played an important role in that catalytic process. The metalliproteases have a means of holding water there. That actually could make the enzyme more efficient because in the aspartyl proteases, that water could be bouncing around. Ahern: If we're going to break that peptide bond, we have to have a nucleophile. And that nucleophile and coming from water, we'reGoing to make a reactive hydroxyl group just as we did for the aspartyl protease. First, water is bound by this zinc ion. The zinc, you'll notice, is positively charged. The positive charge of the zinc is attracted to the negative, or the relatively negative charge, on the oxygen of the water. The basic mechanisms are the same. We created a nucleophile, the nucleophile attacks the carbonyl group, the peptide bond breaks, and the pieces go their way. Well this business of creating nucleophiles is not unique to proteases. There are other enzymes that use nucleophile and generation of nucleophile in their catalytic mechanisms. One of these is an enzyme we've been talking about some already, that's the carbonic anhydrase and that's right here. You guys look very tired. of a sudden realizes, "Whoa! What's that?" He grabs it, you know. Wipes the dust off of it. Of course in the process polishes this thing. And out pops this magic genie. And he says, "oh master, thank you, I will grant you 3 wishes." and the guy says, 'oh, this is really great' he says,. "I guess I want a billion dollars "so that I can be a very rich man." and poof, a certificate appears in his hands and it says he has a billion. dollars in a Swiss bank account. Carbonic anhydrase can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second, per enzyme. Most enzymes have a fairly narrow pH range where they work that's ideal. But this guy tops out at about pH 9, where we get up to a million per second. Why is its Kcat so high at such a high pH that it really doesn't encounter in the body? And so that's what I want to show you next. It's going to relate to the things I've been talking about. The rate limiting step in the catalytic action of this enzyme like that of the proteases that you saw before, is the rate of formation of the nucleophile. At pH 9, the enzyme is still holding its shape enough that it's actually able to continue catalysis. When we get above that, we're going to see the ending drop off precipitously. So that's a very interesting step. This actually shows the mechanism and again, it's nothing like you haven't already seen. We see the water being bound and we see something pulling off that proton. them? You can stick your neck out, I won't chop it off. I hear a no. Do I hear any yesses? What do aspartyl proteases have to do, folks? What about the metalloproteases? They both use water. Do they work better at a higher pH? Probably would. They probably work a little better at higher pH. The stability enzyme structure. That's going to be the only limitation. If the enzyme structure is stable at pH 10, the enzyme will be way better at 10 than it is at 7. their efficiency. In the case of carbonic anhydrase, though, remember what's limiting them is actually defusing it into the active site. It's probably not going to get much better than that million even if we were to improve that. But for a metalloproteases, it may very well be useful because now we can stabilize the enzyme with disulfite bonds, we can use it at a higher pH, that might very may be a strategy. We're slithering along through this. Let's take a, spend the last 5 or 6 minutes talking about restriction enzymes. We'll see some similarities we saw before. They use water to break the bond. And that should give you some hint about the mechanism that they use. One of the things we see in restriction enzymes is that they all require magnesium for their action. magnesium, like zinc, is a divalent KCat ion. It does help to position the water so that it can lose a proton and make an attack on, in this case, a phosphodiester bond. We're not breaking peptide bonds, obviously. But we're breaking phosphodiesters because those are the bonds between the adjacent nucleotides in a DNA molecule. A restriction enzyme is a protein. That protein grabs a hold of DNA. EcoRV recognizes the structure, the sequence GATATC and it cuts right in the middle of it. Now I want to explain to you just physically how a restriction enzyme works and then I'll show you very briefly a little bit of mechanism. DNA is a very complex substance. It's very difficult to understand. It has a lot of different functions. It can be used to help people understand how DNA works. is a negatively charged molecule, we would expect that to grab a hold of DNA, perhaps positive or neutral, we certainly wouldn't expect the protein to be negatively charged because it wouldn't interact very well with DNA. Most of the time it's going down that trip down the DNA molecule, it does not encounter the sequence GATATC. In fact that sequence will occur randomly, only about once every 4,000 residues. In the case of the serine proteases, that shape change resulted in the creation of the enzyme. alkoxide ion. In the case of the restriction endonucleases, that shape change is more dramatic. What it does is it actually causes a bend to occur in the DNA. So we think of the DNA molecules of being straight and linear, but when the enzyme is bound to that proper site, the enzyme goes "oh, whoa!" and it bends. The DNA molecule is physically bent at that point. It's physically bent. Now that bending turns out to be critical for the catalytic action. like we saw with the peptide bond and everybody's happy. I will very briefly go over that next time and I will see you on Friday. Thank you for listening to our show on CNN.com. We will be back on Friday at 10 a.m. ET for a new episode of CNN Live in the U.S. and 2 p.M. ET in the UK. For more, visit CNN.co.uk/live and follow us on Twitter @cnnlive and @CNNLive.