We were looking at our atas model and we had real GDP a real output whatever you want to call it doesn't really matter we had our price level that aggregate demand short-run aggregate supply long- run aggregate supply and we were at some full employment level of output which we called YF. We had some Price Index equal to say 100 and we said ok what happens if we have some increase in aggregate demand. We saw aggregate demand increasing and we see aggregate demand doing this so we had some increase. in output to say y2 and we saw some. increase in the price index to say 110. see happening is that firms respond to this by saying we want to make more output right we're seeing profits increase so they increase output out here to say y2 but in order to do that right unemployment has to fall employment rises so we saw unemployment decreasing you see employment increasing right which makes sense if real wages are falling firms want to hire more people not less. Eventually people get to the point where they say look you know this stinks my real wage is actually falling you have to give me a raise and when they do that we see the short-run aggregate supply curve actually began to shift back in. and point c is what price level prices went up all right it just takes more green pieces of paper to buy the same goods and services at C as it did at a let's see what happens if we have a decrease in aggregate demand it's gonna be very similar but let's run through it anyway. With this decrease here's our real output here'sOur price level so same thing is before you start off at some full employment level of output why I for just have our price index equal to be 100 it's just the easiest number I think for students to deal with so we have this price index now. firms are seeing here here they're seeing output prices decline and input prices stay the same. What are they seeing in terms of profits exactly here we're seeing profits actually decrease. What's happening to people's real wages they've gone up alright if input prices are staying the same and output prices are declining real wages are actually increasing. firms respond to that increase in the price of labor by doing the same thing that they do for everything they use less of it right and so we see output begins to decline we see unemployment increase and we see employment decrease. level of output unemployment Falls to this natural rate of unemployment employment Rises the only thing that's different is the price level Falls to 80 it takes fewer green pieces of paper to buy the same goods and services at sea than it does at eight now how often do you see prices falling generally pretty often are not very often not very many all right so we can make this model more dynamic if we think of this not being as the price levels but the change in the pricelevel these suit I'm saying so and same thing for here not output but kind of like thechange in output. right so we've got a lot of excess labor but what's true about the price level what did it do that's going up right well this price level increasing so here we have both inflation and we have unemployment it's not inflation because demand pull its cost push inflation here. People's real wages decline so they should be wanting to hire more people right yes but they don't write because there's been something that's changed the fundamental relationship of generally speaking when it takes to meet goods and services in the economy. important anymore so if these guys over here you're kind of going from A to B to C right same thing over here. What could we do if we want to return the economy to full employment what could we change. We could do this oops wrong direction all right I mean that's an option is what I'm saying. But doing that returns you to fullemployment but it also increases the price level right and remember I said if we think of this model dynamically is that not that this is the pricelevel but this is more like inflation than we've just gone permanently from one rate of inflation to a rate offlation. much higher rate of inflation whatever this guy up here is you know 120 or whatever he is a higher rates of the prices are increasing faster similarly if you have a increase in your short-run aggregate supply curve it's the exact same thing. You've got real output you've got the price level and you get the man short supply long line at supply curve here you alright say YF here you are a hundred all right same thing as before. We move basically back to point a alternatively rather than going. back to this higher price level we could if we wanted to which do you know you're going to return to YF at some point in time anyway you could do what you could lower aggregate demand somehow. If we make the model dynamic at a lower rate inflation let's look at our changes in long run because remember when we said the long-run changes it brings the short-run with it so here's our real output there's our price law here's a go get them in that supply long where that good supply is. we're going to see this change in long-run aggregate supply remember what was changing long- run aggregate supply the quantity of our resources quality of ourresources or our level of technology. We have this increase I'm going to call this YF - we see that output increases but which type of output increases our our real output our would we call this guy our full employment level of output right so our full Employment level of outputs actually going up. So we're gonna have a change in one of these things right we know that the long- Run aggregate supply curve is going to increase and remember the short-run is really just a special case of the long run. our ability to make goods and services using all of our resources is increasing right so we're seeing this increase in our full employment level of output. We're seeing an output increase from YF to Y 2 similarly you're seeing the price level fall or like I said if you want to make the model dynamic and you know look at changes in real output and changes in the price levels then you're looking at the rate of inflation declining but what's this guy gonna do overtime typically I agree with the man he's going to increase as well all right. we said for most of the 20th century this guy was about 3% now we're wondering is he maybe 2% I'll have to see but our real business cycle model over here said we're gonna see these ups and downs in economy are gonna see periods where it's increasing. We've got this general long-run trend that's going up at some point 2 percent 3 percent 1 percent 4 percent 12 percent whatever the number is. For most of human history it was this right it's some really low level of output. it's gonna be trust me I've been doing this for 20 years questions on the AAAS wanna yes so that's what we're going to talk about when we talk about fiscal policy and monetary policy. Changes in taxes and changes in government spending are also pretty obvious right if your taxes go up and the government doesn't give you more goods and services for that you have less stuff. If taxes go down and thegovernment doesn't change the amount of services that they give then you have more money in. your pocket right so you can change people's wealth by changing their taxes or by changing the services that they're getting in exchange. Keynes comes along and says famously and the long run we're all dead in other words yes eventually we'll get back to a but why wait why not go ahead and do something change aggregate demand and get you here to see. There's really no difference between a and seeing anyway other than the number of green pieces of paper it takes to buy the goods and services. Keynesian model has problems too it doesn't work perfectly either so that's why we have these changes in aggregate demand. We'll get to that when we look at fiscal and monetary policy okay so I will see you guys on Wednesday we only have the exam. We only had the exam we only has the exam so we will be back on Wednesday to talk about fiscal and Monetary Policy. We will be talking about the impact of the stimulus package on the U.S. economy and the global economy.