Adam Martin: In this video, researchers are shining light into a mouse's brain to activate specific neurons in order to test whether they function in arousal. In today's lecture, we're going to work towards understanding how this experiment works. We're also going to talk about how neurons function and how researchers are able to control that function to modify behavior-- in this case, the arousal of this mouse. And here, you see the mouse is going to wake up. There it goes. It's awake now. The sciatic nerve extends from the base of your spine all the way down into your foot, OK? So that's an extremely long distance to transmit information along a single cell. And so we're going to go from thinking about how signals are transmitted in single cells, and this will evolve electrical signaling. Then we'll talk about synapses and how synapses function to help us understand the function of a single neuron, and how they communicate with each other, and so on and so forth. Communicate between neurons. And this is going to involve also sort of understanding how certain antidepressants, like Prozac, work. And then we'll end by talking about how researchers did this experiment to wake up the mouse. And it all starts with something that I told you about at the beginning of the semester, which is that the plasma membrane separates distinct compartments the outside of the cell from the cytoplasm. And there are distinct ion concentrations on either side of this boundary. So we're starting now talking about a single neuron cell. This is thermodynamically not favored, right? These ions would prefer, by diffusion, to be equal concentrations on both sides of this plasma membrane. So the cell to shift this from equilibrium has to expend energy to set up this situation. And it pumps potassium ions into the cytoplasm such that there's a higher concentration of potassium ions in the cy toplasm. So these neurons expend a huge-- a quarter of their ATP is used by pumping ions like this. This voltage difference is known as a membrane. potential. So this is a membrane potential. And it's an electrical potential across the membrane. If the cell is not getting stimulated by something like a neurotransmitter, the resting potential is negative 70 millivolts. So the resting state of the side is there's a polarized-- it's polarized. However, the cell can lose this polarity and not have a charge differential, or it can flip and be positive on the side that has the negative inside potential. The cell can also be polarized and have a positive inside potential, or a negative outside potential. Inside a cell, if there's either zero or positive inside potential, this is referred to as depolarized. Anyone have an idea as to how the cell would flip the potential? What would have to happen in the plasma membrane to flip this potential and depolarize the cell? Yes, Stephen? You could open the ion channels. Which ion channels would you open? The sodium channels. Because remember, sodium is high on the outside, out here. And so if you open these channels, positive ions are going to flow in. And that's going to make this less negative. An action potential is a transient depolarization of the nerve cell. It doesn't just depolarize and stay depolarized, but it depolarizes and then restores itself back to the resting polarity. So it's a transient process. When we think about the neuron at higher resolution, what you're going to see is also a traveling wave that propagates along the entire length of the cell. And so this illustrates a key property of neurons, in that the level of sodium doesn't have to do any work to do this. activity of a neuron is not determined by the size of this action potential. This action potential is an all-or-nothing event. It either happens or it doesn't. And when it happens, it depolarizes to the same level. You can think of it as a binary signal. So now we're going to unpack how it is a nerve cell fires an action potential and how it propagates along the entire cell length. In the case of the sciatic nerve, this has to happen across an entire meter, OK? That's a very long distance to propagate this change in electrical signal, at least for a cell. How is it that this nerve cell is told to start depolarizing at the dendrites? Because there's going to be another neuron here, which is going to communicate to this neuron over here. It does this at the location known as the synapse. And the way this process is initiated is similar to the type of signaling that you saw in the past few lectures, where you have a ligand and a receptor, OK? In this case, the ligand isgoing to be what's known as a neurotransmitter. In this case, it's a sodium channel. So it's going to be-- whether or not it's open depends on the presence of the ligand. So if we take a neurotransmitter like serotonin, if it's not bound to the receptor, the receptor is closed. But if serotonin binds to the receptors, it opens up the channel, which can selectively let in a type of ion. In this case,. this is an activating channel, because letting in sodium is going to depolarize the cell. sodium channel? This is a voltage-gated sodium channel here. And you can see, in the resting state of the cell, this channel is closed. And it's closed because of this red rod structure that's positively charged. That's a positively charged alpha helix that is a part of this protein and is embedded in the membrane. When there is depolarization, that shifts the position of thisalpha helix, such that now it shifts up towards the exterior face of the plasma membrane. And that opens the channel, which lets sodium ions rush in. neuron, how do you get it such that this electrical signal moves unidirectionally along the neuron? So what leads to uniddirectionality? Who's been to a sporting event lately? OK, good. So we're going to do the wave. Once you to stand up, you're going. to be tired, and you'll have to sit down for a while. And so these voltage-gated sodium channels have a similar property. Once the sodium channel opens, after about a millisecond, that ball sticks in the channel pore and blocks it, OK? channel which prevents the action potential from moving backwards. If you have a voltage-gated potassium channel, that's going to cause a rush of positive ions out of the cell. And that will be able to restore the net negative potential on the inside of thecell. So this termination or repolarization is the result of the opening of voltage gated, in this case, not sodium channels, but potassium channels. When would these have to open relative to sodium channels? Yeah, Carmen? Rachel? AUDIENCE: Move the potassium ions. The depolarization is going to be high where the sodium channels are only entering. And then following that, you would have potassium ions getting pumped out and basically repolarizing the cell. So here, you have a spike, and you complete the cycle. It can even get hyperpolarized, where it gets even more negative than it normally does. It eventually gets back to this resting potential of around negative 60 or negative 70 millivolts. And I want to tell you about one process or property of neurons and another helpful cell that enables this to go extremely fast. tape for neurons, OK? So they are these-- there's electrical insulation around the axons of these neurons. And this is provided by another specialized cell type called a glial cell. And that insulates the plasma membrane of the axon such that-- so here is an axon. You have glial cells that are wrapped around, and it sort of forms like beads on a string. And so there are these gaps between the myelin sheath that are known as the nodes of Ranvier. ones, localize to these nodes. And that allows the action potential to travel about 100-fold faster along the axon. And one important reason to bring this up is because there is an important human disease that affects the electrical insulation in the myelin sheath here, and that's multiple sclerosis. This is an autoimmune disorder. And so we're going to talk about immunity later in the semester, and we'll talk about how that happens. But for now, I just want to point out that multiple sclerosis happens when the immune system attacks this myelinSheath. if you damage this electrical insulation, you greatly slow down these action potentials, and that has a significant impact on nerve impulses in the brain and throughout the entire body. And that's why multiple sclerosis is such a devastating disease. All right, I'm going to start moving now to consider more than one neuron. And so if we consider this connection right here, there's a synapse right here. Here's a cell that's sending information and a Cell that is receiving that information. but you might have another neuron sending a signal to a synapse on this part of the cell. And you could have another signal coming in here. And so this neuron will then have to decide whether or not to fire an action potential down its axon. And the way that the neuron decides this is to integrate the signals. So there's a signal integration process. And what's important for signal integration in a neuron is whether the cell body-- whether the voltage increases above a certain threshold potential. result in depolarization. What might be a type of receptor that would inhibit this process of sending an action potential? What might an inhibitory receptor be to lower the chance that this action potential will be fired? What if I told you it's an ion channel? What ion would you expect it might pass? Udo? AUDIENCE: Potassium. If it passes potassium, then it's going to make the inside more negative. And that's what's known as hyperpolarization, right? influences whether or not it will send the signal to a downstream cell. So there's a signal initiation process at the synapse. And this involves the presynaptic neuron secreting a neurotransmitter. So the signal, in this case, signals between neurons are called neurotransmitters. They're often derived from amino acids, and so they're small molecules. So one example is serotonin. Here, you can see it's a derivative of tryptophan, and it's able to bind to a receptor. on the postsynaptic cell and induce depolarization. And so neurons are-- the way that they communicate is-- neurons are a case of where luck favors the prepared. Neurons are totally prepared to send signals to each other. They have everything ready to go when they get word from upstream. And that's because if we look at the synapse prior to an action potential, everything isready to go. The cell has neurotransmitter, and it's packaged in these vesicles, and they're tethered to the plasma membrane, ready to be released. with the plasma membrane? What should trigger the fusion process? Yes, Miles? AUDIENCE: So after [INAUDIBLE] axon when it's time for the [INAudIBLE] that's when the vesicles fuse. ADAM MARTIN: Yeah, so Miles is exactly right. If serotonin is inside my vesicle here, it's going to need to exocytose. And now the serotonin is going to be outside the cell, ready to bind to the receptor. now on the outside of the cell, where it can travel across the synaptic cleft and bind to a receptor on the postsynaptic neuron. So this fusion is when neurotransmitter is released. And the way that this increasing calcium has to happen, when the action potential arrives at the axon terminus, there's depolarization of that part of thecell. And then there's a mechanism that links calcium entry to vesicle fusion. And that's going to be shown here. the plasma membrane of the cell, thus releasing the neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft. So this is what starts the signal. Now, you probably know that these neurons are not active or on all the time. So something has to terminate the signal, usually quite rapidly. So now I want to talk about that. So like all signaling pathways, signaling is useless if you can just turn it on. You have to be able to toggle it on and off in order for biological systems to function properly. And that's the case with neurons. Prozac, Zoloft, these are a class of drugs that are known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. This is abbreviated SSRIs. But the way they function is to leave the neurotransmitter in the synaptic cleft for longer so that you enhance signaling, even if you have low levels of the neurotransmitters. All the machinery on this vesicle is recycled by endocytosis such that it can be reused again, OK? So cells are really good at recycling stuff. If this is sort of the membrane, youendocytose and then you can use it again later on.  optogenetics is an approach to control the activity of a cell with light. In this case, we're going to have light inducing depolarization. And the way this is done is there's a protein discovered from photosynthetic algae that's responsive to light. And this protein is called channelrhodopsin, specifically ChR2. And if that's expressed specifically in the neurons that you're trying to test, you can then shine a light into the brain of the organism and activate this type of neuron. you to test the function of the neuron in the behavior of an organism. So, in this case, this mouse, the light is shined into its brain, and they're testing a specific type of neuron that is involved in arousal of the mouse. And it's going to wake up right now. There it goes. It woke up. You see now its muscle activity is going, OK? So you can test thefunction of specific nerve cells using this approach, and it's because you have a light-sensitive sodium channel.