The famous example was posed by Comte de Buffon back in the 18th century. It marks the beginning of a subject that is known as the subject of geometric probability. The problem is pretty simple. We take a needle that has a certain length -- l-- and we throw it at random on the plane. We're interested in the question of how likely is it that the needle is going to intersect one of the lines if it is thrown completely at random? We will answer this question, and we will proceed as follows. In order to have a complete model, we need a joint PDF in our hands. Here, we're going to make the assumption that x and theta are independent of each other. So the joint PDF is going to be equal to 4 divided by pi times d. By this point, we have completely specified a probabilistic model. We have made some assumptions, which you might even consider arbitrary. But these assumptions are a reasonable attempt at capturing the idea that the needle is thrown completely at random. much more streamlined. There's not going to be any choices. We just need to consider the event of interest, express it in terms of the random variables that we have in our hands, and then use the probability model to calculate the probability of this particular event. When will the needle intersect the nearest line? This will depend on the following. We have an intersection if and only if the vertical extent-- which is this vertical green segment-- is larger than the distance x. Or equivalently, if x is less than the vertical amount of the needle. our case is four over pi d-- and integrate it over the set of x's and theta's for which the PDF is non-zero. So what are these pairs? This event can occur with any choice of theta. So theta is free to vary from 0 up to pi over 2. How about x? For this event to occur, x can be anything that isNon-negative as long as it is less than or equal to this number. And all we need to do now is to evaluate this double integral. is this 4 with this 2 give us a 2. We have 2l over pi d. And then the integral from 0 to pi over 2 of sine theta is minus cosine theTA. This turns out to be equal to 1. And this is the final answer to the problem that we have been considering. And now, a curious thought. How can you figure out the number pi? Take your needle, throw it at random a million times, and count the frequency with which the needle ends up crossing the line. If you believe that probabilities can be interpreted as frequencies, this gives you a good estimate of this probability. This is a so-called Monte Carlo method, which uses simulation to evaluate experimentally the value, in this case, of the constant pi. Of course, for pi, we have much better ways of calculating it. But there are many applications in engineering and in physics where certain quantities are hard to calculate, but can be calculated using a trick of this kind by simulation. Here's a typical situation. Consider the unit cube. Inside that unit cube, there is a complicated subset which is described maybe by some very complicated formulas. And you want to calculate the volume of this complicated subset. What you can do is to start throwing at random points inside that. unit cube. So you throw points. Some fault inside. Some fall outside. You count the frequency with which the points happen to be inside your set. And as long as you're throwing the points uniformly over the cube, then the probability of your complicated set is going to be the volume of that set. You estimate the probability by counting the frequencies with which you get points in that set, and so, by using these observed frequencies, you can estimate the volume. It turns out that these days, physicists and many engineers use methods of this kind quite often and in many important applications.