50 years ago, John McCarthy and Marvin Minsky coined the term artificial intelligence. Progress has been made, especially in the last 20 years. But it was obvious that we needed different expertises. Not all in computer science, but in other ones. And so, this was the people that we put on the team. The team was made up of computer scientists, mathematicians, physicists, and other experts in different fields of study. The group was put together by MIT OpenCourseWare, a collaboration between MIT and several universities. together from different labs, from neuroscience, from computer science, from cognitive science, and from a number of institutions in the US. Let me tell you a bit more about the background here. This idea of merging brain research and computer science in the quest to understand intelligence. Part of the reason for this was progress and convergence we saw between different disciplines. And one of them was progress in AI. And this started, really, with Deep Blue, I guess it was called at the time. And then, of course, there was Watson beating champions in Jeopardy. cover of a Nature supplement, on artificial intelligence and machine learning. I think it's a golden age for intelligent applications. We are still very far from understanding how people can answer questions about images. And we would like to know to have a system that does that. But also, to know how our brain does it. So that's the science part. It's not enough to pass the Turing Test. In In Nature, David Wheeler looks at the future of artificial intelligence, and how it will affect our lives. this case, to have a system that does it. And we want to compare your model, our system, with measurements on the brain of people, or monkeys, also during the same task. So that's what we call Turing plus, plus questions. And part of the rationale about it is, this is kind of a more philosophical discussion. I personally think that it's very difficult tohave a definition of intelligence, in general. There are many different forms of intelligence. What we can ask is questions about, what is human intelligence? Because we can study that. able to answer how people do understand images. We start with vision. We are not limited, eventually, to vision. But in the first five years of the center, that's the main focus. And answer the question about images. And we want to understand how the answers are produced by our brain at the computational, psychophysical, and neural level. It's ambitious. And I think there are probably, in terms of having all these different levels, levels of really understanding from the what, where, the neuroscience, to the behavior. looking at the face. And make models of what's going on. And, of course, we want these models to respect the neural data, ideally the MRI data. And do the job of recognizing faces as well as human do. So we are getting there. I'm not saying we have the answers, but we have at least models that can be tested at all these different levels. So that's kind of the ideal situation, from the point of view of what we want to do in the center.