David Kaiser: Today we're going to be talking about the kind of invention or the hybridization of a whole new subfield within physics that now is often called particle cosmology. We'll talk about institutions, and politics, and some broader shifts in the field, out of which come this new now quite flourishing subfield. It studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary forces. It is actually very cool, and it's also flourishing by any measure. It's a fairly new invention. This whole field of study came together fairly recently in historical terms. constituents of matter. And it asks about what role they might have in shaping, really, the fate of the entire universe. It's one of the best examples we have of how we now use our tools about quantum theory and elementary particle physics to try to make sense of and, in turn, be constrained by measurements. The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the United States is on the order of $1 billion a year. That's if you combine spending in this subfield from the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy, NASA, and other federal grants. On average, there are on average two new physics papers, two new preprints posted to the central preprint server archive.org every hour of every day just in this subfield. That's averaging over 24 hours a day, seven days a week. So it is really a booming, booming subject of study. And I find that all the more astonishing since this field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago. So this is a $1 billion area of study with devoted colleagues all over the world, not just here in the United States. or particle physics and that it somehow this set of ideas that bubbled up in the mid-1970s of that we'll look at today. And so there's a lot going for that explanation, but it's also, I think, really, really quite incomplete. So of the sort that we've been looking at throughout the term, we'll be talking about some changes in institutions, in training, in broader politics, and the support for science, and that these shifts were deeply consequential. In the 1950s and '60s, physicists in two different subfields were focusing on the question of mass. Why do objects, say, resist changes in their motion? Was there a deeper origin or way to make sense of this common notion of mass? And that helps us trace the precursors for this field of particle cosmology. Then we'll take a look at some of the broader institutional shifts that were also coming to be very dramatic, and some of them quite unexpected, that also helped propel this new merger of fields. Einstein was inspired by some of Mach's writings on this. Mach himself didn't call it Mach's principle. But it was attributed to Mach by Albert Einstein as early as 1918. So from the early days of the study of general relativity, it was often framed as a question. Do we have to think about the distribution of matter throughout the whole universe in order to make sense for why this block slides down this inclined plane at a certain rate? Local inertial effects, are they somehow tied to cosmological distributions? The problem of mass was given a concrete form by Einstein's general theory of relativity in the 1950s and '60s. The idea was should we be constantly paying attention to the global distribution of matter and energy when we try to make sense of local phenomena associated with mass? So that was a very challenging question, and we'll say more about it soon. But that was one of the ways that the Problem of mass took form. It was given form by specialists who were pursuing things like Einstein's General Theory of relativity. acceleration throughout the 1960s, a number of high-energy theorists were trying to put together these highly symmetric models to account for things like the nuclear forces. We looked at one example of that at the end of class last time, Quantum Chromodynamics, or QCD, which was really coming together in the early to mid 1970s. There were other instances of that, cousin models, similar kinds of models that were getting a lot of attention for the other main nuclear force, for what's called the weak force. Self-evidently of short range, unlike gravitation or electromagnetism, which, in principle, can extend arbitrarily long distances. The nuclear forces really exert themselves across nuclear dimensions, very tiny fraction of the size even of a single atom, let alone macroscopic scales. So the idea was could have finite range nuclear forces if these force-carrying particles had a very large mass. That will make it very unlikely for that force to be felt across a verylarge distance because of the whole set of ideas about virtual particles. uncertainty principle. All well and good, but the problem was with these new fancy highly symmetric models of the nuclear forces. So you can have one or the other. You could have a short-range nuclear force that does not have any of those fancy symmetries. So this was a pretty substantial challenge. It got lots of theorists very exercised over the 1950s and especially 1960s, which is really like, why do these particles have mass at all? Can we account for mass of these elementary particles in a self-consistent way? The Brans-Dicke theory of gravity was published in 1961 by Carl Brans and Robert Dicke. Their idea was to try to go back to this notion of Mach's principle and more thoroughly account for it. Even though the ideas were bubbling up around the same time and often published in the same journals, they still were embedded in quite different research traditions and conversations. Theories of mass came from members of the gravitation and cosmology crowd on one side and the high-energy particle physics community on the other. for that within a quantitative theory of gravity. So they wanted to modify Einstein's general theory of relativity in a very specific way to try to address this question of mass. So their idea was to introduce a whole new kind of matter, a newkind of particle in nature. They labeled it with the Greek letter phi. And now the idea was that instead of having a single constant unit strength of gravity labeled by Newton's constant capital G-- that's the G that's in like Newton's force law. F equals G M1 M2 over R squared. is actually not a constant? What if the strength of gravity could vary across time and space? So it was an attempt to modify Einstein's theory of general relativity. In Einstein's version, you can represent Einstein's general theory of relativity by an action, in a sense, by writing down a Lagrangian. This R is one of those geometrical objects that he had to learn about from his friend Marcel Grossmann because Einstein had cut too many of his math courses in school. Geometer's tool of quantifying the warping of space and time is called the Ricci curvature scalar. multiplying that is this constant, this unit strength of gravity in Einstein's theory. So what Brans and Dicke do is say, well, let's replace G by 1 over phi. So now 1 over G becomes phi in the Lagrangian or in the action for gravitation, where in principle phi, the local strength ofgravity could change across time and space. their version would depart from the ordinary behavior from general relativity. The idea is that if omega is a very small number of order 1 or a fraction of 1, then, in some sense, it doesn't cost very much. So as omega becomes larger and larger, the field becomes more and more wobbly. And so, inSome sense, you're stiffening up the trampoline. It's like saying you can have quite dramatic differences in the local strength of gravity because this field phi could be wobbling. field is much less likely to vary either over space or time. In the limit that omega becomes arbitrarily large, then phi, in a sense, can't afford to vary at all. The kinetic energy cost is too high. And so, on average, the field doesn't change at all, it acts like a constant. So you get back to the Einstein-like limit. So they had this very clever fudge factor, a coupling constant, so that, in principle, the local strength of gravity could be changing. Carl Brans and his advisor Robert Dicke suggested a new form of matter. They'll label it by the Greek letter phi. It extends to all of space, and everything else interacts with it. And meanwhile, phi very locally affects local inertial effects. So this would be a way to incorporate Mach's principle going beyond even just Einstein's version. It would take into account Mach's idea that the effects of this strength of local strength of gravity right here right now, really is attuned to the broader cosmic distribution of Matter. certain elementary particles have a short range if we can't accommodate a mass while keeping this symmetry? This is now they're back in this question of things like the nuclear forces. Could you have nuclear forces mediated by the exchange of particles? Could those particles themselves be very massive? So they don't go very far-- so a short-range force-- and yet, still be respecting the very symmetries for which people had invented those particles in the first place. All this work was bubbling up between 1961 and '64, again, often being published in that same journal as the Brans-Dicke work. Goldstone was among the very first to show this. If you adopt a certain kind of characteristic shape for that potential energy function, then you could accomplish what they came to call spontaneous symmetry breaking. So the idea was, at the level of the governing equations for these nuclear forces, you would continue to assume that these force-carrying particles really were genuinely massless. They had zero mass, just like the photon from electromagnetism. So that would preserve all the symmetries. And you wouldn't put in any symmetry-breaking. terms by hand. You'd leave those particles massless. However, you'd add in a new additional form of matter even beyond those force-carrying particles. It's what's now called the Higgs field. That separate field isn't responsible for the nuclear forces. But it's responsible for giving everything else the masses that we measure, including those forces. The equations are perfectly symmetrical, in this case, by a simple left-right symmetry. So the equations respect the symmetries. But this is a dynamical field. seek its equilibrium. The governing equations maintain the symmetry, but the symmetry is broken spontaneously when the system relaxes to some lowest energy state. So now once this scalar field, once this what we now call Higgs field gets anchored or gets stuck in one of its local minima, it now acts like it has a molasses. It actually is stuck at a nonzero value of its field. Instead of being stuck at the origin, it's stuck at some non zero value. example, interact with phi, then, all of a sudden, they have drag this field around. They start acting as if they have a large mass. It's an induced mass coming from this spontaneous symmetry breaking. So now, again, you can have your symmetries and your short range. You can have his cake and eat it too. It was a lovely idea. It also was introduced right around the same time as Brans-Dicke also as one way to try to get to this question of why do objects have mass. The Brans-Dicke field phi seemed very exciting. It got a lot of attention, as I'll say more about in a moment, because it offered the first really concrete quantitative alternative to Einstein's general theory of relativity in nearly half a century. And so that helped to spur high-precision tests. Depending on the value of that parameter omega, there might be really measurable astrophysical effects between whether it's really what Einstein said or this other seemingly self-consistent alternative. a way forward to be able to maintain these very fancy, very abstract mathematical symmetries of the nuclear forces and keep them short-range. The force-carrying particles could become massive due to their interactions with this all-pervasive field even though they had no intrinsic mass on their own. So that was answering a separate set of puzzles and quandaries. No one suggested, at least in print, that these two scalar fields with the same Greek letter might be similar for nearly 20 years. A paper is considered technically renowned if it accumulates at least 500 citations in the scientific literature. So each of these papers-- the Brans-Dicke paper and the Higgs papers-- became technically renowned within fewer than 20 years. These were getting a lot of attention very quickly. So on the right-hand-- excuse me-- on the left-hand side in red are the worldwide citations to the 1961 Bran-Dicske paper. That was the gravity-type paper. And in blue are citations just to Peter Higgs's papers, not even counting the comparable number. that went to Geoffrey Goldstone's early work. In blue, I'm plotting just cumulative citations to Peter Higgs's work specifically on what we now call the Higgs mechanism. And again, they cross 500 within fewer than 20 years. And yet, only six of those-- so less than 1%-- cited both the Brans-Dicke paper and Higgs papers in the same article during this whole 20-year period. So both articles are getting lots of attention, but within really quite separated communities. those fields were. So why was there such a sharp divide? Why was there no overlap? Were these fields just different from each other? Am I just asking a silly question? Why would anyone have ever thought that the Brans-Dicke field had anything to do with the Higgs field? Well, no. As we'll see in the third part for today, in 1979, two separate theorists working independently of each other actually suggested that the two fields might be literally the same, not just comparable or worth considering side by side. It was not a rule but a pretty widespread convention by that point that a field that had no spin-- so a scalar field-- would often be labeled by the Greek letter phi. The Greek letter psi was often reserved by this point for spin 1/2 particles. So the notation isn't super surprising that it was so similar. But the rest of it that is a new hypothetical state of matter, it pervades all of nature, everything else interacts with it, that's what gives rise to mass. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. Let's look at what might have changed to make it possible, let alone feasible or likely for those theorists in the later '70s to consider these two scalar fields in a new light. Other questions on that? OK, I will charge on. But as usual, please don't be shy. Feel free to jump in with questions anytime. Robert Dicke was one of the last physicists of the 20th century who was really, really active and gifted both in theory and experiment. He invented Brans-Dicke gravity in the mid 1960s. Now you can do very precision monitoring of very weak or subtle gravitational effects, not just in the space of one laboratory, but literally on a solar system scale. To look for these effects, including things like human-built artificial satellites that can be sent throughout the solar system. the Sun, what was called solar oblateness. If the Sun is measurably different from an actual sphere, then that could actually have an impact on things like the orbit of the planet Mercury. If you have a more of an oblate spheroid from the Sun, then some effects that had been attributed to Einstein's general relativity might actually be different. So Dicke himself found some compelling evidence against Brans-Dicke theory, again, I'd say, to his credit. objects like the Viking Mars spacecraft and so on. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. That is all the tests were easily consistent with the predictions from Einstein's theory within experimental errors. To match all of these increasingly precise new experimental measurements, Brans' Dicke theory was not highly favored. In fact, Einstein's looked really good. So that's on the gravity side. Meanwhile, as most of you probably know, there was literally zero experimental testing of Brans's theory. evidence, a big fat goose egg nothing in favor of the Higgs-Boson until July of 2012, or if you're extra generous, maybe December of 2011, the first hints experimentally. So it wasn't a new experiment. The main story that's mostly given is actually hearkens to changes in ideas and, in particular, on the particle physics or particle theory side. And these are brilliant and beautiful ideas. These ideas are well worth appreciating. I just don't think of the whole story. asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. So this was work introduced by Frank and his then advisor David Gross, and independently by a different very young grad student at the time, David Politzer. And what they found was that the strength of the strong nuclear force, that QCD force that we talked about quite a bit at the end of last class session, that the force actually decreases with the energy scale. The effects that Frank Wilczek, David Gross, and David Politzer were talking about would be noticeable exponentially higher energies, right? Well beyond anything that can be achieved even today, let alone in the 1970s. So it's suggested that if one could ever get to really super crazy high energies, you might see some very qualitatively different behavior among nuclear particles-- really cool, a very interesting set of ideas. The present-day experiments at the Large Hadron Collider are here. idea from asymptotic freedom. The force strengths look like they might converge. It's not just that these two get stronger with high energy, and this one gets weaker. They actually might overlap at a single value. The idea was that maybe all of these highly symmetry mediated forces that we see as very different at these low energies-- they have very different behaviors and characteristic strengths-- maybe they're actually all signs of the same force. If you could scatter particles with that average energy, maybe all these three separate forces would have the same unit strength. a single force-- the grand unified theory, which would unite these three forces of nature into a single one modulated by a single force strength, a single effective charge. That was called GUTs. And you can see that only makes sense in the light of asymptotic freedom to get this strength to come down so that it can meet the very gently rising strengths of the two forces. You can probably get a sense for where this is heading. It starts to become a natural question to ask about conditions when particles could have interacted with literally astronomically high energies, cosmologically high energies. the 16 GeV, rather than 10 to the 3 GeV. So this became a natural reason-- this is the main argument-- for particle theorists to ask about things like a very high-energy cosmology. And the phrase that was often used at the time, a gendered term, was a cosmology would provide the so-called poor man's accelerator, the poor person's accelerator. And so this becomes the main reason that's usually given, the main kind of cause for why these two previously quite separated fields of study-- gravitation and particle theory-- were somehow merged. story. It's a large part of ingredients, but it doesn't quite add up. If we go back to things that we can investigate empirically, it don't quite make sense. The rate goes from roughly six or six and one half papers per year worldwide to around 21 on average. And not only that, you can see that the inflection point really comes quite a few years earlier than this purported cause from asymptotic freedom. GUTs became really, really hot years later. So many particle theorists got very excited about that notion. Grand Unified Theory, but not in 1974, more like in 1980. So if we want to account for changes in 1974-- and even the particle theorists weren't paying much attention till a half a decade later. The ideas were published in 1974. That's true. But as we've seen a few times in this course, just publishing an article doesn't guarantee that people will pay attention to it right away. And that was certainly the case with that work in particle theory. So even though it offered a very interesting reason to ask new questions, most people weren't asking those questions at that time. The US budget for high-energy particle physics fell in half in just four years. The field that had, so to speak, the most to lose or that lost the most during this reversal of fortune was particle physics. When particle physics is getting hit harder than any other field, you have twice as many people leaving that field than joining it. And that's where the people who stay within physics at all that you have a net outflow by a factor of 2 just within the field of people fleeing particle Physics. was cut most dramatically. And the job scene was most hard hit, and experiments looked like they'd be on hold and so on. And so in some of these reports that tried to make sense of the crash, like this 1972 report commissioned by the National Academy of Sciences, they single out particle theory. They say it's not coincidental that these young theoretical physicists in particle theory had the hardest time when the trouble came because this report claimed, at least, they'd been poorly trained. These symmetry arguments about nuclear forces. weren't being exposed to or responsible to the many, many other fields of physics. And so when trouble came, they were least adaptable. That was the kind of explanation that this blue-ribbon panel of leading educators, including many leading particle physicists themselves-- that was their explanation for why that one subfield fared so especially poorly, even as the whole field had trouble. And one of the recommendations is to forcibly broaden the training of young physicists in particle theory. the discipline, including explicitly more focus on gravitation and cosmology. So that means that more and more departments, including very elite trend-setting departments across the country, start rushing to offer new graduate courses in general relativity. Questions on that field, really for the first time in the U.S., start showing up regularly on the general exams for physicists across all fields, all specialties, not just those who wanted to study relativity. And you see a market response as well. You see a flood of new graduate-level textbooks on general relativity on Gravitation and Cosmology-- twice as many published in the 1970s versus the 1960s. vast majority of those came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. So remember that big report comes out in 1972. You start seeing curricular changes as early as '73, '74. By '75, '76, '77, you start seeing, in some sense, the market respond with many textbooks being really rushed into print. Some of these textbooks were basically mimeographed lecture notes. And now there's very, very fancy books published in a more typical way. for more than half of my life, to his great chagrin. He's won a number of awards, gold prizes and that big award-winning fella. But the award that I take most pleasure in is the fact that he won Boston's Messiest Office. So yes, we'll work on that. Let's see. Fisher says, on the chart of interactions with the field strengths, are those groups? Yes. Fisher, thank you. That's right. So I was avoiding the nomenclature, but you're quite right. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. Whereas SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a discrete symmetry. It's a more complicated symmetry structure. And that's the symmetry group that these force-carrying particles-- the W and the Z particles-- are invented to enforce. broken at lower energies, they take on different features. It's another example of spontaneous symmetry breaks. And that's super cool and fun and lots more to be said about that. But that is, indeed, where that nomenclature came from. Any other questions on that? OK. Anyone else want to share stories of Alan's messy office? No, going once?OK. Then let me press on for the last-- the last part is pretty short, so the last little part, and we'll have time for more questions and discussion after that. There's a direct coupling between this new hypothetical field and this geometrical structure, the local curvature of space and time. And so this is really, again, playing the role of the varying unit strength of gravity. That's in place of Newton's constant G. If that field can vary, then you better include its kinetic energy with, Again, some fudge factor. that's all the Brans-Dicke stuff. And give that field its own potential energy with that very specific shape, that symmetric double-well type shape. Even the electromagnetic force is exponentially stronger than the gravitational force. The force between an electron and a positron when they're close together is exponentially higher due to their Coulomb attraction compared to their gravitational attraction. So why is there such a strange hierarchy? Why such a huge divide in the average strength of gravity compared to these other seemingly elementary forces? And so that could be. And so if phi becomes stuck at some large nonzero value, either plus or minus, then the square of that will be some large number, some large positive number. setting the inverse gravitational field strength. So why is gravity so weak? They suggested maybe it's because it's arising from some broken symmetry. Much like the Higgs-Goldstone mechanism, the field is dynamical, but it's getting stuck. Only in the broken-symmetry phase do we experience a phenomena that we are used to. So gravity gets stuck being weak because its local strength is arising through the Brans-Dicke field getting accurate in a symmetry-breaking potential. physicist with whom he again kind of accidentally wound up swapping apartments happens to have been immersed in gravitation and cosmology. And as Tony recalls, he found these stacks of preprints all around the apartment that looked interesting. He'd been an undergraduate at Princeton, Tony had. And there, he studied a little bit of gravity with John Wheeler for his undergraduate thesis. So by the mid to late '70s, he's now asking questions at this interface between his formal training in high-energy particle theory and gravitation. Lee Smolin was the other person who independently introduced that broken-symmetric theory in 1979-- same year as Tony Zee. He was actually, from the start, combining the two fields, both in the courses he took and eventually with his advising team for his thesis and for his dissertation itself. So unlike this accident of trading apartments in Paris and reading a few preprints, more and more members of Lee Smolin's generation were going through a training more like his, partly by design. entered with an interest in particle theory. They learned a lot of particle theory, but both formally and informally, coursework general exams and advising for theses, they were working from the start with a combined set of ideas and advisors. So I find this really interesting because there's a tradition for trying to think about how physics changes over time. We, often think about whole-scale theories, and one theory replaces another. And I think there's just that misses lot of what people do all the time. Few physicists today think Brans-Dicke theory of gravity best describes our Universe. But the theory is still very much alive today. In fact, interest in the field grew even as it was getting experimentally less and less favored. The idea that we're picking single theories and that they replace each other, I think, just misses this fine structure, says David Weinberger of the University of California, Los Angeles. He and Weinberger will look at inflation next time on inflation. does exactly the kinds of things that Smolin and Zee had been doing, trying to unify the Brans-Dicke and Higgs field. And in fact, there were a bunch of concrete changes-- some of them geopolitical, the ramping up the Vietnam War, worldwide economic crisis, huge changes in policy priorities within the United States. All these things on a huge range of scales are helping to mold what's going to seem natural or, quote/unquote natural, for younger people to consider doing. in turn, these new folks, especially people like Mike Turner and Rocky Kolb, went on to become real institution builders in their own right. So in fact, they were accelerates. Not only had they been trained to think carefully at this new interface, they helped really accelerate the trend. Turner and Kolb became the directors of the very first institutional center devoted to particle cosmology. It was called the Center for Particle Astrophysics at Fermilab when they were still relatively young in their careers. And so they were actively working to perpetuate this new hybrid area. new hybrid area, really of what becomes the poster example of particle cosmology. And as I say, including my own students and many people now around the world, it's now just totally bizarre not to consider the Brans-Dicke field and the Higgs field is somehow relatable or maybe even identical. So it goes from who even thought of it to who wouldn't even try that? What counts as natural can shift in a pretty short time scale. Those shifts can be driven as much by things well outside of the physicist's control, geopolitics, and national scale budgets. the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. A single key would open the whole hallway. Couldn't get rid of it now. And one time, my parents were visiting. And I basically broke into Alan's office. They couldn't believe me when I described what it was like to try to work with this person. So I actually broke into his office to show them the safety violation, fire code violation, horror show that was the den of entropy. So that's a true story. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.