The amygdala is closely connected to the basal forebrain. In discussions of aging in human pathologies, you always hear about the basalForebrain. The degeneration of acetylcholine containing neurons in the basal nucleus, located there, is the cause of aging. The amygdala is a major part of the basal ganglia, which includes the hypothalamus and the brain stem. The basal fore brain is one of the most important areas of the brain in the human body. It is responsible for the development of the limbic system. forebrain structures here. Includes a collection of structures, including the olfactory tubercle right at the base. You see it in the sections. See, here we're in the hypothalamus. There's the amygdala in the hemisphere. This is in front of the optic chiasm. And there you see all the major basal forebrain structures, plus the septum. We usually don't include the sePTum as part of the basal fore brain, but it could be. Functionally it's very closely allied to these structures we call basal fore Brain. But the amygdala primarily projects to the more caudal one here. This is where they overlap. That's the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, which we mentioned last time. And I've indicated in blue there the acetylcholine containing neurons that you see in the medial septum. You see them in this diagonal band of cells. And then the basal nucleus at the bottom here. Those are the cells that have this very widespread projection to the neocortex. They project to most if not all of the neoc Cortex. and visual system that I and other people had done. It was inspired by a study of people with temporal lobe epilepsy that had been operated on in order to get the tissue generating seizures removed. And they found that the patients could be grouped into two types. And I've summarized there at the bottom the real basis for this idea, other than the fact of early lesions. And that is that the earlier the lesion in these other systems, at least, the greater the plasticity, that is, more sprouting, more chances of regeneration. of the catecholamines, the monoamine, serotonin, and some acetylcholine axons as well. I knew at the time I drew up this hypothesis that there were dopamine abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenics in many of them. And I would predict this kind of sprouting. For one thing, by removing this structure we've eliminated these projections to basic forebrain and prefrontal cortexes. But we've also pruned these axons, making it likely that they will show compensatory sprouting in other areas. and early damage? The fact is, a number of schizophrenics, particularly the ones that are the hardest to treat, have enlarged brain ventricles. Now, of course, with more drugs to treat them, more of them are not in the mental hospitals. But this just shows schizophrenian monozygotic twins, where you have one twin with schizophrenia. The other doesn't have it. And as they often find in these cases, the affected twin has larger ventricle. And we know that larger ventricularles can result from early damage. of them do have this temporal lobe damage. Of course, there's always a lot of variability in the studies like this. But-- yes? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] in like epilepsy in schizophrenics? PROFESSOR: That's a good question. You'd like to know if in studies of schizophrenics, how many of them have epilepsy. Usually they're kept separate, but I don't know of studies that have just looked broadly at schizophrenics. It'd be worthwhile checking. are a little more widespread according to recent studies than they were in the earlier studies, where they were seen mainly in the cortex. Now we know they are also in the more caudal areas, but just less dense. But also we know the basal nucleus projections are shown here. They could be affected too. And in every case these four systems of widespread projections all go to the amygdala as well as to other parts of the brain. All right? And this is just to show you binding to receptors for these different transmitters of the various anti-psychotic drugs. that we know if you bind the receptor you'll reduce the effects of the [? rejections. ?] If the prefrontal cortex is functioning abnormally because of sprouting of these axons, also the basal forebrain, then binding to the receptors will move it more towards the normal. And that could be a reason. Just saying that it does [INAUDIBLE].. Let's talk about the other part of the basal ganglia, the larger part, the corpus striatum. In mammals and other amniotes, the skates and the rays-- sharks, skates, and rays comes from the ventral tegmental area. We know that, especially if you look in fish, that a major input to the hypothalamus in those animals is from the taste [? cyst. ?] In mammals it's never been emphasized, but we know taste can be very rewarding and influences the te segmental area cells. The studies of rats have indicated yes, there are some projections, even in mammals, from that system. In the evolution of this structure you start out with the ventral area getting olfactory input. But then we know that non-olfactory inputs came in. And that led to expansion of the striatum, this area here. And some of it still gets direct olfitory projections. Whereas sensory inputs come into thestriatum. And I'm just showing you here for a rat or a hamster or a mouse. Many of the neurons in those structures project to one or the other, either cortex or striatum. In mammals, the neocortex expanded. That didn't happen in amphibians at all. Amphibians have this little dorsal cortex that's equivalent to a parahippocampal area. And they have a medial pallium. But none of it's like neocortex, really. Even though it does get some non-olfactory input. And just of the striatum. What is the big change that happened in mammals? In general, in the forebrain, what was the bigchange in mammals. The older picture of this was when we talked about the lateral and medial forebrain bundle. And then these more ventral and ventromedial structures are ventral striatum. And they connect through the medial fore brain bundle. Whereas the dorsal striatum and neocortex, they connect to more caudal structures through the lateral forebrain. And here we're talking mainly about that midbrain locomotor region. The literature names it pedunculopontine nucleus, and not always called it by its full name. to the VA of the thalamus, which then projects to motor cortex. The one with the colliculus goes directly from the dorsal striatum to the nigra. And then you need to know what we mean by doubled inhibition. Notice excitatory input from cortex. Inhibits the globus pallidus and inhibits the Nigra. So you're inhibiting an inhibitory pathway. Important for understanding the pathologyies when something goes wrong with these structures, as in Parkinson's disease. The subthalamic nucleus excites both segments of the globus pallidus and the nigra. So it's unique in that way. And it's critical for the balance of this system. So anything that goes wrong with it can cause major problems with movement. For people to see how knowing these connections explains some of the disorders. So we'll leave it here. But just note, if there's just a subthalamic nucleus-- here's the Nigra down here. So these are the two main satellites of the corpus striatum.