David KAISER: In the last few class sessions, we were looking at some changes in high energy particle theory. And then in our most recent class session, we looked at some of the shifts within the fields of study. And today, we're going to focus on a kind of example of that new subfield, a relatively new sub field that's known as inflationary cosmology or simply cosmic inflation. So it's a framework for trying to understand the evolution of our universe over a huge expanse of time, increasingly using tools at the interface. lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. Again, strictly for your own interest as your interest and time allows. There's some more material there. And again, I'd be glad to chat more about this if questions come up beyond that. OK. So oftentimes, astronomers will describe the most salient features of our universe in terms of what they call large scale structure. It's really quite remarkable. And this [CLEARS THROAT] picture's been emerging really over a century, for 100 years or even more. or our own Milky Way galaxy. Or if we zoom in even closer to home with the solar system or even really in human terms, there are concentrations of enormous matter and energy and activity separated by huge voids. It turns out that ordinary gravity-- even Newtonian gravity, let alone Einstein's fancier version that we looked at in class, general theory of relativity-- can account for that structure across these scales from meters or kilometers up to tens of billions of light years. The point is that there's a pattern to it. Matter is not uniformly smushed out in space. that these gravitational frameworks are sufficient to help us make sense of this hierarchy of scales, of structure across large distance scales. If we assume, to start, there's some initial, very tiny lumpiness to begin with, if we assume some very tiny inhomogeneity, a little bit of unevenness in the distribution of matter and energy at early times, then gravity will do the rest. Gravity will make those regions that happen to have slightly more matter or energy per unit volume than average-- the gravitational force will then attract more and more matter andenergy to those local regions. more and more uneven over time. So a challenge for astronomers for a century or so has been to try to make that account more precise and more quantitative. And there have been two main conceptual ingredients, especially as we'll come to in the more recent versions of this in the era of particle cosmology. One of the sets of tools, not surprisingly, is some theory of gravity. And the other main ingredient especially, as I say, refined in recent years with insights from high energy nuclear and particle physics. Nowadays people are pretty well convinced consists of things like quarks and gluons and even some more exotic particles like the Higgs particle. So we have these two ingredients of the structure and behavior of space time as governed presumably by Einstein's theory. And then the stuff that's filling that space time, an idea about matter, especially how matter behaves at very high energies and densities. So with those two ingredients, the goal has been, again, for many decades to account for the observational features of our universe even on very large scales. Einstein himself and then soon several other colleagues began applying these equations not only to local phenomena like, say, the warping of space outside the sun. His friend Karl Schwarzschild first found an exact solution for very early in this work not only for local phenomena, but actually for global phenomena. They took three particularly simple forms. Depending on the amount of stuff, depending on the distribution of matter and energy, if you had more than some critical value, you had a 'Goldilocks' situation. a critical value that came from the equations themselves above that, an overdense region, space itself would warp back onto itself like a closed sphere. If you had less stuff per volume, if the universe were underdense compared to that critical value, then, in fact, the universe would open up away from itself. You'd have a hyperbolic solution or an open geometry with negative curvature. Only if the amount of stuff perVolume were exactly equal to the critical value would the sections of space be flat. Einstein thought that was horrible. He had a very strong aesthetic and philosophical preference for a universe that had no beginning that was simply static. But some of his colleagues who began pursuing these cosmological solutions began to realize that the universe could not only have a shape at a given moment in time, but the shape could change over time. You could have expanding or collapsing solutions, also strictly consistent with Einstein's equations. And they could apply not only to local physics like the warping of spacetime outside a massive object like the sun. for an infinite expanse of time. But other colleagues showed at least it was consistent with his own equations to have universes that would change over time, that could either expand or contract. That was actually a prediction made by some of these colleagues even before some empirical evidence began to come in starting in the late 1920s. Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving away from me further still. So you can actually then work backwards and say for how long has our observable universe been stretching? When did this stretching or expanding phase begin? Georges Lemaitre was at the forefront of this work, starting in the 1920s and throughout the 1930s. He was an ordained Catholic priest and an MIT trained PhD astrophysicist. He studied briefly in Cambridge, England with one of the first converge to general relativity, Arthur Eddington. And then he came to MIT to finish his PhD and then was finding many of these solutions to Einstein's field equations even before Einstein did. And it's consistent with the beginning of that expansion being not quite 14 billion years ago, billions of years ago. relevant in the light of data like Edwin Hubble's about the expanding universe. Lemaitre was one of the first to start thinking about playing that filmstrip backwards to say if things are moving further apart from each other on average today, and if the universe in general is expanding today, then was it, in fact, smaller at earlier times? And what if you ride that all the way back? Was there a primeval moment, was there a single moment when all the matter of the universe, at least all of the matter that we can see, was actually on top of each other? Lemaitre was calling it a primeval atom, that there was this initial fireball from a very, very hot, dense state. And he was very eager to understand the early stages of that expansion. That's where things stood really through the 1930s. And then soon after the Second World War, new groups began coming back to these somewhat old questions. Some of the newer groups had experience with things like the Manhattan Project and in general were better versed in things like nuclear physics than had been known even in Lemaitre's day. George Gamow was advising two younger physicists, Robert Herman and Ralph Alpher. They were coming back to some of these questions about the very early universe inspired by the writings of Georges Lemaitre. And in a series of really quite ahead of its time farsighted work starting in the late 1940s, this was a trio that began coming back in a big way in the '50s and '60s. It was much like the MIT Rad Lab, they worked on things like proximity fuses and so on. The Big Bang model suggests that the universe was very hot and dense at early times. The conditions in which these elementary particles would find themselves should be quite different than what we find commonly around ourselves today. Temperature, after all, is just a measure of kinetic energy of motion. So you have a very high temperature. It could've been, for example, higher than the binding energy of stable hydrogen atoms. So if that were the case, then every time some positively charged nuclear particle like even just a single proton would approach or be in proximity to a negatively charged electron, they might begin to form a stable electrically neutral hydrogen atom. At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. The photons would each be trapped, kicked like soccer balls between all these loose electric charges. Light can't propagate in a charged plasma because it's always bouncing between these very nearby free electric charge. So they could calculate how to make a proton. Proton would then piece all this together. When would that effect go away? Well, when the average or ambient temperature fell below the average binding energy of a single hydrogen atom-- and that would happen at a distinct moment in cosmic history. So as the volume of space stretches, as you have an expanding universe, the average temperature of all the stuff inside it should fall. It should fall in a quantitatively calculable way, again, using Einstein's equations. So again, they put numbers to that and say, well, at a particular moment in time, now using the modern values-- they had the right idea. years, after the start of that stretch after that primeval atom begins to expand, the ambient or average temperature of all the junk inside that universe should've fallen below this Coulomb attractive energy for neutral hydrogen. At that moment, the average energy per photon or per elementary particle would fall. So only at that time, a new phase in the universe would begin to unfold. The universe would be filled with neutral atoms of hydrogen. And now you have a mean free path for light that's arbitrarily long. energy continues to redshift. They lose energy as the universe continues to expand. So the energy of those photons would've started at the equivalent of around 10,000 degrees Kelvin and now today would be much, much,much lower than that. The universe has been expanding and draining that average energy per particle over time [CLEARS THROAT] so that today the universe should be filled with this remnant glow. This is all work that they predict around 1948, '49, '50, Gamov, Herman, and Alpher. out I don't attend dance parties very often. This is what the internet tells me they look like. If you just Google "dance party" and throw away the bad pictures-- anyway. So at early times, the DJ's playing some raucous house music, and everyone's just jostling around. The average energy per dancer is very high. That's like the charged particles where the mean free path is effectively zero. No one could cross that dance floor. And then at a calculable moment, if the DJ knows what she's doing, she'll put on some slow music. And you start having couples form like in Harry Potter at the Yule Ball. Gamov, Alpher, and Herman were putting real numbers to to try to make sense of these different phases of the very early universe. They predicted as early as 1948 that there should be this remnant glow from the Big Bang. And the question was, where is it? Well, almost 20 years later, two radial physicists working at Bell Labs, Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias, were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This was basically left over from the early telecommunications age. actually given time on this telescope not only to fine tune the corporate program for telephonics, but also to conduct actual radial astronomy. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. And they couldn't get rid of a residual hum. At one point, they climbed inside that huge horn antenna on their hands and knees to scrub out what they graciously called special dielectric materials from pigeons who had made a nest in there. in Southern Jersey. They were close to Princeton. They all got together. They said, oh, what you found is actually the remnant glow from the Big Bang. This residual hum in your receiver consistent with an energy of about three degrees above zero, three degrees Kelvin. The average energy per photon had fallen steadily since the time when they were first released in that early dance party. Soon afterwards, they were very soon afterwards awarded the Nobel Prize for actually detecting evidence of the Big. Bang. The idea was the whole universe is filled in the early times with very high energy particles that are at early, early times too high energy to form stable, electrically neutral atoms. And so from every part of space, from every single direction in the sky, those photons began to move freely at this single moment in time. So basically, the universe should've been filled with light, originally avery high energy. And then actually the energy of that light should be falling as the container expands, so as the average energy inside that balloon goes down. a galaxy there, a quasar, a particular bright star in our neighborhood. The photons were everywhere. And it's like sitting in a bathtub full of these photons. And they're just losing their energy as the overall size of space continues to grow. The idea was that there should be-- so it's not just that they should have a particular temperature. They should be everywhere in the sky was the idea, a uniform pattern. So if they could point that radial telescope in any direction, and they should find more or less the same signal, which is indeed what they were finding. everywhere. So every part of space that we could see today once had been at the Big Bang, so to speak. The Big Bang happened there. It happened at x equals 0, and x equals 1, equals 2. But I say all that as if that's obvious. It's not obvious. I'd be glad to chat more about it. But that's the kind of reckoning that people like Lemaitre got very comfortable with starting in the '20s and '30s. This day or let's just say earnest disagreement over what's called the cosmic distance ladder. We can get the velocity from these very fancy spectroscopic-- I say we. The people who do it are actually astronomers. They kindly share their information. I don't know how to do it well. But one can do it very, very well. What's hard to do is to calibrate. How far away is that object right now, let alone how quickly is it continuing to move away? compared to modern day values in Hubble's time. In fact, his value was-- well, let's see. 500 versus 70. So what we now call Hubble's parameter is roughly 70 in appropriate units. And he measured 500. So he measured a much quicker average rate of expansion than what we have mostly settled on today. But the basic picture was there. The picture was enough to get a small number of people to pay attention to Georges Lemaitre's otherwise quite obscure mathematical solutions. whether we agree with the number he inferred of the actual rate, it seemed pretty clear to many people at the time that this was consistent with an actual overall expansion, with the change over time. And that made these seemingly pure mathematical solutions like Friedmann's and especially the follow up work by Georges Lemaitre, that made those mathematical solutions look much, much more curious and interesting than they had prior to Hubble's data. So this is a, I think, safe to say, remarkably successful set of ideas that eventually becomes called the Big Bang model. to give real quantitative teeth to these internal phases or intermediate phases by people like George Gamow and his younger assistants. And it starts to match observations really quite well. And yet we're not done. People began to get worried about some of these features of the Big Bang model not only to cherish its successes. So for this next part, it's actually really helpful to adopt convenient coordinates. If we accept the notion that there is a universal stretching of space, then it'sactually helpful to adopted coordinates that take that into account. space in between is stretching. And you can accommodate that by inserting this one universal stretching function called the scale factor. So the distance between, say, the Milky Way and the Andromeda galaxy at any given time, the physical distance really would change. This is actually called conformal time. That might remind you of our beloved friends, the 19th century Cambridge Wranglers. We're really doing a Wrangler-ish thing here, very similar idea, to adopt coordinates for the time, for the rate at which we think clocks should tick. what we call conformal time, often labeled by the Greek letter tau, is basically a variable tick rate that is really convenient because then we can start making a dynamical changing spacetime look just like the spacetime of special relativity. In these special, very simple fine coordinates, light just travels on 45 degree diagonals. We sit still at a fixed value of comoving location. And then light comes to us at 145 degrees. That sounds very abstract. We do that all the time. This is just. an example in space time of a conformal mapping of a sort that we all use every day like a Mercator projection. So what this does is it inserts certain kinds of location dependent artifacts. We're doing the same thing here. We are stretching our time coordinate so time gets more and more stretched out towards earlier times. And it makes other relationships remarkably easy. Likewise our conformal maps here make the paths of light, for example, very easy to follow. When people begin using these convenient coordinates, they also go back to some questions about or features of the Big Bang model. Robert Dicke was an expert in microwave electronics, a radar Rad Lab veteran. He went back to Princeton and became very interested in general relativity and cosmology. In 1961, he published this alternate to Einstein's own theory of gravity, the Brans-Dicke theory ofgravity. He introduced this conundrum in 1969, so soon after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation when people began to take the Big Bang model more and more seriously, including Robert Dicske. stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. If omega is larger than 1, you have more stuff for volume. You expect it's open or hyperbolic geometry. So far so good. Then Dicke plugged this quantity into Einstein's own equations. A universe should generically become more and more different from flat over time. And so this solution that looks like the Goldilocks solution, the spatially flat solution where you have just the right amount of stuff per volume is actually an unstable solution. If a universe started out being close to but not identically equal to flat at early times, it should look nothing like spatially flat at later times. So the difference from a flat universe, the deviation from spatial flatness, generically should grow over time. As Dicke points out, you have these exponential fine tunings for the universe to be even remotely close to a flat or Euclidean-like behavior today, which is looking more and more consistent with observations by the '60s and '70's and '80s. equal to flat, this parameter omega was, say, 0.3. And yet a measurement of anywhere near 1 today suggested that it had to have been exponentially close to 1 at early times. And that seems like this very strange or unexplained fine tuning. If the universe has been stretching for 14 billion years, what set it to be so arbitrarily close to spatially flat given that is an unstable equilibrium point? That became known as a flatness problem. That was introduced by Bob Dicke in 1969. And 10 years later he introduced the next big real conundrum for the Big Bang model. years later, Dicke and Peebles introduced the second big conundrum. And this one's called the horizon problem. So now let's go back to this very convenient, conformal diagram. I'm mapping the history of the universe using comoving distances. So I've taken into account that universal stretching of space and that variable clock rate, that conformal time. According to this, we should be receiving these microwave photons today from literally every direction in the sky. This goes back to Steven's question. Imagine you have a three dimensional version of this. Einstein's theory says light travels at a fixed speed at least according to Einstein's theory. So if the universe has only been around for so long, then light could only have traveled so far. That's called the horizon distance. What's the furthest possible distance that a light beam could've traveled traveling at that constant speed of light for as long as it was able to? So even though an actual physical light beam couldn't have traveled because the universe was optically opaque, any information, any physical signal, any force, anything that is limited by Einstein's speed limit should only be able to travel up to and limited by the speed oflight. The universe was still so young that the furthest possible distance that any causal influence should've been able to travel was a tiny fraction of the distance across which we actually measure remarkably uniform signals on the sky today. That became known as the horizon problem. And this was heightened as more and more data came in. It became clear that signal really is uniform to one part in 100,000. It was at 1,000th of 1%. That signal is remarkably uniform to a tiny fractions of a percent. is uniform across every direction we look in the sky today, even though it's coming from all these regions that when that light was emitted couldn't have possibly had any physical interaction with each other. That becomes known as the horizon problem. So why on Earth would the CMB be so uniform today to this exponential accuracy from regions of sky that were never ever in causal contact? Plus, why on earth do we have this distribution of scales that I started off in the beginning? Where does large scale structure come from? Oh, I'm sorry. I skipped ahead. The Big Bang model has still had to assume by fiat with no real explanation that there was some initial lumpiness, there's some inhomogeneity that over time could then grow to become this cascading hierarchy of scales. So we'd have super clusters of galaxies separated by huge voids and all the rest. That's the point of this series of ping pong balls distributed through space. And that's what it's like to have these causally disjoint regions emitting these photons with the exact same energy. the Big Bang model had some amazing successes but some pretty stubborn quandaries as well. So I'll pause there again and ask the questions about that. Any questions on the shortcomings of the Big Bang as people began articulating them throughout the '60s and '70s? Feel free to jump in or use the chat or either way. And again, there's more on the quantitative details of that in that optional primer you can find on the Canvas site. So Fisher asks, is it useful to think of the universe as spherical still? Yeah. These pictures get pretty hard. like circa 1980. Here's a very young smiling Alan approximately 40 years ago. He was wondering about these questions as well as we'll see in a moment. But he was, however, coming at this having been trained at MIT in particle theory. He wasn't trained in relativity or cosmology. And he was much more the same generation as Tony Zee, whose work we talked about briefly in the previous lecture. When Alan was in graduate school, he was studying high energy physics. He wound up doing a series of postdoctoral studies. but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions, again, very much like Tony Zee around the same time. What Alan was interested in was in things like spontaneous symmetry breaking and the Higgs mechanism. That was all the rage for a lot of particle theorists in the early and mid '70s by then. And he was wondering about shapes for the potential energy function of that Higgs field that might have a extra structure. There might be a kind of dimple to that energy function. or relax that energy arbitrarily quickly because it's stuck in this metastable so-called false vacuum, then that could have implications for the global shape of space and not just for the behavior of elementary particles. Alan is unbelievably anal retentive and writes everything down and has pretty neat handwriting. A lot of people who write things down and have egregious handwriting, and there's more people who don't writing things down. And so I note the date. 41 years ago to the day-- today is December 7-- to theday, he was up very late as is his wont piecing together his ideas about these Higgs like functions with these funny metastable states. Einstein's notebook is now on display in the Adler Planetarium in Chicago. He realized that this kind of feature could actually lead to a cosmologically distinct kind of evolution. If the energy density, the stuff per volume, remains constant, then very counterintuitively, you have a runaway growth in the size of space. That stretch function, the scale factor going back just to Einstein's equations, will grow exponentially quickly, will have a period of accelerated expansion during which universe won't just get bigger. even as the volume grows exponentially. That could happen. Alan began wondering if you have this weird state of matter that was at least hypothetical and of right interest to particle physicists. Alex, I'm going to skip the monopolar problem, but it comes from this discussion as well. And I'd be delighted to chat more about that if you'd like afterwards. But in the interest of time, Alan was worried about some exotic features from these Higgs fields that can get twisted up in some topological shape. But he was really just wondering what happens if the universe gets stuck even temporarily. equations exactly in the form that he began learning from Bob Dicke from that series of lectures, then you have these very different solutions for the average size of space. It grows exponentially quickly. And as Alan and others were quick to confirm, this happens very naturally, or at least it's a kind of feature that one stumbles upon readily, if when studying these exotic Higgs-like fields from particle physics. And then again, realizing that if you study the dynamics, the behavior of these exotic quantum fields like a Higgs field. in a stretching space time, if you take that stretching of space seriously, then you don't even need to cook up those exotic Higgs-like potentials that Alan was first thinking about. Quite generically, you'll have a damped oscillator behavior. This comes from the fact that space itself is stretching. And that alone it turns out is enough to find these self-consistent solutions in which the field moves very slowly. You can imagine it rolling down this hill, rolling down-- sorry-- rolling down slowly as a function of time. shape for the potential energy function just when you think about these fields like a Higgs-like field in the early universe. So then you come back to those quandaries that Alan had first heard about from Bob Dicke. And you ask, how would these things look if you now take into account this very early, very brief phase of exponentially fast stretching of space? The universe today should look indistinguishable from a flat universe because the difference from flatness was driven to 0 dynamically. The latest measurement from the Planck collaboration using a satellite is that this parameter in our actual universe today is 1 to better than a percent level accuracy. In grad school, it looked very much like omega was 0.3. And if you squinted at it, you could maybe make it 0.35. It was not 1 according to the best. In more quantitative detail in the primer, we'll go into more detail about the new measurement in a few minutes. We'll be back next week with a look at some of the other things we've learned about the universe this week. If inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. So we're adding more real estate along our time axis. We're unfurling a little bit extra time that hadn't been taken into account in the standard Big Bang model. So then it would at least be plausible there's at least now a causally self-consistent mechanism by means of which the universe could have similar conditions everywhere because they actually were causally connected. smoothness scale we observed. It takes an unbelievably short amount of physical or cosmic time, the time that we measure on our wristwatches, to accomplish that. In fact, it takes about 10 to the minus 36th of a single second. That's all it takes for this inflation. If the universe expanded exponentially just for that sub, sub,. sub blink of an eye, then all of a sudden, the causal structure of the entire observable universe is turned upside down. You basically erase the horizon problem because there actually was a time when all the stuff we see would've been in causal contact. distance and conformal time. The universe was so tiny, it could very easily have been in a kind of equilibrium or at least a causally self-connected state. So during this tiny blink of an eye, the universe grew exponentially quickly and then mapped onto the standard Big Bang evolution. And that alone is enough to address the flatness and horizon problems. It turns out it does more than that as well. That Higgs-like field that was driving inflation, that was very slowly evolving in its potential should've been subject to the uncertainty principle just like all matters should be. first papers on inflation. By 1982, '83, pretty early on, people realized that not only would you have a gross feature of the evolution of those exotic particle physics-like fields. They should also have quantum wiggles because how could they not because they should be subject to the uncertainty principle. These are quantum fields evolving in a dynamical spacetime. But you can actually take into account that frictional damping, the stretching of space, and the reaction of that jittering trampoline. moment, that field would be subject to slight, slight quantum fluctuations in the distribution of energy across space. That starts to yield this tiny little fluctuation in why there's slightly more matter and energy in this region of space than the other one. So now those very tiny quantum scale fluctuations get stretched as the whole universe stretches. As the scale factor grows exponentially, you have the average length between the distance between crests of those tiny wiggles get stretched to galactic and even super galactic scales all within that blink of an eye. higher energy photons in the CMB and slightly lower energy photons. The regions of the sky from which these photons were emitted are telling us about the very, very tiny unevenness in the distribution of matter and energy. There's a tiny, tiny little excess gravitational potential. So the photons we receive today had to spend less energy gravitationally to overcome that. They should have slightly more energy on average today than the average. We should receive it today as being a little less energy than average, very slightly less. ground based measurements as well. And each of these came out 10 years apart with an increase of about a factor of 30 in the angular resolution of the sky. They were the first ones to measure these tiny, tiny fluctuations on the order of about one part in 100,000 but over huge scales. It was like they had very poor eyeglasses. The first of these released their data in September 1992. I was a senior that year. And the [INAUDIBLE] team led actually in part by our own Rai Weiss. solid green line is the generic prediction from the simplest models of inflation, what's the pattern of bumps and wiggles on the sky you should see today. The red dots are the actual observations from Planck team. And in many cases, the error bars are expanded so we can see them with our naked eye. So now not only do we know do we live in a universe that is indistinguishable from flat as inflation suggests we should, but the actual pattern of those wiggled matches predictions to, again, better than a percent level accuracy. should be slightly more or less energetic depending on the quantum fluctuations of that Higgs-like field. There should be primordial gravitational waves as well. This is now much like the waves that Rai and his huge team found locally from the collision of, say, black holes. Inflation says similar kinds of things should've been happening in the earliest moments everywhere in space through this very violent, rapid stretching of space. So a version of these were found by the LIGO collaboration and announced early in 2016. These are not primordial. While atoms are forming, gravity waves would be rippling through them. That should yield a characteristic twisting or curl pattern of polarization in that cosmic microwave background radiation. In March of 2014, a team using the BICEP satellite at the South Pole announced they had actually measured exactly that corkscrew pattern. Unfortunately, pretty soon after that, it turned out the BiceP team had measured data consistent with local noise. This is from their now famous or infamous paper. We had a celebration here at MIT. Many of my friends on the BICEP team managed to find out the Milky Way galaxy is dusty, which we knew. So basically, the signal they had hoped to measure was actually swamped by foregrounds they had not yet been able to control. And this was found by a number of very sophisticated analyzes soon afterwards. So it remains an open question to this day whether these primordial curling, twisting patterns really can be detected. Maybe there's such small magnitude, it'll evade our detection. We don't know. makes specific predictions for what we should see on the sky today, including very minute statistical predictions for things like the cosmic microwave background radiation. The simplest models fit to unbelievable accuracy despite what my mean dormmates used to say in the mid '90s. So why is the universe lumpy? Why is this cascade of scales? Because space time is wiggly, and matter is jiggly. Now, there's an alternate hypothesis, my final set of slides. I mentioned this last time. And I just want to make it clear. why the universe is so messy is actually because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales. So if you want to study that part of today's lecture, it's probably the most important lesson, you'll ever take away. And I'll be glad to stay a bit longer if people have questions. Again, I'm sorry for running late. Feel free to drop off if you need. Any questions on that? The photos in Alan's office are on Canvas.