In order to make proteins like hemoglobin and antibodies-- these are made up of amino acids-- we need large entities. And so the things that will feature today are the transfer RNAs and the ribosome. And I want you to look at the size of this molecular machine. This is we're getting pretty large now. We're needing to use large machines to make the smaller catalysts that are essential to making proteins and other molecules that we use every day. And we are going here now from the smallest carbon atom. The ribosome organelle is a large entity in the cell. And, when you do look at electron micrographs of cells, you can see these dark dots, which represent ribosomes. They're big enough to see, whereas the proteins themselves are not. So that's what you're destined for today. The structure of the mature messenger RNA just for a minute because, in the last class, we talked about a lot of manipulations of that pre-messenger RNA. And now I just want to remind you that the messenger RNA is the fresh thing out of transcription. messenger is single-stranded RNA, obviously. It has a 5 prime cap, which has got this funky 5 prime, 5 prime bridge that's resistant to exonucleases. Somewhere in that sequence is a start codon. It's something that says this is the bit I want to translate. Often, there's a lot of stuff here that you don't translate. And there are many features in this part of the sequence that are very important for translation. They contribute to the efficiency of translation. time to stop and finish translating. The other end the message has a poly-adenine tail. Remember that, once again, is structural to protect the ends of that transcript. Even if some of the hundreds of adenine nucleotides are nibbled off, you don't get into the part of the gene that's critical to be translated. At a certain stage, though, you might get in. And they may end up chewing up your transcript, but that probably suggests that the messenger has been around too long, and it's time for it to retire to a better life. There are a couple of other amino acids that might be designated as the so-called 21st, 22nd amino acid. We have selenocysteine in just very, very few proteins. There are other organisms, for example, in archaea, these guys who hang out in bubbling hot pots in Yellowstone. This is the ones you really need to think about are the ones we're encoding in the global genetic code. It's something beyond the list of 20 that you saw. ones that are common to everybody, all right? So, obviously, when you look at the language of bases, one base-- if the language translated directly one base to one amino acid, we could only encode for amino acids. So it's finally deduced that three bases encoded each amino acid. That would give us 64 possible words in the language that needs to be translated. That's a lot more than we need. We only need 20 for the encoded amino acids, so 64 possibilities. We need a few more things anyway. Once the structure of double-stranded DNA was deduced, everyone was moving on to trying to understand how that converted to the translation to proteins. Crick and Brenner realized it was three bases to code for one amino acid, but Khorana, Nirenberg, and Holley defined that genetic code and got all of the details. So that's the work thatKhorana and others did. And that was awarded them a Nobel Prize for that work. And then, later on, things started to get-- you know, these are decades of work I want to point out to you. decade later, the sort of details of the structure, but not the structure itself. And it was really exciting in the 2000s when Ramakrishnan, Steitz, and Yonath solved the structure of the prokaryotic ribosome. So each of these things has taken a decade to happen, but they are fundamental, major, important things that we can act on and move forward to understand more. All right, so let's move to the transfer RNAs. And I've flashed up this slide a couple of times, but I actually now have the movie of theructure of a transfer RNA. The ribosome is a large structure, but don't mistake it for being something that's just sort of amino acid and anticodon. One of the loops has a special name. It comprises three nucleotides that are complementary to the nucleotide in your messenger sequence. So this really is a decoder because, at one end, it's carrying an amino acid, but it'scarrying the amino acid that corresponds to the code that's in the messenger via that anticodon loop. A lot goes on with the rest of the structure. It's a very important structure in the mechanisms of protein translation and synthesis. And, coming down to the anticodon loop, you're going to read the messenger 5 prime to 3 prime. And so, if you look up here at the acceptor stem, the amino acid is joined by an ester bond to the 3 prime end of the transfer RNA, but, hopefully, you can see in here. There's the carboxyl. And CHR designates the aminoacid where R would be the side chain of your amino acid. the symbol for it that you've picked out. And it's a base known as pseudouridine. It turns out that these unusual bases show up in RNA sequences. Pseudouridine has an interesting structure where the bond to the ribose ring is not a carbon-nitrogen bond, but, rather, a Carbon-carbon bond. So, in RNA, there's some of these other unusual bases. And pseudouridine is the most common of the unusual ones. It can still hydrogen bond. But it tends to show up. in these sort of different loops and turn-type places. We're starting to understand the tRNAs. What we need to move on to now is really taking a look at the genetic code. This is the absolute-- the sort of Rosetta Stone for translating messenger RNA to amino acid sequence using codons. So this sort of-- whoa. Getting a little-- I love translation. I'm getting a little bit excited about translation. OK, so there are a few features of this genetic code that are very important. Number one, you won't have to remember it. is how we designate the triplet of nucleotides. So the way you read this table is you read the first letter. And then, within each block, there are the four alternatives for the other four bases. So you can read, for each amino acid, what three-letter codon would correspond to it. Some people quite like this other rendition where the first of the three letters is in the center. So it's either G, U, A, or C. Then the second one comes out. It's in the brown circle. well get used to that particular table. Now there's a couple of characteristics in the table. The first thing to notice is that, within that table, there is a codon to start. And it's AUG. And the one thing that's sort of sent to drive you crazy is that AUG codon equals start, but it also equals methionine. Methionine is fairly rare. There may only be one or two more in the protein. And I hate the illogic of that, but, nevertheless, it is the case. stop codons. The stop codons tend to be used variously. Some are more predominant in some organisms than other. And some of them respond differently when the process of stopping occurs. The next important thing to notice about the genetic code is that it's what's called degenerate. What this means is there are all, for several amino acids, more than one codon that specify it. It's at its most extreme with residues such as leucine where there are six codons that specify leucines. The genetic code is the code that's going to be embedded within the messenger RNA. When you're looking to read what your amino acids that get put in may be, you're going to look at the codon. And it will tell you exactly the amino acid. So, whenever you see a particular three-letter code on the messenger, you will then be able to know what amino acid it would code. The codon and the anticodon are antiparallel. And so what I want to do is, basically, you would be reading from the 5 prime to the 3 prime end. cartoon form. And, to attach an amino acid to the 3 prime end of the transfer RNA, you have an amino Acid residue. And what we do is we need adenosine triphosphate to activate this chemistry. And then the OH at the 3prime end reacts with the amino acid. So you attach through an ester to the amino Acid from the 3Prime end of these transfer RNA. That's what's done. The ATP makes this chemistry feasible, but there's one more player here. synthetases for different amino acids that show you that there's a recognition not just for the amino acid that's being loaded, but, rather, for the entire transfer RNA. So some of these look quite different. The isoleucine one interacts in one way. The valine one is a little different. And the glutamine one is different again. So they vary in the way they interact with the transfer RNAs. That's how you get the specificity. Does that address your question from earlier? Hello? small and large subunits. And I've shown them there in two different colors. The prokaryotic ribosomes are pretty different from the eukaryotic ones. The small subunit would have a 30S sedimentation coefficient. It's how fast its sediments in an ultra centrifuge. And the large subunit, the 50S, correspond to a certain number of daltons. And, when you start to bring all the pieces together, what we can see on this slide is the messenger, the transfer. RNAs, and the ribosomal all to scale in such a way that it can really explain it. So what I show you here is the small and large subunit. In orange-- well, that's kind of a burnt orange-- is a sneaky little bit of the messenger. In yellow are the transfer RNAs. And there's one more unit on here that I won't describe too much. It's a protein factor that helps all the processes occur. Generally, it's thought to help the loaded tRNA come to theribosome, get it in place, and then go away. Methionine is the first amino acid. And it's always at the N-terminus. Then there's another amino acid comes in. And then the next thing that happens is there's a movement such that a new bond gets. formed between the methionine and the phenylalanine. And that new bond is an amide bond. It's not any of the others. So you're literally intercepting this complex on the transfer RNA with the amine of a new amino acid, and that's how that comes together. amino acid to come in, and translation finishes and releases the protein in its complete form. Now the reason I want to differentiate between the release factor and an RNA that has the complementary stop codon is because the RNAs that are known as the suppressor RNAs have now been completely hijacked to make an enhanced genetic code. This occurs at about a rate of 20 amino acids per second, meaning you're reading about 60 bases per second. That's far faster than the rate of replication. a protein, you will see that ribosomes line up on the messenger RNA. And you'll have many proteins being made at once and at different stages in the game. So, when proteins are made on the ribosome, they have a bit of a choice. They can get made and fold beautifully into active proteins. Occasionally, proteins misfold. Maybe the rate of synthesis is too fast, or the environment isn't right. So there will need to be mechanisms whereby proteins get degraded if they're not folded properly. Proteins are starting to fold almost immediately from that N-terminus to, ultimately, attain their compact shape. The editing at that stage, by the way, to fix errors is editing when you've loaded the wrong amino acid onto a tRNA. When we have here-- and, on all these slides, I'm going to show you the double-stranded DNA. And they're all lined up so you can follow them really nicely, always always, always. But that's the story for another day. writing 5 prime to 3 prime, except when we have double-stranded because we have to put the bottom strand in a different order. So this would be a situation where you have a wild-type enzyme. Everything is transcribed and translated properly. Occasionally, though, there are errors that will introduce defects into the ultimate protein. The first type of error is a nonsense mutation, which might be leaving out a base pair, inserting one, substituting one. And this would, ultimately, cause An error in the DNA that causes an error in messenger RNA. A frame-shift mutation introduces a nonsense mutation and puts a stop codon into your RNA. The next types of mistakes are what are called silent mutations. It doesn't matter, for example, if you made an error. in DNA, which ended up with anerror in the messenger RNA, if. you still code the same amino acid, right? I go to the genetic code. I'm like, oh, oh. Mutations that cause errors in DNA that result in errors in proteins that may cause genetically inherited diseases. Here it's a missense mutation where we've got an error in the DNA. And then the last one I want to show you is a non-conservative mutation that causes a serious defect. And this takes you back to the beginning of the class. And I just want to remind you of the situation in hemoglobin when we've changed a glycine to an arginine. And that's a big change. we had a missense mutation, and we incorporated a valine instead of a glutamic acid, just through one change in the DNA. The missense mutations are the more serious ones because you end up with a full length protein that might have a mistake in it. And then that would affect the function. Am I being clear enough to everyone? Yeah? Good. OK, I am going to tell you that I'm handing over the baton to my colleague, Professor Martin. He'll take over on Monday. He's pretty excited about genetics. "I think this field is fascinating. Once you get used to the mechanics of it, it's really cool to think of how you go from DNA to RNA to folded proteins," he says. "Don't forget my office hours on Monday if you need them," he adds. "I'll be in the lab all day, every day, if you want to talk to me about it." "I've got a lot of questions for you," she says, "but I'll be happy to answer them."