RAFAEL JARAMILLO: All right, let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. So I want you to recall intermediate phase in a three-phase system. And I'm going to recall it visually, and we're going to remember what the free-energy composition diagram looked like in such a case. And it looked-- let's say an alpha phase and the beta phase. We had some intermediate phase. So the common tangents are to look like this with a common tangency there. In this case, n is fixed. It doesn't vary in nature. So this is a little bit more like a molecule than a solution. How does that look on the free-energy composition diagram? Let's see. I used blue, green, and maroon, I guess. But now let's say that-- here's n. That's that composition. And this solution model is going to look like this. What I drew is something that's really narrow. So there's a minimum to this curve. But as soon as we deviate from that composition a little to the right or a little left, we have to pay a huge energy cost. solution model becomes very narrowly shaped, like a pin. All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point. That point is x of B equals n. That's that one composition that we find in nature. So I no longer need a solution model. All I need is that one point, thatOne point, is one free energy point and one composition. OK. So here, I can't help myself. I got to draw the mouse-face plot. The magnesium nickel system has a number of different phases. At high temperature, this Laves compound develops some width. It can be made as a solid solution with a very, very narrow range of solid solubility. But when it's made into a line compound, it actually broadens. And this line compound down here, it also broadens at high temperature. So it's a mouse-face plot. But the point here is that these whiskers are all the common tangents kind of coming together at one point. You don't reach this hexagonal magnesium 2 nickel phase just by individually substituting our atoms from the HTP magnesium phase. And they're really fundamentally different structure. These Laves phases are of interest for people that study magnetism because they have these triangular sheets which are interesting for spin liquids and spin ices-- and then this FCC nickel. But this is the point I want to make here is that these are very distinct structures, and they're only occurring at very distinct compositions. That's a hallmark of an intermediate phase. like this. Magnesium nickel-- actually, magnesium nickel system, right? So, for instance, at some low. temperature, we have here this is going to be x nickel. And my taut rope construction, or my common tangent construction, ends up being just a series of straight lines. This is magnesium nickel 2 nickel. All right. So now let's talk about the size of these vertical segments. And it's often written as delta form. It is the free energy change for formation of 1 mole. of compound from the elements in their reference states. So, for example, I might have 2 moles of magnesium in. its alpha phase plus alpha-- let's say HTP-- plus a mole of nickel in its alpha. FCC phase. And these can react to form magnesium 2 nickel. This formation energy is per mole of compound. When we draw free energy composition diagrams, we assume 1 mole total of the components. So there's a normalization that you need to apply in order to use formation free energies. Modeling we have a model for how the free energy changes when you combine a total fixed amount of atoms in different composition ratios. This measure is 1/3 times delta form magnesium 2 nickel. So that is kind of a a solution. But this is different in the formation energy, right? This is a delta formation free energy on a free energy composition plot. So 2/3 a mole of magnesium, 1/2 of nickel combined to form this magnesium 2 Nickel 1 phase. That green arrow is the change of free energy. algebraically-simple point, but it's a conceptual point that it's easy to mess up. So you have to apply that normalization if you need to draw such plots. All right, I want to give you some examples of line compounds in nature and in technology. And then we'll come back to discuss the thermodynamics a little more. Before I move on to some examples, are there questions about this algebra, this arithmetic, the concept of formation energy, the mouse-face plot, anything, anything of that nature? have some examples here. So you can see that you can get a fair amount of silicon into copper. That's this kind of purple region. There are silicon bronzes and silicon brasses-- that is, bronze and brass alloyed with silicon. Those are ternary systems. But silicon tends to be a pretty useful additive for copper-based alloys. I used a silicon bronze when I was in grad school and we were designing high-pressure cells that needed to be actuated at low temperature, below 1 Kelvin. agencies around the world have developed in the last century. There's no real lubricant that you can use. And so there are certain silicon-based bronzes that have been developed for that application. And I didn't know anything about all that, really, when I was in grad school. But I needed something that would work for my high-pressure experiments. So we ended up with that. So let's see. There're a couple of other solid solution phases. But how many line compounds are there? Trick question. That's why it's a trick question. Silicon's not an intermediate phase, but it is a line compound. The solid silicon phase appears to have no equilibrium solubility of copper. In reality, you always have some finite solubilities of a solute in a solvent. So in the case of silicon, the solubilty of metals is very, very low. The solubileil limit is typically parts per billion. But in principle, there is a purple region extending along this y-axis of solubiliy of copper into silicon. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over Zoom. Doping some metals into silicon is as important as it gets. The solubility limits can be in the parts per billion. But they're rarely above parts perbillion. There's always a solution to doping semiconductor devices, says Dr. Richard Branson, founder of Branson Semiconductors, a company that specialises in semiconducting materials. The company's products include the gallium arsenide line compound and gallium arsenic system. gallium arsenide. Where silicon isn't fast enough are the transmitters and receivers of your phones, gigahertz RF networks. Another place you're going to find it is anywhere you need light. And so gallium arsenicide and alloys, thereof-- which we don't show here-- are the basis for all optoelectronics and photonic technology. So right now, we're Zooming. But likely, some part of the data between me and you is carried by fiber optic. arsenide and similar-material-based chips doing the work. Silicon carbide is a refractory-- some people will say it's a ceramic. Some people say no because it doesn't contain oxygen. It's used for grinding, so it's of enormous industrial importance. It also is an emerging semiconductor material for high-power electronics. The idea that you could replace those discrete elements with integrated circuitry-- saving power, saving money, saving weight and so forth-- that is the future. field of power electronics. And the thing is, you can't do it with silicon because silicon doesn't perform well at very, very high voltages. So in 50 years from now, if the idea of a power substation is a thing of the past, it will be due to silicon carbide and similar high-power electronics that are being developed today. And this last one, this is a big old mess. This is the titanium-sulfur system. It has this totally wacky kind of mismatch between two elements that are nothing alike. third of the Nobel Prize work that was recognized recently in 2019 with the chemistry Nobel Prize was for work on titanium-sulfide-based cathode. It's a layered material, so you can shove a lot of lithium in it. So these are-- for example, systems that have line compounds and other things. Do we have any questions on reading these, interpreting these, using these? AUDIENCE: Yeah, I have a quick question. So on the bottom left one and the top right one, do they both contain three line compounds? doesn't have to be that way. Here's a case of a line and an element that actually does have a pretty wide, solid solution, great range. At low temperature-- actually, similarly to gallium arsenide at low temperature, it's going to be a really boring free-energy composition diagram. Let's draw what that looks like. And let's say this is 50/50. All I need is a number to represent the free- energy change on forming silicon carbide. I just need that point. carbon from carbon doesn't take any energy to form. Silicon from silicon doesn't takes any energy. No solution models anywhere needed because nature doesn't form solutions. And here is my free-energy composition diagram. It is just a triangle. So it's simplified. It's simplified a lot. Any other questions on the meaning or importance of this stuff? I'll go back to this slide quickly. And then if there are no more questions, I'll finish up on the board. I suppose that because silicone is not a compound, the right answer probably was that there are three line compounds. But there are 1, 2, 3, 4 if you take pure phrases in the system. the free-energy composition diagram. That's what I meant to say. OK, then we move back to the board. I'll just make a couple of conceptual points and then we'll finish up. Comparing solutions at equilibrium to line compounds at equilibrium. So this is going to be two solutions. Let's imagine an alpha phase and a liquid phase. And I'm going to draw just a representative phase diagram just to have something in mind. So here's alpha. It is liquid. Here's x. we have these composition variables. We're familiar with that. The equilibrium condition, the equilibrium condition dG equals 0 satisfied by common tangents. Now let's imagine two line compounds. B3A2 and B4A3. How did I come up with that? Well, I sketched an imaginary phase diagram, and then I had to follow through on my sketch. And that means I had a congruent melter. And then I drew as this and then like this, peritectic, and something like this. I had this complicated thing which I do. low temperature where I have two line compounds coexisting. There are no internal composition variables. Before, we had composition variables because the composition of the phases was variable. Now, we don't have that. What that means is that the equilibrium condition dG equals 0 is satisfied trivially, trivially. There's no need to do common tangents. The compositions aren't changing. I can write out the total Gibbs free energy. It's going to be determined just by the phase fractions, phase fraction of the II-III phase. 1/7 of the Gibbs free energy of the IV-III phase. And these phase factions are determined by lever law. This is really the point. When you have line compounds in coexistence in equilibrium, there are no internal composition variables. Whereas when you have solution phases in equilibrium,. the internal compositions are variable. And that's what's led to everything we've been enjoying over the last month and a half. And now we have these cases where the compositions are not there [INAUDIBLE] anymore. Z is determined by charge balance. Oxygen is always O2 minus in compounds. Metals have various oxidation states. Some metals have more than one oxidation state. Z is in its reference state. That could be solid, liquid, or even gas-- although, we don't really encounter that so often. Oxidation of metals at low temperature, the metals are solid unless it's gallium or mercury. Oxides are line compounds. That z is not a variable. That's what that's supposed to mean. z is an integer or a rational fraction, and it's fixed-- SiO2, magnesium oxide, Al2O3, so forth. So when we return on Wednesday, we're going to talk about the thermodynamics of this reaction. We'll use this property of being line compounds, and we're also going to use a bunch of other things as well. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnopin.