In this video we're going to be going over our weekly inlex practice question. Let's see what our question says a patient who has a health history of uncontrolled hypertension coronary artery disease and diabetes militis is prescribed to take propanolol. If you have provided the patient with education about this new medication which statement by the patient indicates your teaching was effective. If I miss a dose it is important that I double the next dose to prevent potential side effects. I will immediately stop taking this medication if I experience cold hands or feet. correct so before we do that let's analyze this scenario now as you read the scenario some things should be jumping out at you for instance the patient's health history and they have a history of uncontrolled hypertension which is high blood pressure they also have coronary artery disease and diabetes malius. Now let's talk about that drug propanolol that's what they're prescribed now let's think back to pharmacology this is the generic name of the drug generic names tend to have the same letters for the ending and and the ending for this is ool these are our beta blockers. beta blocker you have to watch out for some certain things that can happen Okay so what do beta blockers do in a nutshell beta blockers block your sympathetic nervous nous system. Whenever you take this drug it acts on those neurotransmitters specifically norepinephrine and epinephrine so those will be blocked and in the heart. What will happen is that you will get a slower heart rate instead of that tacac cardia now think about diabetes malius whenever these patients have hypoglycemia their heart rate goes up.  Beta receptors do they increase a process called glycogenolysis what it means is that whenever a patient has hypoglycemia the body tries to correct that. If they're taking a beta blocker that is blocking that response they're not going to have that classic Tac of cardia so they may later on their sugar will drop so much and it may be too late before they can treat it. Now Beta two receptors where are these mainly located they are located in various places number one your lungs you have two lungs that's how I remember beta 2. increase that blood sugar naturally with that process so you have this double-edged sword you have where they're not going to be able to notice their blood glucose because they don't have that tack of cardia going on and they don’t have that process of increasing that blood glucose naturally themselves. The patient wouldn't want to take their beta blockers with grapefruit juice. They need to take medic this type of medication or various medications with great fruit juice cuz grapefruit Juice contains chemicals that can slow the absorption of the medication. to be educated to actually avoid that and to take it strictly with water so this is wrong option b says if I miss a dose it is important that I double the next dose to prevent potential side effects. If a patient misses a dose of their beta blockers they don't need to double the dose they need toTake it as soon as they remember unless that next dose is due. These medications as we talked about with the beta blockers um they decrease your heart rate they do a lot of things to your heart and if you're taking double the doses they are at high risk of a cardiac event. look and see why D is wrong this patient says that they're going to stop their beta blocker immediately if they experience cold hands and feet well this is a normal side effect with these non-selective beta blockers. You would never just immediately stop taking a beta blocker they need to be tapered off of this because if they just all of a sudden quit taking that medication they can go have cardiac death or something worse can happen so that answer is wrong for that reason okay so that wraps up this inlex practice question.