The CDF of x is the probability that X is less than or equal to little x. We use the standard formula, which is minus infinity to infinity t times fx of t dt. The integral of u to the a t is 1 over a times e to the t. The derivative is what's going to go in that integral. The CDF is evaluated from 0 to infinity, but then you take the limit as x goes to x. It's not going to going even if you try all kinds of u substitution. infinity. So that's going to help us here. And this negative-- these negatives cancel. And we're left with negative x minus lambda x plus the integral of this. All right, so now the limit. So for the limit, notice that x increases as x goes to infinity, and this exponential decays. But the exponential is going to win because it decays way faster than x. And so this first term isgoing to go off-- the limit is goingto go to 0. the same set of steps from before. For x squared, it's just going to be t squared. The only thing that's going to change is what we choose for u here, for the u substitution. So the derivative is going to changed to 2t dt. And so here in this term, we get negative 2t e to the minus Lambda t. But there's a negative sign out here, so the negatives cancel and we're left with a positive sign here. the limit as x goes to infinity-- the exponential will beat x squared. No matter what polynomial we put in there, the exponential's going to win. We're given that x1, x2, and x3 are independent and identically distributed. They're exponentials with rate Lambda. We are asked for the PDF of z, which is the max of x1,. We take the CDF and then take the derivative, right? And so we have 1 over Lambda squared for the variance. of structure as before. If z is less than 0, x1, x2, x3 are positive-- non-negative. And so this is the probability that if you get little z less than0, you're not going to have any probability there. And if z is greater than or equal to 0 is where it gets interesting. We need to do something special. So the special thing here is to recognize that the probability of the max being less than orequal to z is actually also the probability. of each of these random variables individually being more than or less than z. events are equivalent and this is true. By independence we can break this up. And we get-- these are all CDFs of the exponential and they all have this form. Plug this in here. And then, try to take the derivative to get the PDF. Let's see. So it's going to be the same, like this for z less than 0. For z greater than or equal to 0, the derivative of this thing is by chain rule, 3 times 1 minus e to the minus lambda z squared. that the min-- if the min of x1 and x2 is less than or equal to w, that each of them isLess than orequal to w? No, right? X1 could be less than and equal to. And x2 could be bigger than w. So that's definitely not true. So what do we do here? The trick is to flip it and say we want to compute the min being greater than. w. In that case, let's check if we can do this trick. So it's going to be-- Notice the similarity between this and this. The only difference is this has a 2 lambda in there. That means that w is an exponential random variable with rate 2 Lambda. You can also take the derivative of this and find that you get this. OK, so we're done with the problems. We computed some interesting quantities for the exponentialRandom variable in this. So then the PDF isgoing to be an exponential, whatever it is for an exponential.