Protein three-dimensional structure and its implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. The ABCs -- the alpha helix, the beta sheet, and the coil -- can be characterized by the hydrogen bonds that hold it together. How can we use these to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acids? We will in short order get to the scary pumpkin-like molecule. It's a catch-all phrase that includes everything except alpha and beta, but a particularly well-formed type of coil has its own nomenclature. The binding constant is measured in the molarity, roughly where you get half maximal or equilibrium binding. This is not going to be by staring at long sequence alignments where we're going to get the weight matrices. We can get them by actual experimental measures of the binding in vitro. Then I'll show you a little math how we got those apparent binding constants, which means you can get the binding constant at a lower concentration. Instead of being a single stranded nucleic acid, it's ready to bind to double stranded. It's not the only way, but this is a way. sequence that you're interested in is present. And what you do is quantitate the fluorescence of the zinc finger protein indirectly by the binding of the covalently-attached phage to the antibodies, which are fluorescently labeled by [INAUDIBLE] fluorescence. But how you relate that to the binding constant we had in the previous slide is the subject of this slide number eight. Now we call this the apparent equilibrium association constant because these experiments, just like many binding in living cells is not at equilibrium. that the helix that causes the dimerization of proteins-- you can think of this as your really most elementary protein-protein interaction code. A very fundamental one that comes again and again, so-called coil-coil, two alpha helices interacting. Can we extend this to RNA? This is a much more complicated situation with RNA because you don't have these long perfect double helices anymore. You have these very short RNA helices that I I think I can predict new regulatory protein DNA interactions with double-stranded DNA. showed in the last couple of classes. This is transfer RNA, one of our favorite molecules here, with the anticodon at the bottom of each of the pink structures. And the amino acid acceptor three prime end of that 70-some nucleotide-- 70 to 80 nucleotide nucleic acid. So the pinks are all the tRNAs, and there are at least 20 different types of amino acid and has 20 types of-- at least20 types of transfer RNAs. The topic today is proteins, and this really is the main contact between the exquisite regulatory mechanisms. Here, we need sensors to sense the environment. We need actuators to then deliver back into the environment what the cell wants to do or to interact with other cells. You have to have feedback, synchrony, so on that you can basically program the almost digital nucleic acid world inside the cell but via clearly analog inputs and outputs. We also-- I've listed some of the scariest proteins that I could think of. And we're going to talk about three of them. of the constant for that process is around 50 nucleotides per second. These are important numbers, because a typical gene size piece, say, after RNA splicing in higher organisms or naturally, it might be a kilobase. So that's about a half a minute to transcribe and translate. That could be used as a timer in a circuit of these longer time frames, like cell cycle, circadian rhythm, very long time frames in ecological systems with bamboo and various pests, and then development and aging. your accuracy, as you can get from NMR and X-ray crystallography, you now are in a position to study catalytic mechanism and design and improve ligands, such as drugs. This is really where we want to be. There may be a day where we can do this all from ab initio prediction or modeling at very great distances. But for now, modeling atvery short, say, 80% to 90% amino acid similarity, is important. We will contrast this, or show the interplay of the computational biology, that can be aided by actual measurements of drug binding. The AIDS virus changes. the wild type, the position in amino acids from the end terminus is the number, and then the third-- or the last far right letter is the new amino acids. And for example, D67N means a [? sparcade ?] at position 67 and wild type changes to an asparagine. And that causes a drug resistance in the HIV, with unfortunate consequences for the patient. We can take-- now, making mutations in polymerases is not entirely of negative consequences. There are ways that you can program, and conditional, meaning you can regulate under what conditions the protein is expressed or not or active or not with an entire domain, or with single nucleotide polymorphisms. Another way is by modulating the activity of the proteins from the outside with drugs or drug-like molecules and chemical kinetics. And under the subheadings for that, you can make these by combinatorial synthesis, which can be based on design principles, not just completely random. It can take into account what you know about the nature of the interaction of similar proteins. that we didn't discuss before. But it's related to what we've been talking about. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. With the DNA polymerase, by changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better an inhibitor. And here, many different-- many of these are enzymes, where you can not just knock out the enzyme, but actually make it recognize a new substrate. think of these things in terms of proteins. You can have-- a disulfide is a very important thing to lose. They tend to be highly conserved. If you introduce a proline into what would normally be an alpha helix, this is something where knowledge of the three-dimensional structure would say, oh, that proline, this a priori, without any knowledge of conservation, could be a huge change. And then these multi-sequence profiles are a good way of looking at the conservation. That's a way of prioritizing single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Solid phase comes up again and again in arrays. It's very obvious why you have a solid phase. You want to be able to address it by its positions in x and y on the array. But the other reason-- technical reasons are, it's a fantastic way of getting purification of your products simply by washing. And it allows you to, in the case of beads, there now-- you can think of it as an ultimate and flexible array. You can move the beads around and put them in new arrays, and identify them later. This is a completely synthetic way of getting short peptides. You can think of these as drug-like molecules. These are naturally related-- they can be analogs of nucleic acids and proteins, not just straight ones. And we'll talk about opportunities for making these analogs. We'll talk more about protein synthesis as part of quantitation next time, and aspart of networks in the last three lectures. And the process is cyclic in the sense that each cycle, you return, and the polymer gets a little bit longer. capping step that can soak up any excess that was left over. After you're done with all of these cycles, then there'll be a step where you remove the protecting groups altogether and remove the polymer from the solid phase if you so choose. Or you leave it there, if you have an array. These are other examples of protecting groups. Some bases don't need protection, like thiamines. If you have a exocyclic amine, then you typically need a benzyl or an isobutyryl group. which you can make small molecule diversity which are less cyclic than processes we just talked about. These are more a set of ordered reactions that has a conceptual repeat, but in a sense, you can think of it as a linear program. And that's to make these polyketides, which are shown on the right-hand side of the slide. A large class of pharmaceuticals, including most of the antibiotics, are made by a fairly small set of organisms, such as streptomyces in certain plants. In next class, we'll talk about ways of getting direct information on protein through cross-linking and mass spectrometry. Another way is indirectly setting up these reporter assays, where you take advantage of the binding properties of known proteins to analyze two unknown proteins. This is a source of information, which is intrinsically computational in the sense that there's a large amount of it. And typically we want to select targets for solving the structures of proteins in order to look at their ligands in more detail.