This is part 2 of a guide to clinical reasoning or how to create an accurate differential diagnosis from a patient's presentation. The patient is a 75 year old woman presenting with epigastric pain for four hours. She was in her usual state of health until four hours prior to presentation at which time she developed the onset of abdominal pain. The pain is relatively well localized to the midline in the region between her humble ankus and xiphoid process. There did not seem to be any particular trigger and the duration from initial to final pain was relatively short. onset to its maximal intensity of 8 out of 10 was about 45 minutes the pain is constant does not radiate is not exacerbated by anything including nor alleviated by anything she had moderate nausea it has refused to attempt to eat or drink anything since the pains onset because she is concerned that it will concert a vomit which she has not yet done. She denies changes in her bowel habits shortness of breath chest pain changes her skin or eye color her past medical history is notable for hypertension and diabetes she has had no surgeries. exam reveals normal oral pharynx but poor dentition her neck is supple without breweries and without lymph adenopathy her chest is clear to percussion and auscultation bilaterally her cardiac exam has a regular tachycardia hypertension her jbp is undetectable at either 45 degrees or when she's completely sipping on abdominal exam she has non distended and there are no scars. bowel sounds are unusually quiet but present rectal exam with normal tone no tenderness and minimal guaiac negative brown stool musculoskeletal exam revealed full range of motion in all joints without bony abnormalities. The problem representation is a one to two-sentence summary using precise medical terminology of the most highly relevant aspects of the patient's history exam and diagnostic tests. The primary symptom using semantic qualifiers might sound something like acute constant epigastric pain. The soft abdomen and lack of rebound would be grouped into the collective descriptor of absent peritoneal signs. The elevated lipase would also be included in the summary of the highly relevant diagnostic data. The organization of a particular framework may just appeal more to some people than others in general when the primary problem is some form of abdominal pain most people most people will have pain. The epigastrium would obviously be the most critical anatomic region to include organs that lie directly underneath it. The major structures are of course the liver and gallbladder along with other components of the extra hepatic biliary system. The spleen can cause pain with either a splenic infarct or splenic abscess. The chest referred pain to the upper abdomen from intrathoracic diseases is a common phenomenon organs in the chest to consider include the esophagus and the heart. and what that impact was that is obviously very tedious and time-consuming an expert clinician would probably start with the key features focusing on the ones that were either most prominent most unusual or those which clearly clustered together. Then thinking about which specific diagnoses were impacted by those features for the purposes of demonstration I'm going to take an approach here somewhere in between by going through each diagnosis one at a time but only mentioning those key features would seem particularly relevant so first up is gastritis the patient has some risk factors for gastritis with our alcohol use in smoking so these increase the probability of this diagnosis also gastritis can be associated with nausea. any key features which have not yet been incorporated into the framework that is are there any key features that don't seem to impact the likelihood of any of the diagnosis in the framework in this case there are essentially three. The first is the normal troponin and CK so why was this piece of information not incorporated into our framework discussion it's because they were actually miss identified as key features. The second unused key feature is the guaiac negative stool this key feature was critical in establishing the problem representation in step three. element does not fit into the framework yet still seems to be a key feature the framework must be incomplete in this case I would add another category of diagnosis to our four existing categories. That fifth category is acute abdominal pain secondary to systemic toxic metabolic problems. The four major members of this group are heavy-metal poisoning a rare genetic disorder called acute intermittent porphyria another virgin etic disorder called familial Mediterranean fever and finally angioedema for any of these to be the final diagnosis this patient would need to have an atypical presentation of a rare disease and thus it would be a highly unlikely diagnosis. of diabetic ketoacidosis which can definitely present with acute abdominal pain and nausea in a diabetic however the normal metabolic panel which implies a normal glucose completely rules out this possibility. In my opinion the most likely diagnosis for this patient is acute pancreatitis. pancreatitis is associated with her heavy alcohol use it explains her nausea her distress the vital signs her tenderness on exam leukocytosis and is the best explanation for the elevated lipase the only key feature arguing against it is the fact that the pain is not made better or worse with changes in position. atypical presentation those diagnoses which are rapidly fatal if missed for which this could plausibly be a presentation. Finally any diagnosis that is specifically suggested by an unusual element of the presentation even if the diagnosis itself is rare common disorders which could be a typical or atypical Presentation include gastroenteritis food poisoning and either gastritis or peptic ulcer disease which I have grouped together because I think it's very difficult to tell the difference between them without endoscopy don't miss diagnosis for this presentation would include a bowel infarction and acute coronary syndrome. that will increase the likelihood of. establishing the correct diagnosis sooner in outpatient hospital course you. That will. increase the chance of establishing the right diagnosis sooner. that will increase. the likelihood that you will be seen by a doctor sooner in hospital. that you. will be more likely to be admitted to hospital for treatment. that. will increase your likelihood of being seen by doctors sooner in the hospital. and that. you will have a better chance of being treated. of being diagnosed with a condition that is more serious.