The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. We are now using the coherent states to look at any other quantum state of the electromagnetic field, any statistical operator which describes photons by forming the diagram matrix element of the statistical operator with alpha. And now we realize that coherent states are not as wonderful as I believe. In quantum mechanics, number and phase are complimentary. If the number of photons is fixed, you know nothing about the phase. The energy is sharp of a number state, since the energy is e squared. But what you get is also something blurred on the order of unity. And I want to say something about that in a second. Finally, we discuss the time dependence. And this is almost like the disclaimer now. Just to give you a bigger picture, we want to achieve with quasi-probabilities what we can achieve with phase densities. The second order coherence function for classical light, which has a classic description, is always larger than 1. But quantum mechanically, we will see that the g2 function is not necessarily larger than1. And that's actually an interesting-- you can see-- litmus test for the quantumness. And then you have a final state of your harmonic oscillator, and your zero-point fluctuations has zero squared fluctuations. So what is more closely related to an experiment is how you measure the correlation function. I'm not sure if it's right, but it's consistent. By the way, if there is a question, I sometimes make a question mark in my notes. And when I post the notes, the question marks are eliminated. So this is now drawing our attention to the single photon. And this is our next subsection. This shouldn't come unexpected. It comes from the quantization of light. And that only happens when you go down to similar photons. This is when certain fluctuations are most pronounced, because the energy is dependant on a singular photon. Vladan Vuletan: Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always a g2 function of 1. And attenuation is not changing it. So a coherent state with an expectation value of 1 photon is not a single photon. But of course, there are ways how you can get single photons. And this is, well, you start with single atoms. Namely, if you have a single atom in the excited state, it can emit only one photon. So that's a way how we can create non-classical states of light. Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment involves two photodetectors and a beam splitter. The first photon is observed by the first detector, and the second photon is detected by the second detector. In the quantum version, especially when we have a single photon, only one detector can go to this extreme case. If you put a light bulb into a cavity or couple the light from a light bulbs into a fiber, the light becomes spatially a single mode. That's the only way how you can distinguish a lightbulb from a laser beam.