Bolek Wyslouch: How do you convert a given physical system with all the forces, et cetera, into some sort of fixed form, fixed type of notation? Bolek: We will work on two, again, simple physical systems, one that consists of two pendula driven by forces of gravity, each of them. And we will discuss various interesting-- even though the system is very simple, just two masses, a spring, a little bit of gravity on top of that. For most of those problems, what you do is you simply focus on the mass in question. You take all the forces, you calculate them, and then this coupling will somehow appear in the equations. The trick in this whole mathematics, and calculations, and the way we do things is how do you solve those coupled equations? OK? So what I would like to do is-- and there is multiple ways of doing that. Let's write down everything in the matrix form, because it turns out that linear matrices are very useful for that. But hold on. OK, all kinds of complex numbers can write, but any particular-- AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: That's the physics answer, all right? Complex notation is a mathematical answer, how to solve a mathematical equation. The physics answer is to find fixed frequency modes us such that the system, the complete system, oscillates at one frequency. Everybody moves together. This is so-called normal mode. It turns out that every of the system will have a certain number of frequencies. Real-world examples of how to find the oscillating frequency of a system. The system has been built. The only variable which we have to change is the spring constant and the mass this affects is given. We need to find a parameter which sets this to 0, and then I can put the two identical terms so I can solve this equation. So this is the equation which we need to solve to obtain the solutions to at least one normal mode. We expect that there will be two normal modes, because we have two masses. is basically equivalent to the following equation g over l plus k over m minus omega squared. So there is one solution, one oscillation, that does not depend on the spring constant. And there's a second solution which corresponds to minus, where omega squared is equal to g overl plus 2k over m. And this is what we have. We now know that there are two oscillations and two normal frequencies. And the next step to finish our understanding of the system in a mathematical way, to describe it fully, I have to know the shape of oscillations. In principle, we know, now, at the end of the day, I still want to know how much 1 moves, how much 2 moves. So we have to put it all together. We have identified the frequency and the kind of, in the matrix notation, shape of the node. But of course, the final solution is a linear superposition of all possible normal modes. And then you calculate a shape of a normal mode. Is that clear? Any questions at this time? Right? The shape, 1 and 1, and 1 minus 1 is fixed, because these are the shape of normal modes, which corresponds to those frequencies. And the superposition of x1 plus x2 gives you the most general combination of possible motion. So if I write this down now in terms of position of number 1 and number 2, so I have a position of X1 as a function of time. In general, it will look like this. It will be some sort of constant alpha, cosine omega 1 t plus phi. The magenta is normal mode number 2. And blue and the red are the actual pendula. And the motion of blue and red is simply a linear sum of the two. And this is exactly what-- this is the computer simulation that shows you that one of them is going up, the other one down, et cetera. This is for the certain combination of initial conditions. I could go change initial conditions in my program and have a different behavior. But whatever happens, I would be able to-- it will always be a combination of thetwo motions. could put it with me some spaceship, and go to a place where the gravity is different, right? Why not? So what would happen? So if gravity changes, then basically what will happen is both this term and that term will change. So let's try to see what happens on the Moon. It's a little bit not completely clear what's going on, but you see, actually the motion is kind of a little strange. Look at the red one. The red one is stopping. Then it's going halfway out. It looks kind of messy, doesn't it? equations. Let's look at these equations here. This is mass 1 and mass 2. So I can rewrite those solutions a little bit different. And what you get is x1-- x1 of t is equal to minus x0 sine of omega 1 plus omega 2 divided by 2 times sine omega 1 minus omega 2 divide by t. So again, we did zero physics here. We just rewrote the simple trigonometric equations. But there is-- we have those two frequencies which are playing a role. 2 is like omega, right? 100 plus 105 divided by 2 is about 100. Whereas this one here carries information about the difference of frequencies-- 100, 102, the difference is 2, which is very small. So we have-- so this term here-- it basically oscillates at the frequency of omega. And the other term is much, much smaller. How does this look? Well, it turns out that if you make a sketch of this, if you do signs, it looks like this. Two speakers go on very, very similar frequencies, all right? So they both work at similar frequencies. And so when I switched on, you should hear-- hear the sound. So if you have two, and I can adjust the frequency, and the frequency is close, then this frequency of changing is very slow. So you can actually hear it. So this is the effect of beats. I can maybe show you another simulation of this works. Let's see what it is. OK, so this is just a single frequency. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: I don't have to go to Jupiter to modify it, because this one is just a little mass here, right? [TONE] Ah, cool. AUDIENCE: Should both of those sine and cosines have Ts in their arguments? BOLesLAW: Of course always. They are both time dependent, yeah. This is the fast thing, and this is this time-dependent modulation. All right, so where are my notes? So this is the-- this is how the-- so we were able to set up the system. simply x1 plus x2, and I define u2, which is x1 minus x2. So instead of talking about x1 and x2 independently, I have a sum of them and difference. So if I add and subtract the two original equations of motion, which I don't know if I have them somewhere, and you can look back, then you end up having those crossed terms drop out. And you have one, which has only this coefficient, the other one which has that coefficient. The determinants needed no matrices, no nothing. We just added and subtracted the two equations, and things magically separated. So you can always have a linear combination of parameters for arbitrary size coupled oscillators system where you combine different coordinates, and you basically force the system to behave in a way in which it induces the single oscillation, single frequency. So this is, again, a very powerful trick, but usually for most cases, you can do that only after you have solved it, after you've found out normal modes, et cetera.