David KAISER: Today, we're going to pick up where we were on the most recent classes. We'll look at the coalescence of what came to be called the Big Bang model. And then we'll see how cosmic inflation emerged from that particular moment to try to address some of the shortcomings while retaining some the successes. And the asterisks are to remind you there's a set of strictly optional lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. or our own Milky Way galaxy. Or if we zoom in even closer to home with the solar system or even really in human terms, there are concentrations of enormous matter and energy and activity separated by huge voids. The question is, what could account for that structure across these scales from meters or kilometers up to tens of billions of light years? It turns out that ordinary gravity-- even Newtonian gravity, let alone Einstein's fancier version that we looked at in class, general theory of relativity-- that these gravitational frameworks are sufficient. Einstein's equations describe the shape of the universe depending on the amount of matter and energy. If the universe had a uniform density of stuff per volume, it would have a positively curved surface. But if the universe was overdense, space itself would warp back onto itself. Einstein thought this was horrible, but other colleagues showed it was consistent with his own equations to have universes that would change over time, that could either expand or contract. The evidence for this began to come in the late 1920s with enormous telescopes. to collect information about not just the distribution of distant galaxies, but could also measure how rapidly they were moving with respect to us. And Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving. And the basic trend holds. There's some interesting deviations. But the idea is nonetheless evidence consistent with our universe expanding, not just having a shape to it, but actually stretching and getting larger over time. So you can actually then work backwards and say for how long has our observable universe been stretching? When did this stretching or expanding phase begin? George Lemaitre was an ordained Catholic priest. He was also an MIT trained PhD astrophysicist. He studied briefly in Cambridge, England with one of the first converge to general relativity, Arthur Eddington. Then he came to MIT to finish his PhD and then was finding many of these solutions to Einstein's field equations even before Einstein did. And it's consistent with the beginning of that expansion being not quite 14 billion years ago, billions of years ago. It's also consistent with things moving further apart from each other on average today. Georges Lemaitre wrote about what comes to be known as the Big Bang model. He was calling it a primeval atom, that there was this initial fireball from a very, very hot, dense state. After the Second World War, new groups began coming back to these somewhat old questions. They realized that if the universe was very hot and dense at early times, then the conditions in which these elementary particles would find themselves should be quite different than what we find commonly around ourselves today. At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. As the volume of space stretches, as you have an expanding universe, the average temperature of all the stuff inside it should fall. This is all work that they predict around 1948, '49, '50, Alpherov, Gamov, Herman and Alpher. It should be filling the sky in every direction, a uniform glow. In the early universe, charged particles had a mean free path to cross the dance floor. Gamov, Alpher, and Herman were putting real numbers to try to make sense of these different phases of the very early universe. Very high temperature, early dense state should be qualitatively different in its behavior than a later lower energy state. They predicted as early as 1948 that there should be this remnant glow from the Big Bang, all those photons that only then at 380,000 years after the Big bang were able to start streaming freely. 20 years later, two radial physicists working at Bell Labs, Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias, were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. They couldn't get rid of a residual hum. At one point, they climbed inside that huge horn antenna on their hands and knees to scrub out what they graciously called special dielectric materials from pigeons who had made a nest. In the early universe, there were photons that were too high energy to form stable, electrically neutral atoms. The photons are coming from every single region of space. They're like sitting in a bathtub full of these photons. And they're just losing their energy as the overall size of space continues to grow. And all that's changing is their average temperature per photon is the main idea. The average energy per photon had fallen steadily since the time when they were first released in that early dance party. Every part of space that we could see today once had been at the Big Bang, so to speak. The Big Bang happened there. It happened at x equals 0, and x equals 1, equals 2. Any place we could put spatial coordinates to on this model, those all experienced the Big bang at the same time. So this is a safe, remarkably successful set of ideas that eventually becomes called the Bigbang model. And people began to get worried about some of these features of the model for some of its successes. what we call conformal time, often labeled by the Greek letter tau, is basically a variable tick rate that is really convenient because then we can start making a dynamical changing spacetime look just like the spacetime of special relativity. In these special, very simple fine coordinates, light just travels on 45 degree diagonals. And then light comes to us at 145 degrees. That sounds very abstract. We do that all the time. This is just an example in space time of a conformal mapping of a sort that we all use every day like a Mercator projection. stretching our time coordinate so time gets more and more stretched out towards earlier times. We can take that into account. We know how to use a Mercator projection. And it makes other relationships remarkably easy. Likewise our conformal maps here make the paths of light, for example, very easy to follow. When people begin using these convenient coordinates, they also go back to some questions about or features of the Big Bang model, and they start having new questions. It's the same Robert Dicke. So he introduced this conundrum in 1969, so soon after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation. stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. If omega is larger than 1, you have more stuff for volume. You expect it's open or hyperbolic geometry. So far so good. Then Dicke plugged this quantity into Einstein's own equations. A universe should generically become more and more different from flat over time. And that seems like this very strange or unexplained fine tuning. If the universe has been stretching for 14 billion years, what set it to be so arbitrarily close to flat is an unstable equilibrium point? or even exchange a single tweet, to have absolutely no information of this part of the sky. How could they have become indistinguishable in the signals we receive today? That became known as the horizon problem. It became clear that signal really is uniform to one part in 100,000. It's remarkably uniform to a tiny fraction of a percent. That signal is uniform across every direction we look in the sky today, even though it's coming from all these regions that when that light was emitted couldn't have possibly had any physical interaction with each other. like circa 1980. He was not originally asking questions about the cosmos, but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions, again, very much like Tony Zee around the same time. What Alan was interested in was in things like spontaneous symmetry breaking and the Higgs mechanism. He realized that this kind of feature could actually lead to a cosmologically distinct kind of evolution. If you have a time even briefly during which the energy density, the amount of stuff per volume gets stuck, then the energy could remain constant. That stretch of growth in the size of space will stretch exponentially. grows very fast in time-- while the energy density remains nearly constant. Now you'd see this expression, the deviation of the universe from spatially flat. That deviation should rapidly fall to 0. The universe today should look indistinguishable from a flat universe because the difference from flatness was driven to 0 dynamically. By having even a very brief phase of exponentially rapid accelerating expansion, you drive the universe towards a flat shape rather than having it flow away from aflat shape. So the latest measurement from the Planck collaboration using a satellite is that this parameter in our actual universe today is 1. If inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. So we're adding more real estate along our time axis. We're unfurling a little bit extra time that hadn't been taken into account in the standard Big Bang model. And so the universe was so tiny, it could very easily have been in a kind of equilibrium or at least a causally self-connected state. So during this tiny blink of an eye, the universe grew exponentially. higher energy photons in the CMB and slightly lower energy photons. And the idea now is that the regions of the sky from which these photons were emitted are telling us about the very, very tiny unevenness in the distribution of matter and energy. They have been mapped by three generations of satellites above the ground with increasingly precise ground based measurements as well. Each of these came out 10 years apart with an increase of about a factor of 30 in the angular resolution of thesky. And so we can now make plots like this. Inflation says similar kinds of things should've been happening in the earliest moments everywhere in space through this very violent, rapid stretching of space. At the moment when the electrically neutral atoms start to form, if there were this sea or bath of gravitational waves, then the high school auditorium-- imagine where this dance is happening. These are mathematically more complicated structure. You should have this periodic squeezing, stretching, and then inverted by 90 degrees. So a version of these were found by the LIGO collaboration and announced early in 2016. March of 2014, a team using the BICEP satellite at the South Pole announced they had actually measured exactly that corkscrew pattern. Unfortunately, pretty soon after that, it turned out the BiceP team had measured data consistent with local noise. So basically, the signal they had hoped to measure was actually swamped by foregrounds they had not yet been able to control. And this was found by a number of very sophisticated analyzes soon afterwards. So it remains an open question to this day whether these primordial curling, twisting patterns really can be detected. Maybe there's such small magnitude, it'll evade our detection. makes specific predictions for what we should see on the sky today, including very minute statistical predictions for things like the cosmic microwave background radiation. The simplest models fit to unbelievable accuracy despite what my mean dormmates used to say in the mid '90s. Now we have extraordinary agreement with many, many of these predictions, albeit not the final one. So why is the universe lumpy? Why is this cascade of scales? Because space time is wiggly, and matter is jiggly.