JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission, and then we will go on to a few other things. We didn't actually derive the emissivity of it, but we gave ourselves a hand-wavy reason why there may be multiple peaks here. And these peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies-- I'm going to switch into angular frequency units, omega m. And they're evenly spaced. And this is just for a single particle. that, the frequency depends only on the magnetic field. And so, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma. And that was particularly useful when we considered a tokamak because, if we have some magnetic field that goes 1 upon R, then different regions of our toroidal device are going to be emitting electron cyclotron emission with different frequencies. And this is a technique which will give us, by looking at the spectrum for lowish frequencies, we can work out what the temperature is as a function of space. This is correlation ECE, often called CECE. We want to measure temperature fluctuations within the plasma that are maybe on the order of 1% of the baseline temperature, delta T upon T about 0.01. And that 1% is actually extremely hard to measure. And this is because the noise is just too high on these systems. There are lots of different contributions to the noise. But, in general, they all add up to make it very hard toMeasure these very small fluctuations. want to understand in plasmas so that we can build an economically viable fusion reactor. So it'd be very nice to be able to know. Now, the fact that the noise is too high does seem like a big limitation. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. We're not trying to measure the temperature profile throughout the entire plasma. We want to measure it inside some very small region. So the size of our turbulence of R turb, is on the order of 100 microns. That's the width of a human hair. We're zoomed in on only quite a small frequency range. Each channel samples a non-overlapping region in frequency. And, therefore, in real space, because, again, we've got this very strong link between our magnetic field and our spatial position. Many oscillations. And so, it will average out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: So if we were doing geometric optics, which we're not, then you would have a lens like this. That lens could collimate your beam. And if it collimated that beam, that would mean there'd be a focus point at some distance f away. very small region on the order of 100 microns. Anyone know how micro splitters work? Looking at you? STUDENT: RF. JACK HARE: The answer I got was RF, which I don't think is much more satisfying than my answer. But, you're right, you could come up with some clever analog way of doing the splitting. But this is getting way beyond what I was hoping to talk about on this. So let's get on to correlation ECE see what that does. The technique is used to measure temperature in plasma. It involves two adjacent channels, S1 and S2, measuring from adjacent parcels of plasma in real space or inside the tokamak. The two signals are carrying the same components that we're trying to measure. We are going to find that the noise is uncorrelated at random, but these two signals will correlate together, and we'll be able to measure it. And, again, these are really, really closely spaced, 100 microns or so apart. do correlations, and I'm not going to go into them, but I will give you a citation at the moment. We get out a term here that looks like the temperature term squared, the thing we want. And because this noise is just random, when we do some sort of averaging, this could be in time or best to think of it is a short time integral, then these terms are all going to drop out. And we'll just be left with a correlation signal that is proportional to the temperature squared here. fluctuations in a tokamak. And this is something that has revolutionized our understanding of turbulence. Now we can finally characterize it. That was a lot. Any questions? We're going to move on from ECE [INAUDIBLE]. Yes. Any other questions? Anything online? Now we are going to go to the next segment, which is about turbulence in the Earth's atmosphere. The next segment is about the atmosphere in the atmosphere of the Earth, and how turbulence affects the atmosphere. Bremsstrahlung is a term used to refer to a type of radiation in the universe. It involves electrons being deflected and breaking and emitting these photons. There are lots of different ways to deal with bremsstahlung to do the actual calculation. The main thing we can say in a classical treatment is that the bremstahlt is going to be isotropic in every direction. That's actually quite different from electron cyclotron emission, even though we didn't really look at the anisotropy of that in any detail. here with the ions and electrons as point particles. There's a semi-classical approach where you start bringing in some quantum physics and treat, I think, the electron as a wave. And then there's a full quantum approach. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So we get a small change in coefficient. The scalings are the same. So in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. bremsstrahlung emissivity, this is equation 5.3.40 in Hutchinson. This is ne, ni, z squared, T to the minus 1/2 e to minus h nu upon T. And then, there's a factor called G bar, the Gaunt factor, which we'll talk about in a moment. And these constants are things like e, the electron charge, and the electron mass, and epsilon 0, and h bar, and c. There is no mode in a plasma which propagates below the plasma frequency. So it goes back to being optically thin here for the high energy photons. But the low energy photons will get absorbed as well. There's actually another effect, which is in Hutchinson's book, which I haven't covered here. But we're skipping over that this year. But it's in there if you're interested. Yeah. Yeah, I think someone told me that maybe for a high field tokamaks synchrotron could start being significant. But I actually have no idea how big a deal it is. mostly on the magnetic field and the radius. And those are two things in a tokamak you already know. But maybe there's a really clever diagnostic you can do, like fast particles or something like that. So worth thinking about. JACK HARE: Right, but I'm not interested in [INAUDIBLE]. This is a diagnostics course. Any questions online while we pause? So this is bremsstrahlung radiation, and often people call this free-free. Professor Jack HARE: We're going to switch to a slightly quantum model of the atom. We have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And, up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again, HARE says. But, of course, there's another case where this photon takes away so much energy that this starts, I guess it becomes imaginary. Bolometry is, in some sense, a very simple diagnostic. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. We have a little sensor sitting at the wall of our vacuum vessel. And that sensor is just a resistor. It has a resistance M, and that resistance M is a function of temperature here. And, from that temperature, we can make an estimate of the radiation power incident upon it. have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. It's the heat transport kappa grad T that gives us the time constant for thermal conduction through the substrate from the absorber to the resistor. And, effectively, this tau here sets the timescale at which we can measure. So the larger tau is the slower our measurement of the radiated power is going to be. And if tau gets very large, because we've got a very thick substrate here, or it doesn't have very good heat transport, then we're going to have a very poor time resolution. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.