well welcome back everybody to uh the last lecture 162. this is kind of a a special lecture um i did get some requests for more information about distributed storage and quantum computing and so i think we're going to do that. Today i want to tell you about the cord algorithm which has been turned into storage systems of many sorts including those used by amazon et cetera okay facebook. Before we get there i wanted to remind you of this notion of recursive versus iterative lookups. idea okay because it's just not going to scale the billions of entries very well all right and back in the early 2000s myself and a bunch of other researchers started looking at how do you deal with peer-to-peer technologies as a way to solve this problem. One solution here is consistent hashing which i'm going to tell you about. The chord algorithm lets you get by with only knowing essentially a logarithmic number of nodes in the total system and you can still do this well. means that no particular part in the in the world here might be a hot spot it means unfortunately though that we don't have the most uh local of look up because if we start at node four it'd be nice if we could just go down to 15 and back okay now this is a really good question here about redundancy how do we get redundancy out of this for the moment uh suspend that question for just a second certainly we could put raid servers or what you know raid storage on each of these nodes and that would be great if the disks fail but uh we would like something even more powerful because i don't know if there's a big earthquake and california falls off into the ocean it'dbe nice to know that key 14 survived somehow. with dns you need to know how to talk to local at least one dns server somewhere before you can start resolving names. We're going to have this dynamic stabilization procedure so every node can run stabilize okay in which it asks its successor its current successor node who the predecessor was and then if it finds a problem it can run notify to help reconnect the ring. If you lose two nodes in a row then what i've just described to you is no longer going to work so there is a way to completely break the ring such that the stabilized procedure won't work. The power of the powerful thing about this is once i've got all these nodes now i can do a really fast routing process to figure out how to find which node is going to store the key i'm interested in. If you have log m where m is the number of nodes of the system you can end up with a situation where you can find data even if half of your nodes fail. So that's kind of what's proved in that chord paper and that's not that many because it's a logarithmic number. algorithm and so what's good about this is like i said you store the data in the cord ring and it it's very hard to destroy okay why are they called leaf sets that's a good question the reason they're called Leaf sets is because in some sense you can view the uh if you take any given um starting node like 58 and you view the set of fingers that’s a tree and so eventually you get to the leaf set and so it's like a tree with leaves so that's where the leaf is coming from and here's an example of that. with our replication but it also serves as uh as part of the last couple of hops we can use the leaf set to basically find who's supposed to have our data all right um now so let's look at replication from a physical standpoint right so if you look again at this ring i showed you a little while ago that ring is mapped physically to things that are spread widely. Now we can see another big advantage of the randomness introduced in chord and that advantage is that these copies are actually stored in geographically separate places. it adapts automatically which is pretty good okay so what i wanted to do next uh i'm going to talk a little bit about security and then um talk through a couple of things and then i want to uh try to get to quantum computing as well so we can i know there was some of you asked some questions about that so i'mgoing to leave this topic unless there's more questions okay. Security is kind of dealing with actions of a knowledgeable attacker who's really trying to cause harm and we want to make sure that uh they can't really screw us up. about by using new techniques and the distinction between protection and security i think is an important one because protection is the set of mechanisms that we talk about in this class. Security is basically using those mechanisms to prevent misuse of resources so for instance virtual memory is a mechanism that can be used for protection security policy would be making sure that when we use virtual memory we don't let malicious processes or different processes owned by different people use the same memory and have a potential for screwing each other up. making sure that you can't repudiate things that you've previously said and so i'm hoping that if you haven't taken 161 it's on your list because there's a very interesting set of things that people can talk about. The idea of a secure hash function is one where you take data and you run it through a hash function and you get a bunch of bits out of it. If you change the data even slightly you end up with a good hash function with something that essentially roughly half of the bits change. how we want to be dealing with data all right sorry if that's a lot of information but i wanted to see if there's any questions there before i switch over to some quantum computing all righty give me a second i'll be right back. So first question is how do we know the data is secured so um just like with a blockchain let me just back up to the picture here which i think is a is a good one to be talking about um what we know is the following. The vision here really is of pretty much everybody using data capsules everywhere okay and if you can get that to happen then you could potentially have a very interesting scenario here. We're working with roboticists and machine learning folks to put their data and their models for grasping and so on inside of data capsules and as a result they can reside securely in the edge in say your robots or whatever in a way that can't be breached. If any of you want to come work on this project come talk to me uh separately we have plenty of places we can talk to you. Those are particles like protons or electrons have this intrinsic spin and so now i got one and zero or up and down okay and a representation called the heisenberg representation looks at this messy physical situation like this which is either a zero or a one in these brackets. What you see here is actually a superposition of zeroness and oneness together okay now you know i realize this looks a little weird we don't normally get a wave function notation in 162. But the thing that's very interesting about this is that this is a description of a combination of zERONess and Oneness where the probabilities can be adjusted anywhere. you do a bunch of computing on it such that the probabilities are kept and you measure okay and the way it looks is that you take uh let's say you put an input with all possible combinations of the input input of the inputs being equal values all possible probabilities it looks like you're doing computation on all possible values at once but then when you measure you pick up exactly one and that's the answer you get okay. So basically what we're talking about here looks like a random computation like you get in cs70 or 170 where you randomly pick an input you compute on it you look at the result so that's not very interesting right. The difficulty of factoring rsa is figuring out how to take a large number which is publicly known and factor it into two large factors that are primes. If you can do that you break the cryptography so classically this is an exponential time algorithm and so as long as these are big enough nobody's going to break it quantum computer can do it polynomial time and let me show you how here's how it is in a nutshell you pick a random x between 0 and n that's easy. This out what r makes this equiv equation satisfied and we could do that quickly then um we win and that's something that uh you can't do easily classically but with a quantum computer what we can do. i can set up a situation where my input to my algorithm is all the possible k's uh if i take a bunch of values and i compute uh the the value x to that value and i add them all together as a superposition and i do a fourier transform what i'll find is that x to the r congruent to one as i have r go through all its possible values. question is is this something to worry about the answer is well so far no but it's looking like um it's getting closer and closer okay. We actually investigated ways of optimizing that and we could actually look at performance of different options for the shortest factoring algorithm as quantum circuits. We built a cad tool to do that so um i i don't know i think it's a pretty interesting area right now and there's a lot of interest in it all right so um sorry i kept you guys way over but this is the last lecture i figured if anybody was interested. i think it's it's pretty exciting project we got working on it if anybody's interested in that and then we told you a little bit about quantum computing and uh feel free to come ask me or also look at 151 or 191 excuse me um which is an interesting class on quantum computing all right well thank you everybody sorry for going way over today thank you for those of you that stuck around and uh i hope you have a good uh finalizing of project three andThose of you listening in cyberspace later as well you are all great.