David Kaiser: particle cosmology is a new subfield within physics. He says it studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. Kaiser: The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the U.S. is on the order of $1 billion a year, roughly, he says. It is really a booming, booming subject of study, Kaiser says. The field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago, he adds. and '60s. There was quite a different set of conversations happening around the same time. This had nothing to do, at least on the surface, with Mach's principle or even with Einstein's general theory of relativity. But the challenge became very clear very quickly. These nuclear forces are somehow mediated was what arose from particles exchanging certain kinds of force-carrying particles. The point is there were new kinds of matter. And then when particles tossed these back and forth, that would give rise to things like radioactive decay. Self-evidently of short range, unlike gravitation or electromagnetism, the nuclear forces really exert themselves across nuclear dimensions, very tiny fraction of the size even of a single atom. The idea was could have finite range nuclear forces if these force-carrying particles had a very large mass. That will make it very unlikely for that force to be felt across a large distance because of the whole set of ideas about virtual particles and the uncertainty principle. So that broke half of the motivation for it. Carl Brans and Robert Dicke proposed the Brans-Dicke theory of gravity in 1961. It was an attempt to modify Einstein's theory of general relativity in response to this challenge of Mach's principle. In Einstein's version, you can represent Einstein's general theory of relativity by an action, in a sense, by writing down a Lagrangian. It's the geometer's tool of quantifying the warping of space and the curvature scalar of time. The idea was that instead of having a single constant unit strength of gravity labeled by Newton's constant capital G-- that's the G that's in like Newton's force law. Their version would depart from the ordinary behavior from general relativity. As omega becomes larger and larger, the field is much less likely to vary either over space or time. And in the limit that omega becomes arbitrarily large, then phi, in a sense, can't afford to vary at all. The kinetic energy cost is too high. So you get back to the Einstein-like limit. So they had this very clever fudge factor, a coupling constant, so that, in principle, the local strength of gravity could be changing all the time. As omega becomes large, the behavior reduces to the kind of constant strength of gravity of the original Einstein theory. The idea is that this new form of matter, this new field phi, is extended throughout all of the universe through every nook and cranny of space. All of matter interacts with phi. So this would be a way to incorporate Mach's principle going beyond even just Einstein's version of the theory. It's almost like a new ether, you might say, It's everywhere. Jeffrey Goldstone was among the first to show that a certain kind of characteristic shape for a potential energy function could be used to break the symmetry of the nuclear forces. Goldstone introduced a new hypothetical form of matter, the Higgs field, which is responsible for giving everything else the masses that we measure, including those force-carrying particles. If this new field gets stuck in its local minima, it now acts like it has a molasses-like effect on the universe. An induced mass coming from this spontaneous symmetry breaking. So now, again, you can have your symmetries and your short range. So fascinating, a lovely idea being introduced right around the same time as Brans-Dicke also as one way to try to get to this question of why do objects have mass. It got a lot of attention, as I'll say more about in a moment, because it offered the first really concrete quantitative alternative to Einstein's general theory of relativity in nearly 50 years. No one suggested, at least in print, that these two scalar fields with the same Greek letter might be similar or even worth considering side by side for nearly 20 years, until the later 1970s. The sets of ideas were published to very wide acclaim in their own separate fields as early as 1961. It took more than 15 years until people began to say, hey, these two Scalar fields are meant to pervade all of nature. All of other forms of matter interact with them. They give rise to what we measure as local inertial effects. Each of these papers-- the Brans-Dicke paper and the Higgs papers-- became technically renowned within fewer than 20 years. So you can see more than 500 each. In fact, it's 1,083 distinct papers doing the citing if you add up all the ones between these two plots. And yet, only six of those-- so less than 1%-- cited both the BrANS-DICke paper. and theHiggs papers in the same article during this whole 20-year period. on these two fields being literally the same field-- only one new field of nature, not two. So it's not that they're somehow intrinsically totally separate or different from each other. So instead, their status, really, is historical. How people assess them or what they thought they were good for was changing over time. And so what had changed? That's what we'll pick up in the next part. Let me pause here and ask for any questions. So Alex asks, was it an accident that both parties chose phi? Not really. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. So we might wonder, well, was it changes in data? Did experiments force a new evaluation? No, not really. Let's look at the gravity side first. So I mentioned that part of what got the gravitation community so excited about Brans-Dicke gravity was it now gave them something very tangible, very specific to try to test for. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. That is, all the tests were easily consistent with the predictions from Einstein's theory within experimental errors. To match all of these increasingly precise new experimental measurements, Brans' Dicke theory was not highly favored. So that's on the gravity side. Meanwhile, there was literally zero experimental evidence, a big fat goose egg nothing in favor of the Higgs-Boson until July of 2012. two sets of ideas consider them side by side. The main story that's mostly given-- I alluded to this in the very beginning of today's class-- is actually hearkens to changes in ideas and, in particular, on the particle physics or particle theory side. These ideas are well worth appreciating. And they came in rapid fire in 1973 and 1974. The first of them is called asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. vast majority of those came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. So remember that big report comes out in 1972. You start seeing curricular changes as early as '73, '74. By '75, '76, '77, you start seeing, in some sense, the market respond with many textbooks being really rushed into print. Some of these textbooks were basically mimeographed lecture notes. And now there's very, very fancy books published in a more typical way. GUTs, or GUTHs-- I'll throw him a bone-- are the symmetry groups associated with the different kinds of forces. Each of those three symmetry groups are actually sub-- you think about it. You can represent any of them as matrices. And there is the smallest group that includes those three as subgroups is an SU5. So that led to new phenomena that were predicted that turned out not to be measured, but that was the idea at least. And that's super cool and fun and lots more to be said about that but that is, indeed, where that nomenclature came from. In 1979, two separate theorists introduced a whole new model where they didn't only cite Brans-Dicke and Higgs, they literally united them. They wanted to ask why gravity appears to be so weak compared to all the other forces. The idea was that this local strength of gravity, Newton's constant, would get anchored to a very small value when phi gets stuck at a relatively large value. So why is gravity so weak? They suggested maybe it's because it's arising from some broken symmetry. He wandered into this field really accidentally. He finished his PhD at Harvard in 1970. His work was squarely in particle physics, the fancy new symmetries and new nuclear forces. That's what he studied for his thesis. He then had a sabbatical early on in his faculty career, and he happened to go to Paris. He swapped apartments with a Parisian physicist who was about to come to the United States. And as Tony recalls, he found these stacks of preprints all around the apartment that looked interesting. Lee Smolin was the other person who independently introduced that broken-symmetric theory in 1979-- same year as Tony Zee. He was actually, from the start, combining the two fields, both in the courses he took and eventually with his advising team for his thesis and for his dissertation itself. So unlike this accident of trading apartments in Paris and reading a few preprints, more and more members of Lee Smolin's generation were going through a training like his, partly by design, in the wake of the National Academies report. Alan Guth: Few physicists today think Brans-Dicke theory of gravity best describes our Universe. He says interest in the field grew even as it was getting experimentally less and less favored. Guth: New generation of theorists trained to work at this interface. They had all kinds of potential roles to play in new work that we'll look at together next time on inflation, he says. "We'll have more opportunities to make fun of Alan Guth, which is what's in it for me" counts as natural can shift in a pretty short time scale. And as we've been seeing throughout the whole term and including today, those shifts can be driven as much by things well outside of the physicist's control, geopolitics, and national scale budgets. So that's where I'll actually pause. And we have time for a few more questions or comments. Any other thoughts on that? With my last moment here, I'll say, before the construction for the new Center for Theoretical Physics, I had an office just down the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.