s gawan and the Green Knight um I believe this is the last piece where we don't know who the author is where it's unknown um I find the background interesting and that through textual Clues they're able to figure out who wrote it. It's interesting when they talk about some writer character character character is whatever that word is SAR Gowan as a ruthless bloodthirsty Warrior um we really don't see him in that regard. Throughout the story of seral when we again come back to what a knight truly is. King Arthur even welcomes the Raper. He says I am not here for trouble no armor down there at the bottom I didn't bring anything there's no other weapons. Arthur says on page 177 that I am here not for war and I shall offer to him this fine axe freely that they strike a blow in return for another so I will let you use my axe you can take a shot at me but I want to get ashot at you. When I survive the blow that you give me with this ax you will have to come and find me afterwards on your honor can you see how this is a game of honor? sir GNE being called a coward we've got to understand that mindset who would that be calling a coward Arthur and everybody else the Knight came here specifically to challenge the best that Earth has ever bred is what he was saying and so this is the moment and now GNE has a year to think about his impending doom is he going to go do we think he's going to take the axe shot is this all a test is he Going to trick something I mean these are all thoughts that should be going through your mind. you receive the the hunter the owner of the house the husband says whatever you receive you must give to me that seems kind of weird what possibly could he receive while he's there well we find out that the wife really kind of starts to come on to him over time okay real flirty she's she's a temptress okay very seductive uh she gives him a kiss what does he do when the husband comes home that day cuz the husband's going to share his his food share his everything with him as long as GNE you share with me and so he gets kissed. comes home and GNE does not give up the girdle because why would I give this this is going to save my life I'm not going to so he breaks his word okay he becomes a coward. He is selfish and coward about his life about hey you gave me a this is a wild card he doesn't know I'm going to have an ace up my sleeve come time to get that shot in the head um and so he does leave and he keeps that GLE for himself um and doesn't give that away page 185. thing and so he hears it you know happening and um so he screams out and the and the um and the Green Knight comes he says by there said one on the bank above his head and you shall swiftly receive what I once swore to give you. The Knight addresses him they have a little back and forth and he gets ready to hit him and it's one of those kind of like you've had friends before probably have come up to you and go like that. He chastises him and says do it again I will not flinch go on game. Celebrate was it New Year's is that what it is we'll come back and celebrate this cold New Year I'm not mad at you so now we need to go back and look remember the archetypes we talked about. What was the purpose of the Green Knight simply to challenge challenge King Arthurs and his crew and see if they truly are as honorable as they say as legendary as Legend has as the stories have it. Can we really call him a villain probably not but yet isn't he that antagonist early on? good person away with the forbidden fruit you know something similar we could maybe connect uh down the road but it's very similar to to those so um so go and the green. I hopefully you enjoyed it um really story-wise we're done with knights uh. It's a very similar story to the one we did with the knights. It was a very different story but it was very similar. I hope you enjoyed the book. I'm glad you read it. I'll see you next week.