Professor Donald Kagan: We are living in the early years of a polis sometime in the eighth century B.C. The date that's typical for the general phenomenon of colonization coming out of the mother cities of Greece is 750 roughly. The earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773 where the Greeks date the foundation of what they thought was the earliest colony they ever established -- a place that they called Pithaecusa, which is the island of Ischia. the natural thing to do given the character of life, which was based upon farming, if you leave you lose your farm, and based upon the difficulty of transportation. The Greeks were, even though they went to sea plenty, they were terrified of the sea for very good reason. So, what I'm saying is, when you leave the place you were born, you leave your ancestors as well. All of that means we need to explain why these folks do what they end up doing, and we have some hints, but of course we do not know with any certainty or any confidence. The vast overwhelming majority of people needed to farm land, in order to stay alive. One answer is that the growth of population that we have mentioned in connection with the rise of the polis is still working. But I don't think that's the only answer. I think the desire for commerce would have been also--I agree with the traditional view which is that this would has been at a lesser consideration, but still very important. They would have had to be damn fools to have settled there without that being in their minds. Delphi was thought by the Greeks to be the navel of the universe, the center in every way. There the god Apollo had established an oracle. Gases would escape through this gap in the earth and there were priests who worshipped Apollo there and who took care of this phenomenon. They would place a young woman there who would sit as these gases came up and she would after a while begin to speak in tongues. She would rattle off a lot of language which nobody could understand what she was saying. will decide whether it's a good idea for him or not. Recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. The best time would be at some great festival. There are festivals held in each city just for its own citizens and my guess is that when you could do that, when you felt that you could recruit a full colony from your fellow citizens in Corinth, that's what you did. Syracuse is an independent polis, autonomous, self-governing, whatever regime it wants. It is not a subject of anybody, not Corinth or anybody else. Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. At the other end of the spectrum it's again Corinth and they have a colony called Corcyra. The first battle between them is a navel battle and thereafter we hear of quarrelling and fighting. It's been around for a while, while a while for a colony, very early times. More time, that the overwhelming normal situation is the first one I described, friendly relations. These guys that have gone out, let us say to Syracuse, they are your people, they have relatives back home. It is natural--oh by the way, they're accustomed to worship the gods in the same way that the Corinthians do. We do know, again, Thucydides is our source, that it was customary for colonies to send representatives back to the mother city for the religious observations that were common to them all. Kagan: The question is who gave permission for a colony to go in the mother city. The best guess and that's the only thing we have. These would have been aristocratic republics at this stage of the game. Kagan: Nobody was compelled to do anything. Everybody--all of this is voluntary on both sides of every agreement. The British practicing mercantilism passed navigation acts, saying what ships could carry what and so on--nothing like that in the Greek world. By the tenth century B.C., we see Greek cities lining the coast of Asia Minor on the west, and even around on the bottom and to some degree on the north, and on the islands in the Aegean. So, there has been a Greek--what's the word I want? There is an expansion of the Greek world already by the 10th century. The way the Greeks did their immigration into Asia Minor actually had a pattern so that you can go from north to south and you will find some consistency. There are no Greek cities as you keep coming down and pass Palestine. You reach Egypt, and of course, Egypt is one of the great empires of antiquity. When you get beyond the Carthaginians advance into Spain, there are now Greek cities on the coast of Spain. There continue to be Greek cities, not everywhere, but in a spotty way into France. So is Nice a Greek town. Nice was Nikea, victory town and there are several others. So, in the period we're talking about there are no Romans that you have to worry about. interesting information from their neighbors in the east and the south and there's no question about it. Anybody who looks at the earliest Greek art for quite some time, I'm talking about sculpture and temple building, will see the influence of Egypt enormously powerfully. The Greeks are sopping up tremendously useful information and talent, and skills, and all sorts of things that help explain what's going to be coming. It is inconceivable the Greeks could have developed a civilization that they did without contact with these eastern civilizations and learned a great deal from them. More and more people would be making their living in a way that was not agricultural. They would be in commerce and industry in this small sense and doing all the various things that are not farming. So you now have classes or groups of people who have interests rather different from those of the most primitive polis you could imagine. Some scholars early on in the century, moved by Marxist theories, suggested that you had a capitalist class growing up, there's just no evidence of that. My guess is that the earliest traders of any scope were probably noblemen who also had land and estates back home. way has to be found to fit them in because, as I say, they don't fit. That creates trouble. As we shall see very shortly, that trouble often takes the form of first of factional struggles within the aristocracy, which then after awhile come to involve people outside the aristocracy. So that's the, what you might say, is the negative side of the story. But colonization, especially, some scholars have pointed out, I think persuasively, also for some considerable time provided an answer to that problem. that colonization provided something analogous to that for the Greek people. So now, here we are somewhere in the seventh century, most of these places I've been talking about have been settled, the currents that I have been describing are flowing and the kinds of problems they have give rise to what will be felt in most of the towns. That is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.