Professor: We're describing interaction between the electromagnetic field and atoms. Professor: If you have a perturbative treatment, even if you carry to infinite order, you have, formally, divergences if you have resonant interaction. I want to show you what are the tools to treat those infinity source diverGences in a consistent and a systematic way, professor says. MIT OpenCourseWare is a free, online education resource. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. In perturbation theory, we can sum up an infinite number of diagrams. We want to understand the time evolution of this system. Our tool is a time evolution operator. We have a problem with one state. Our problem is the excited state b. And we have a resonant excitation state a. So this is a discrete eigenstate of the unperturbed Hamilton operator. And therefore, we actually divergent terms which are 1 over Z minus Eb. And this is just to make the connection, this is sort of a description that in the complex plane and can have imaginary values. The T-matrix is actually the matrix, the relevant matrix, of the time evolution operator. R has a real and imaginary part. One is a self energy, and the other one is a decay rate. We can go from here to there with any combination of states you want. But one thing is not allowed-- to involve the state b. We have now found an exact expression for Gb of Z. And this is the main result, which is the non-trivial expression. light scattering. I just go now and apply to an excited atomic state. So the state we are interested in is the atomic state b and no photons. And the property of the atomic. state is obtained when we know the function Gb of Z. And this is the matrix element between state B0B0 and the time. evolution operator. So we are calculating, of course, the Fourier transform of the time evolution of the state b by the. Fourier. transform through the resolvent G. Professor: In general, a real part and imaginary part. It's a function of the initial energy E. And it has an imaginary part, and it's the same if you have the function 1 over x. The imaginary part gets us Fermi's golden rule. And the real part has actually-- remember when we discussed the AC Stark shift. The AC Stark Shift has a 1 over [INAUDIBLE] dependence. So this is actually nothing else than theAC Stark shift not due to a laser beam, but due to one photon per mode. we calculate here-- has no resonant structure at the energy Eb. So therefore, we can neglect the energy dependence of that and simply replace the argument E by the energy we are interested in, namely energies close to Eb. This replace, neglect E and set, or replace the dependence by E, by taking the value at Eb. And we obtained, as promised, the imaginary part, which we can approximate by Fermi's golden rule. And you should now-- well, this is what we may have expected. But there are two things you should learn. The first thing is that the exponential decay would be different if we had not made the Markov approximation. The density of states of your photon field is pretty much constant around here. And then, this approximation is excellent. So I hope what you have learned from the treatment is number one, where the exponential decay comes from. If we hadn't done the infinite summation of diagrams, if we had done a perturbative expansion, we would have never obtained exponential decay. We would have obtained some polynominal decay. So it's pretty much an exponential function is non-perturbative. In general, if you write down the total Hamiltonian and do the time evolution, something will come out which, in general, is very complicated, very entangled. So you have to know, to keep track of all the photons, which have been scattered in the lifetime of an atom. But often, what we do is we simply put the photons in a trash can. We trash them. We're not interested in what the photons are doing. We really want to focus on what happens to the atom. How does an initial state of the atom propagate into a final state? This is done by optical Bloch equations. it causes stimulated emission. And it causes absorption described by the Einstein b coefficient. And you have a similar equation for the excited state. So this is clearly the semi-classical limit of what we want to accomplish. We want to know more. We really want to find the full quantum time evolution. We have to be careful. The time evolution as a Hamiltonian, if you now bring in the environment, cannot be simply included by adding an imaginary term. This here violates the unitary time Evolution. This is actually something which is the frontier of our field, both in theory in ion traps and with neutral atoms, that we have some evolution of an atomic system by coupling it to the environment. So can you engineer the environment in such a way that it does something really fancy to your system? Well, you can dream of it. But you dreams are restricted by the mathematical structure of all possible master equations in the world. Because the environment cannot do everything for you. The environment can only do for you what can come out of all Possible Hamiltonians. Damping is a consequence of the fluctuation dissipation principle. We do not get any form of damping without at least the fundamental quantum noise. The tool which we use for that is the density matrix. The density matrix can be written as a probabilistic sum over states. This will actually play a major role. We will make certain models for damping. And it's really beautiful. On Monday, I will give you the beam splitter model for the optical Bloch equation. Because it's a microscopic model. processes. OK, any last questions? Well then, let's enjoy the open house with incoming graduate students, and I'll see you on Monday. I'll be back on Monday to talk to you about the classes we'll be teaching next year. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this interview. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to see the full Transcript of this Interview. Back in the page, please share your questions and comments.