HONG LIU: This is a key relation between the bulk and the boundary theories. The more you go to the interior of the space time, then corresponding to the lower energy process when viewed form the field theory. This actual dimension can be considered as a geometrization of the energy scale. It's called the normalization group flow, how physics evolves when you change the energy or length scale. So you can also view that the evolution in the gravity side, in the field theories. say from the boundary to the interior, and that this flow in the z direction can be considered, again, to geometrize the normalization group flow of the field theory. We have N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory. And then here, you have type IIB string in Ads5 times ds5. So there's a 4 supersymmetry, which just comes from N equal to 4. And because we have conformal. symmetry, then the conformal symmetry does not actually commute with this 4 supers asymmetry, then. generate another 4. For each global symmetry in the field theory side, there's a corresponding local symmetry on the gravity side. The isometry is important for the following reason. Even though this is a subgroup, when we talk about quantum gravity, the AdS5 times S5 specifies the asymptotic geometry of the space time. So-called large transformations is that they don't go to the Identity at infinity. These large gauge transformations can be considered as the global part of the diffeomorphism. The gauge symmetry is just redundant freedom. You never see it on the other side. expanding 1 over N squared. So as we said before, we often do dimensional reduction on S5. Let me get a five dimensional Newton constant. And the difference is the volume of S5, which is equal to pi cubed R to the power fifth. And then from here, you can just work out. G5 has dimension 3. Then G5 divided by R cubed, again only related to N given by pi divided by 2N squared. And here, when I write these relations, I have all set h bar equal to 1. The classical gravity limit is the same as QFT, Quantum Field Theory in curved space time. So gravity does not fluctuate. But your matter field can fluctuate, h bar equal to 1. In type IIB super gravity, there are many, many such kind of matter fields, and they all should be treated quantum mechanically. Just don't treat the gravity as quantum, but those matter fields should be treating as quantum. And now, we see that the decoupling of the string effect requires on the field. theory side the strong coupling. This is also something roughly we said before. The strong coupling, then the diagram with many, many vertices will dominate. And then the most dominated diagrams are those diagrams with not a lot of vertices. And they essentially are going to continue to limits. So that means that we can actually use classical gravity to, in principle, solve problems which are strongly coupled. So also, of course, there are corrections beyond this. So this is a classical gravity limit on this side. HONG LIU: In principle, the corrections beyond this limit can again be studied on the gravity side. In the classical string limit, still you can see the N go to infinity, which corresponds to GN. But here, the alpha prime can be arbitrary. And here the [INAUDIBLE] coupling can be arbitrarily. So let me just say alpha prime finite no longer zero. And then this is just corresponding to Lambda finite, which is no longer infinite. So this is a standard t Hooft limit. a general correspondence between some conformal field theory and some AdS gravity theory. HONG LIU: Yang-Mills theory lives on Minkowski space. And then you say you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. AUDIENCE: So if it's a sort of postulate that's just thinking about it, it's not required that the theory live on the boundary of AdS. a few minutes. So now, given this mapping, any operator is due to a bulk field. Then you can ask some immediate questions. For example, the quantum numbers of these operators will map to the quantum number of the bulk fields. And that's something I said you can check their symmetries. So for local operator on the field theory side, we can immediately ask questions related to operators on this side. And ask the story about the field on the gravity side, and ask what's happened. We can start developing the relations. guesswork is based on some very small clues. Good physicists can see non-ordinary things from ordinary things. So here, I will try to deduce the answer to this question by starting from this relation. The GS string coupling can be considered as the expectation value of the dilaton field. So expectation value essentially can be associated with the boundary value of. the field. And the second is that phi 0 O, in the boundary theory, adding a delta G, says the Lagrangian of N equal to 4 super Yang-Mills. phi 0 O in the boundary theory must be related-- now I'm generalizing this story. The bulk field phi due to O has a boundary value phi 0. In principle, you can choose any O. You can break the symmetry if you want. Impose this kind of boundary conditions. Then you may break AdS symmetry too. So in the end, what we will describe is a self consistent story. I will not contradict myself in my later discussion. So if we assume this, I can also use this to argue. N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory and this type IIB gravity. Any conserved curve in the boundary theory must be equal to some gauge field in the gravity side, and the stress tensor should always be due to the metric. I can use this identification to make star and star star natural for any duality, not only N equals 4super Yang-mills theory. It's that any conserved Curve in the Boundary Theory must be Equal to Some Gauge Field in the Gravity Side. and the field theory. And that also tells you that if you have a theory which due into a higher dimensional theory, and then that theory has a stress tensor, then this bulk theory must have gravity. So you can say, if any field theory is due to a theory of one higher dimension, that theory must involve gravity-- nothing about quantum gravity. Let's stop here. We're not going to get into quantum gravity right now, we're just going to talk about the theory of gravity.