CrashCourse U.S. history will be won by - Harry Styles in 2020. Future John Green tells you that in a stunning turn of events, Harry Styles will win the 2020 presidential election. We're going to change the constitution to make it possible. Because… that’s how much we love Harry Styles. The Wall Street Wamboozle, the Financial Fartstorm. The Major Recession of 2008 - 2012. The 2nd worst economic crises in the past 150 years. A mixture of public and private activities that tilted towards short-term economic thinking. many millions of Americans, including certain Crash Course US History hosts, bought real estate assuming that its value would increase rapidly and forever. It turns out this was essentially a pyramid scheme and, my friends, I was not at the top of the pyramid. So back then you could buy a house with a so-called NINJA loan which sadly this did not involve mutant ninja turtles or pizza. Ninja stands for No Income, No Job, and No Assets. All this created a classic housing bubble, which was doomed to burst. When the mortgages turned bad, these securities became toxic assets. When banks stop lending, business can’t function. The stock market collapsed, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropping from above 14,000 to around 8,000. By mid-2009 more women than men held paying jobs for the first time in American history. And World Trade cratered and that led to unemployment and misery worldwide. The event that triggered the chaos was the failure of the investment bank Lehman Brothers in September, just 2 months before the presidential election. In 2008 Obama’s election seemed a political watershed and not just because he was the first African American president. He appealed to young people and minorities, and he harnessed the power of social media to communicate with supporters, and get out the vote, and also raise TONS of money. So Obama promised to change the culture of Washington. He would end partisan squabbling…. sorry sorry. The rules here are simple - he said for the final time. No more shocks. The getting shocked part of my life has come to an end. Hopefully in Crash Course Literature when I get things right I’ll get a puppy and when I got things wrong I'll get a rainbow! He also wanted to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and reverse global warming. A lot of this was more rhetoric than action, as in his verbal support for the revolution that overthrew Hosni Mubarak in Egypt. He did keep some of his campaign promises, for instance he signed into law the Lily Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, which made it easier for women to sue when they had been systemically underpaid. He also appointed two of them to the Supreme Court, Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor. Obama has been criticized internationally for backing off his promise to close the Guantanamo Bay detention camp. But the Obama administration has deployed far more unmanned drones to kill suspected militants around the world. Despite provoking outrage on the left and the right, Americans generally appear to support the use of drones and extra-legal assassination of accused terrorists. Obama was fortunate to have a Democratic Congress for his first term in office, so he could push through a lot of legislation. This included a sweeping stimulus package with nearly $800 Billion in new spending, most of it on infrastructure. The Affordable Care Act is arguably the most significant piece of social legislation since Medicare. Obamacare aims to reduce the number of Americans without health insurance by making it easier and less expensive for the uninsured to buy it privately. In 2012 the core of the law was upheld by the Supreme Court when they ruled that thiants was a constitutional use of the government’s taxing power. Not one Congressional Republican voted for Obamacare, and many used it to campaign against Democrats in the 2010 mid-term elections. The 111th congress was one of the least productive in American history. Unwillingness to compromise precipitated a series of mini-fiscal crises over things like the budget and raising the debt ceiling. Meanwhile, the economy has slowly added jobs and looks halfway decent at the moment mostly because Europe looks so bad. The particular brands of ideological certainty that we see today may seem new but if you look at American history you realize that this has been going on for a long time. The Tea Party is right that the founding fathers would be astonished by the extend of the American government and the extent to which it’s involved in the lives of Americans. We have to ask ourselves again, “What does freedom really mean?’ Can you be free when the government can go to a secret court to read your text messages? We know that you can’t be free if you’re dead, so is the government’S job to protect you not only by having a standing army but also making you wear your seat belt? Crash Course World History has been on the air for two years. The show celebrates two successful years of teaching history. This has been one of the great professional joys of my life and I’m so grateful to everyone that has helped make the show and everyone who has watched it. Thank you again for watching, and as we say in my hometown, “Don’t forget to be awesome.” You can find a full list of your reading for Crash Course Literature in the doobly-doo.rolling.