In this lecture, we're going to talk about how neurons function and how researchers are able to control that function in order to modify behavior. Then we'll talk about synapses and how synapses function to communicate between neurons. And this is going to involve also sort of understanding how certain antidepressants, like Prozac, work. And then we'll end by talking about how researchers did this experiment to wake up the mouse. And it all starts with something that I told you about at the beginning of the semester, which is the plasma membrane. In a resting state, the cell's resting potential is negative 70 millivolts. The cell can lose this polarity and not have a charge differential, or it can flip and be positive on the inside. Stephen suggested opening ion channels. If you open these, it's going to depolarize the cell. Because remember, high on the outside, out here. And so if you open them, positive ions are going to flow in to make this less positive. So what is an action potential? Everyone see how it's a transient potential. A nerve cell fires an action potential and how it propagates along the entire cell length. In the case of the sciatic nerve, this has to happen across an entire meter, OK? That's a very long distance to propagate this change in electrical signal, at least for a cell. And so we're going to talk about the mechanism. And I'm going to start at the beginning, when this action potential initiates. This is a voltage gated sodium channel. And you can see, it's closed because of this red rod that's a positively charged alpha helix. There are different types of signals that nerve cells can send. Signals can be excitatory, meaning it will tend to depolarize the neuron. There are other signals that bind to different type of receptors that are inhibitory. Neurons are prepared to send signals to each other. They have everything ready to go when they get the word from the next cell that they're ready to send a signal to. The way that multiple neurons communicate with each other are through a type of signal known as a neurotransmitter. Prozac and Zoloft affect this reuptake process. And what that does is it keeps the neurotransmitter in the synaptic cleft for longer. And so the idea behind these drugs is that if you are suffering depression from a lack of serotonin, then you can rescue that by preventing the rapid reuptaking of the neurotransmitters. The way they function is to leave the neurotransmitted in the. synaptic clefts for longer so that you enhance signaling, even if you have low levels of the. neurotransmitter to begin with. optogenetics is an approach to control the activity of a cell with light. In this case, we're going to have light inducing depolarization. And the way this is done is there's a protein discovered from photosynthetic algae that's responsive to light, and it is a sodium channel. And if that's expressed specifically in the neurons that you're trying to test, you can then shine a light into the brain of the organism and activate, specifically, this type of neuron. you to test the function of the neuron in the behavior of an organism. So, in this case, this mouse, the light is shined into its brain, and they're testing a specific type of neuron that is involved in arousal of the mouse. And it's going to wake up right now. There it goes. It woke up. You see now its muscle activity is going, OK? So you can test thefunction of specific nerve cells using this approach, and it's because you have a light-sensitive sodium channel.