Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: The information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. Professor: A central property from the Schrodinger equation is at the time variation d dt of p is equal to the expectation value of minus d the potential of x d x. The momentum expectation value is time independent, so it can be written in the form of e cubed, equal to e to the minus i upon h bar p l. equal to alpha, then acting on u sub q, by translate by l, on U sub q of x, is equal to-- well, if we act on Phi sub q we pick up a phase e d i alpha. What happens to e to the minus i q x? x goes to x plus l. So if q l is equalto alpha, those two phases cancel, and we just get u back. u subq of x. If we want u to be always real, we can't impose this periodicity on different wave functions. the imaginary part, h bar over 2 m i. Well, hbar over m times the imaginary part of SI complex conjugate derivative, with respect to x, which is the current, in the x direction of SI. And we need this to be imaginary, or we will get no current. You show this in a problem set, if you have a pure, real wave function, for example. A single real exponential, that's decaying, as on the wrong side of a barrier. can always write it as some q naught plus n pi over l. And so now really what's going to happen, what I'm doing here is I'm labeling q, not by a single number. And then we pick a different function, felicitously, called Phi sub q, which is contained in Phi q. So this is the potential. So in this statement that what we have this translation by x is just some function. It has to do with the potential of the wave function. So if we translate by nothing, then I construct a new function. Professor: When you have a perfect lattice, there is actually no current flowing in response to an applied electromagnetic field. Professor: You can build a system that has exactly a periodic potential. He says you can do it with lattices not of atoms, but lattices of dielectric. Professor: Optical fibers can be used to control the phase of the light that's shining through a glass fibers, and you can shine your light in a way that's reasonably well localized, and that's a lot of fun. beautiful block oscillations. And this has been proved in a very small number of real honest quantum mechanical systems. The most elegant experiment that I know of was done by Wolfgang Ketterle, who's here at MIT. And he got three data points because it was preposterously difficult and declared victory. But it really needs to be done well. So one of the interesting questions in this part of the field right now is we know that it's true. But we want to see it. We want to feel it. talk about the 1 d potential. In order for the system to be neutral, I must have one electron for every well. If we let the system relax with lowest energy configuration, every state in this lowest band will be filled. The next band is empty, but in order to take an electron from here and put it into this state, we have to put them in a superposition of other states. In 1 d, do these bands ever overlap? No. By the node theorem. macroscopic amount of energy. Well, it's not macroscopic. it's large. It's not infinitesimally small. That means that there's a minimum amount of. energy that that incident light must have in order to excite the. electron in the first place. Crystals are transparent unless you look at sufficiently high frequencies. If you looked at low frequencies, your crystal should be transparent. Well that's really interesting. In particular, we immediately learn something cool about two different materials. Consider diamond and copper. These are both crystals. In 3D, this isn't such a big deal, because those splittings are tiny, and so the states can sort of overlap. But in 1D they can't. So I mean, that's also not exactly true, but it depends on exactly the details of the system, is what I wanted to get to. So let me talk about the same phenomena in an easier context, where we don't have to worry about spin, which we haven't discussed in detail, in the class. we add in a lattice we get bands again. The structure's a little more intricate because it depends on the momentum. But these bands now can overlap. OK. Everybody see that? Because there's nothing preventing states from different-- in different multiplates from having the same energy in three dimensions. There's no nodes here that tells you have to keep the ordering constant as you turn on the potential. Now we turned on the multiple particle potential, and they can interact, they can overlapped. As a consequence, when we fill up, let's say we two electrons per potential. the induced electric field? Nothing. Any electric field that you send in will be opposed by an induced current. So this behaves like a classical conductor. You turn on an electric field, and the charges will flow to oppose that externally imposed electric field. You get charges then building up on the walls of your capacitor plates. So, this is where we have a conductor. Because there's an unfilled band. And back here , we had an insulator because we had filled bands separated by gap. The gap between the filled band and the next available band is actually called a band insulator. yeah. There aren't [INAUDIBLE]. But what would we need? What we need is one of two things. We need either the band gap coincidentally is ridiculously small. What's a good example of that? A free particle. In the case of a free particle, these band gaps go to 0. Right? And so that's a conductor. Just an electron. It conducts, right? OK. But that's sort of stupid. But a better answer would be, well, can you have a system where there are bands but you didn't have one electron per potential well? And yeah. You could orchestrate that in lots of ways. Photonic crystals have bands of allowed energy and gaps of disallowed energies where no waves propagate through. Photonic crystals form exact crystals that reflect at very specific wavelengths. So why would a butterfly put a photonic crystal on its surface? Well it's extremely light. It's fairly rigid. And it's like the best thing you could ever do if you wanted to be a shiny, fluttery, flying thing. OK. So that's it for band gaps. And I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is going to be entanglement and quantum computation. The probability of finding the particle at point A is given by chi a squared. And similarly, the probability that we find the second particle at b is this thing norm squared. But we also studied the symmetric configuration, which was equal to 1 over root phi, root 2. Chi of a Phi of b. Symmetric, plus chi of b phi of a. And this tells us something totally awesome. So there's a factor of one half. We either find it at chi of a or chi. So it's fine. If we integrate over all phi b, this is the norm squared integrates to 1. "This should be yet another moment of serious discomfort," he says. "How can something here dramatically change the state, the configuration, the initial configuration, of a particle arbitrarily far away?" "If you think about relativity, this should be all the more deeply disconcerting," he adds. "We've run into a bunch of these over the semester. But this one should be troubling to you," he concludes. "It's a problem that should be deeply concerning to all of us" that's kind of amazing is that he created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week called the EPR experiment. And there's a beautiful historical story about the setting and the meaning and the particular person. But unfortunately, I'm not a historian so I can't tell you that story. It sure would be nice if we had someone who wrote a biography of Einstein to tell you a little bit about that. Oh look, it's Tom Levenson. Tom is-- of describing this problem of entanglement. And it's based on his description of an actual person. Bell used to say, if you saw Bartelstein and you could only see one leg and that sock was pink, you knew to a certainty that the other sock was not pink. Same thing. If you have a coin and you cut it in half down the-- so you've got two coin shape disks. And they're separated. They get handed to two different gamblers. And one gambler tries to cheat the gambling establishment by tossing in his half coin. And you see the head that you know somebody-- somebody at some other casino is cheating. Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen argued that the EPR paradox suggested that quantum mechanics was incomplete. They said that if you can perform a measurement, you know that quantity absolutely. But you can't do the-- so on the one hand, quantum mechanics says you can’t know physical reality to this level of precision. And on the other hand, the fact that you can do that measurement violates the relativistic picture of reality. But the question is whether or not the framework of quantum mechanics is somehow unsatisfactory in any formal sense. stupid. He was Albert Einstein. But he was aesthetically incapable of pursuing this new physics in ways that were possible under the research possibilities of the time. And that is what I would leave you with. Physics is an aesthetic as well as an intellectual pursuit. So thank you all. [APPLAUSE] Back to Mail Online home. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @MailOnlineernews. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the Daily Mail home.