This is the second time we are having this class. We had it last year in a smaller version. That was for six units of a credit, and we had it once a week. And mostly practitioners from the industry, from Morgan Stanley, talking about examples how math is applied in modern finance. And so we got some good response last year. So, with the support of the math department, we decided to expand this class to be 12 units of credit and have twice a week, as you know. "Hopefully, this will give you enough information to decide this is a field you would like to pursue in your future career," he says. "Last year when we finished the class, we had a few students coming to work in the industry" "Some work at Morgan Stanley, some work at elsewhere. So that's really the goal. And at the same time, obviously, you will further solidify your math knowledge and learn new content," he adds. "Some terminologies will be used, which you may not have heard before" and the Sloan school here. So anyway, thanks for that. We will be doing a bit more polling along the way, mainly to get feedback of how you feel about the class. Last year we had it online, so if you feel the class is going too fast, or the math part is. going too slow or the finance part is a bit confusing, the easiest way is really just to send us. emails, which you will find from the class website. So Anyway, I will start today's lecture with a story, and a quiz at the end. Don't worry, it's not a real quiz. Just going to ask you some questions you can raise your hand and give your answer. you the story of Pi or "Life of Pi." That's not a financial story. The rest of the story, alpha, beta, delta, gamma, theta, which you will learn from Peter and Choongbum and Vasily's classes. So I'm going to talk about vega. It's a measurement about a book or portfolio or position's sensitivity to volatility. It is really a measurement or indication of how volatile, or what's the standard deviation of a price can change over time. I did that in the last 20 years. So the point I'm trying to tell you is, before you dive into any details of mathematics or any concept in finance in this class, just bear in mind, this is a field developed in. the last mostly 30 years, or even shorter. So with that, I will give you some background on how the financial markets actually started, and that's really the history part of this industry. So, financial products is really just one form of trading. There are many other ways of trading aside from exchanges. endowment support, some will come from some other form of research budget. Just borrow from the public-- local governments, states, counties, even. So, that's debt product. Commodities, actually, you know. Metal, energy, agriculture products are traded, mostly in the futures format. When you actually buying and sell, you build a warehouse to take them. You ship a tank to store above the ocean. And the real estate, you're buying and selling houses. type of player is really bank. After 1933 Glass-Steagall legislation, there were two main types of banks. One is called commercial bank, the other is investment bank. Some people blame that, and probably for a very good reason, for the cause of 2008 financial crisis. But why do we need financial markets? This comes back to what I described before. There's a need for it. It's really the need to bridge between the lenders and the borrowers. That's really coming down to the essential relationship. Brokers take principal risks, market makers make the trade happen, earn commission. Hedge funds find opportunities to profit from inefficient market positioning or pricing. Private equity funds look to invest in companies and either take them private or invest in a private equity form to improve the company's profitability. Government always have a very large impact on the market, because they are the policymakers, and the different policies they push out will generate different outlooks for the future markets, therefore, profitability. The first type is really just hedging. That means you're not proactively adding risk to what you have. In the new regulation, obviously, proprietary trading is banned, right? And so the third type is really the proprietary trader, the risk taker. These are the hedge funds or some portfolio managers. They need to focus on generating return and control the risk. So, that's where the beta and alpha, the concept comes in. It's a format. You want to beat S&P 500, so you want to basically have certain tracking of this index, but you Want to return more on top of that. I mentioned the currency example. Let me give you another example. There are a lot of people issue bonds, or issue debt. So this example I'm going to give you is, let's think about Australian corporate. Because interest rate in Australia is higher than in Japan, so typically, people like to borrow money in Japan. And they invest it in Australia. You earn higher interest rate. So let me ask you a question. Who can tell me, why don't people just do that all day long, just borrow from Japan and invest in Australia? Even if you are not a finance guy, you work in a corporate, you just do you import, export, or building a factory, you have to know, actually, what the exposure is. Risk management, nowadays, becomes pretty widespread responsibility. So, that's on the hedging side. If you're entering in a merger deal, and one company is buying another, you need to hedge your potential currency exposure and your interest rate exposure. And whatever is on the assets or the liability, or the balance sheet, you must hedge your exposure. that liquidity, and then takes the risk. They manage the book by balancing those Greeks, which I mentioned earlier. Delta, which describes the relationship of this whole book to the underlying stock, or underlying whatever currency. That's called delta. Gamma is really the change of the portfolio. Take the derivative to the delta, or the underlying spot. So, that's second-order derivative. Delta is the first order. So gamma, now you have curvature or convexity coming in. And theta is really-- nothing changes in the market. Nothing changes in your position. Vasily Kuznetsov: Arbitrage is really to find the relationships between prices, and try to profit from those relationship mispricing. He says the systematic trader builds computer models. Kuznets: Math is very useful in risk management, which I will give you some quiz -- questions -- to test your knowledge of the market. He adds that math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have to the risks you have in your bank account or in the stock market. Prof. Jake Xia: "I just want to give you the sense how math and intuition and judgment can come into the same place" "When you go to the market, you buy a stock. When the stock goes up, makes bit of money, the natural tendency is to let's take profit," he says. "If you have the discipline to get out, that's great. Trading is really all about how do you risk manage," he adds. "I'm not trying to tell you which one is right or wrong, but think about it" your bank account balance is-- let's say you are a freshman student. Your bank account is $800. Your choice will be very different from someone has $100,000 in his bank account. And also, your risk tolerance, how much you can tolerate. I'm not going to give you say, this is right or wrong. But with that, let me move on and give you some homework. So, before I give you the homework, I want to make a few more comments. Do people always learn from their experiences? In science, we collect evidence, we build models. Learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning during this class. Go to the course website, read what we have put up for the financial glossary. If you still have things you don't understand, compile your own list of financial concepts, which you can search on the web or even ask us. So, that's really-- and read other materials on the course work. So we got maybe-- how about this? We still got about 15 minutes or 12 minutes left, so I'll pass it to Vasily. every time. So, if you want to differentiate this functions and get a derivative, then this derivative will be quite noisy. And so, instead of getting the true derivative, you might obtain something quite different from true derivative just because there is a confidence interval around any point. So obviously, there is somewhere balance, and the question was, is there an optimal shift size to get the derivative? And that's what-- uh oh, the slide got corrupted. There was an answer. And we are implementing it in our systems and plan to use it in practice. what we had, we had the noisy observation of broker data and it was coming out at different non-uniform times. So, we decided to use Kalman filter and to study how it can predict. And that's one of the nice graphs [INAUDIBLE] produced, which again, we will use this strategy and the Kalman filters which he constructed in our e-trading platform in Moscow. Just to remind, the website is fully functional. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there.