Learn how the solar cell device converts sunlight, the input energy, to some usable output energy, which is in the form of electricity, typically, from a solar panel. Learn how to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed into maximizing amount of life that's actually absorbed. Learn about the duality of light, or how to think about light as a particle, or alternatively, as a quantified particle. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare. very simple yet very powerful formulation that describes not only the interaction of light with the solar cell material but also light through the atmosphere, light the water, many other forms of optical absorption. And for that, I'd like to call Joe up for a quick demo that will allow us to actually plot out Beer-Lambert's Law. What we're going to be doing is taking many sheets of material. This is just some polyethylene material, a little bit discolored. And we'll be inserting these panes of plastic in the middle. in some function to that medium and a certain amount of light is transmitted, we know, of course, from our little experiment that it follows some exponential function. So if we assume that the change of intensity within that medium in each little delta thickness is going to be affected by some sort of scattering intensity within the medium. We collapse the n and the sigma here into an alpha. That alpha is an absorption coefficient. The general equation is the same one that drives the reduction of light intensity as it travels through the atmosphere. We're going to look at two different materials, silicon and gallium arsenide. And we're Going to calculate the thickness necessary to absorb 90% of the incoming light at 550 nanometers. Did anybody manage to walk all the way through that calculation? TONIO BUONASSISI: I'm glad people are asking those questions. And then over the next few classes, we'reGoing to get to exactly what physical processes are going on. But I'm starting to get into the semester, so the energy level starts going down. There is a limit to how much we can trap light simply by modifying or corrugating the surfaces to enhance the optical path length. A gentleman by the name of Eli Yablonovitch, who's now a professor in Berkeley calculated these parameters I think back in 1982 and came up with an upper limit to the optical paths length. And that's a pretty good litmus test for the ability of a material to trap light. If you have silicon, for instance, with a refractive index of, let's say, in the infrared some around 3.6, your Yabonovitch limit is around 50, relative to the thickness of your material. fancier ways of light management as well that don't involve light trapping necessarily but light manipulation or even semiconductor manipulation. You can, for instance, change the wave length of the incoming light. If we can eliminate the longer wavelength stuff out here, which is heat, performance of most solar cell suffers when they get hot. And so if we manage to do spectral up converting or reflect that long wavelength light away from our device, we can improve performance there as well. So again, I wanted to really emphasize that light management is necessary devices. a coating on the back to reflect the light back so that it gets a second bounce through the material. I've engineered the front surface, texturized it so that we have not only the benefit of two bounces, double the chance of light going in, but also the Snell's Law working in our favor. And so all told, the one reason why this boost is so big right here is because I'm increasing the optical path length. And as a result, I'm getting a much larger current output. I'm absorbing much more light inside of my material. surface of a material, let's say right here, then you can cause each node, each point within your material, to lag by an increasing amount, so that your wave front now bends. And that will cause the light, essentially, if you trace through the points of maximum intensity, say the pink, you'll see that the light is bent. And so it's really exciting. There's stuff coming up every day on light trapping and light management. Mostly it's for photonic devices, but they can be transferred over into solar cells. today in class, don't let that constrain your thinking. That's my final message. Thanks. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. Back To the pageYou came from: Back to thepage you camefrom. Click HERE to see the full transcript of this week's episode of "This Is Life With Lisa Ling" with Lisa Ling, Lisa Ling and Lisa Ling on "Lisa Ling: The Next Generation"