RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. He recalls intermediate phase in a three-phase system. He says the solution model becomes very narrowly shaped, like a pin. All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point, he says. "I no longer need a solution model. I only need one point," Jaramillo says. 'I can't help myself. I got to draw the mouse-face plot' Magnesium nickel system has a number of different phases. At high temperature, this Laves phase develops some width. But when you drop down to low temperature, both of these intermediate phases appear as line compounds. These are very distinct structures, and they're only occurring at very distinct compositions. That's a hallmark of an intermediate phase. That is a line compound. Let's talk about compound formation energy. It is the free energy change for formation of 1 mole of compound from elements in their reference states.  silicon tends to be a pretty useful additive for copper-based alloys. There are silicon bronzes and silicon brasses-- that is, bronze and brass alloyed with silicon. There's an infinity of examples of line compounds, so I just want to show you some of different types.have some examples here. So here is a copper silicon system. So you can see that you can get a fair amount of silicon into copper. That's 10%. That's this kind of purple region. Those are ternary systems. solid solution phases. There's this little guy here and this little guys here and then, of course, the big liquid phase. But how many line compounds are there? Trick question. Somebody, please, how many lines are there in this system? Is it three? RAFAEL JARAMILLO: It's not three. that's why it's a trick question. somebody else? AUDIENCE: Four. RAFAel JARamillo: Four Yeah. It's four. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over Zoom. Doping some metals into silicon is as important as it gets. Silicon isn't fast enough for electronics or you need to use light in addition to electronics. Silicon carbide is one of the leading candidates for high-power electronics that are being developed today. It has a bunch of line compounds that broaden it to intermediate phases as you raise the temperature, which is 2,670 C. The last one, titanium-sulfur system, doesn't melt till 1,670C. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's look at the silicon-carbon system at low temperature. Carbon here is a line compound. Silicon is an element that actually does have a pretty wide, solid solution, great range. At low temperature, similarly to gallium arsenide, it's going to be a really boring free-energy composition diagram. It's just a triangle. So it's simplified a lot. Any other questions on the meaning or importance of this stuff? And then if there are no more questions, I'll finish up on the board. tie line there, alpha liquid equilibrium. We have internal composition variables. Chemical potentials are the same in both phases so that the coefficients are 0. The coefficient is 0. That's ensured by the common tangent construction. So this is just recalling, right? Now let's imagine two line compounds. I drew an unnecessarily-complicated example. Let me just follow through on that. B3A2 and B4A3. The Gibbs free energy of that thing is 3 times the Gibbs freeenergy of B and its reference state. It's 4 times that of pure G. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: I want to introduce this and get this in your minds. Let's imagine reacting metal M with 1 mole of oxygen to form an oxide. So zM plus O2 gas reacting to form MzO2. What's z? How do I determine z? Anybody? Does anyone know some oxides? Name for me a common oxide that you know. What is rock? What's the main component of rock? JARamillo: Silicon oxide, OK. z is an integer or a rational fraction, and it's fixed-- SiO2, magnesium oxide, Al2O3, so forth. So when we return on Wednesday, we're going to talk about the thermodynamics of this reaction. We'll use this property of being line compounds, and we're also going to use a bunch of other things as well. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnopin.