More than half of large US firms plan to use AI within the next year to automate tasks that were previously done by staff in a bid to cut costs boost profits and make their work more productive. The New York Times reports that generative AI could automate activities equivalent to 300 million full-time jobs around the world. open ai's chief executive that's Sam mman says governments will need to assume the bulk of responsibility in supporting workers AI labor market disruptions and the question will employees just end up training AI systems only to them be replaced by them. Chintan: There's a danger that we focus on all of this and on what it can deliver but frankly it needs people that understand it. There is no AI without data without the network to actually connect the you know act as the connective tissue to to the algorithms that are answering our questions and giving us our responses. If you can't secure that end to end then that's where that trust issue really comes into as you mentioned around cyber security. Chintan says we have to train the Next Generation in both these Advanced AI skills but also some of the fundamental essential digital skills that we need you. We're going to focus on the impact of AI on the world workplace and how some are now fighting back around the world and the UK. There's also now a concern that intelligent chatbots could replace roles that have traditionally relied on a more human touch things like customer service or call center center. We're also going to speak to one reporter who's been researching the threat posed to workers and how they are now fight back around world. We'll also be looking at how we can make AI valuable for everybody and not just the usual people who profit from technology. And we're going back to AI decoded to see if we can teach AI how to do our own jobs. Emma asks Emma if we will actually see an increase in Union membership for private sector workers in the United States. She says a lot of workers want to feel that their voices are part of the process in deciding how AI is going to be used. Emma says the model for unions needs to be updated for the 21st century too. Emma: I think we're looking at lower level jobs as a result of AI it's like we're flipping it on its head and maybe we could actually replace CEOs or Executives. were most at risk because of automation. People are realizing you have to throw out the door any ideas you had about who is really at risk and say every job is going to be changed. We just hope that the workers whose jobs are changing have a voice in saying how yeah it's turkeyy is not going to vote for Christmas are they if those are the ones that could find their jobs being replaced but there's so much in there and Stephanie just a final thought from you in all of this about briefly if you will. this and now Emma thank you so much we'll be reading closely uh as your investigations continue uh that is it we're out of time we'll do it at the same time next week bye-bye. This and Now Emma is on CNN at 10pm ET on Monday, November 14. For more, go to CNN.com/This and Now Emmett, or click here for more information on the CNN iReport app. The app is available in the UK and the U.S. and costs £3.99.