NORVIN RICHARDS: Today is phonetics, which means that today we begin making funny sounds at each other. So everybody limber up your vocal tracts. Let's see. I'm trying to remember if there's anything that I ought to announce. You remember, maybe, that problem set 1, which confusingly is your second problem set, is due on Thursday. Normally, it would be due on Tuesday. But because I am technologically challenged, it's due onThursday. I just figured out how to get the projector to project over there. Linguists have a system for writing sounds down so that we'll all know what kind of sound we're talking about. A lot of the symbols of the International Phonetic Alphabet resemble letters of the English alphabet. The symbol for the sound at the beginning of "paint" is the letter p. And so that's a symbol of theInternational Phonetics Alphabet. As we go along, we will be seeing weirder and weirlier symbols from the InternationalPhoneticphabet. like "thistle" and "this," where you're sticking your tongue between your front teeth and making air flow out. English doesn't spell these differently, at least not reliably, right? So we spell both of these with a "th" That's one of the reasons the International Phonetic Alphabet is there. We'll talk about the difference between them shortly, but at this point, maybe it's just clear they're not the same sound. There's a type of sound that has been called alveopalatal, also called postalveolar. Inventor: "r" is one of the kinds of sounds that people classically have trouble with. "z" is voiced and that "s" is voiceless. "g"s and "zz" are consonant sounds that agree with the consonant that's at the end of "cat" and "dog" The difference between "cats" and 'dogs' is voiced or voiceless, the phonologist says. "R" might be an example, but we'll get to "r," eventually. Polish has a rule that changes "g" to "k" at the ends of words. Voiced "b" becomes the voiceless version, which is "p" Joseph: There's a reason that I started with sounds like "s" and "z," and "f" and “v." Joseph: In homeworks, if you ever need to write about plosives, feel free to call them either "tt" or "plosives," because they're named after the fact. The way nasal stops work is you're stopping the flow of air somewhere in your vocal tract, but you're allowing the air to flow through your nasal cavity. You can have an alveolar nasal, right? "n," or a velar nasal, "ng" What would a glottal nasal sound like? Trick question. You would need surgery. So you would need, again, as I say, probably there are unethical surgeons who would modify you so that you could makeglottal nasals. English has interdental fricatives and alveolar stops, "t" and "d" There are languages out there that have what are called dental stops. Part of your job, if you're learning Tagalog, for example, is to learn to make dental 't's instead of alveolars. There's all this work on what people do to compensate for various kinds of obstructions in the vocal tract. And on the website, there will be a link to charts that will have more official charts by the IPA. "w," let's say, in the middle of a word like "away," that's not a stop. "y" sound at the beginning of "year" or "yard," and "l" and the "r" are all approximants, yeah. They are sometimes divided into glides and liquids. And I'm hoping that nobody will ask me how you know whether something is a glide or a liquid. But that's the prima facie reason for distinguishing them because there are rules for the distribution of sounds for which it's useful to have that distinction. distinction as long as it turns out to be useful for explaining stuff. Yeah? Good, all right. So those are glides and liquids, OK. And then I recall we were asking about this before. Sounds like chuh and juh-- I think I said you could think of chuh as a stop, a "t" followed by a fricative, shuh, or juh. There's a little bit of a debate about whether what I just said is the right way to think about this or not. English has a very large number of vowels and a not-very-good system for writing them. English spelling is so difficult that we can actually have competitions where you watch people spell. In many languages, the spelling bee would just never end because every word is pronounced exactly the way it's spelled. So here are two vowels. The vowel in "bead" and the vowel in “bad” Go ee-ah, eo-ah,. ee, ooh, ee. OK. Student: "Sue says he's a bad egg." Student: "Top chopstick shops stock top chopsticks" Student: [INAUDIBLE] Student: "[INAUDITED] Top chopsticks. Top chopstick. shops stockTop chopsticks." Got that from a book of tongue twisters. Student: ["INAUDible] Top Chopstick. Shops stock top Chopsticks." Student. "Top Chopstick shops. stock top. chopsticks". Student: "Top chop stick shops stock. top chop sticks." Student.: " top chop stick shop stock top chops" Student."Top Chop Stick Shop Stock Top Chopsticks"