Robotics is a really cool and important direction for the future. I really believe that in the future we will have AI assistance whether they are embodied or not to act as our guardian angels. These agents will help us with cognitive and physical work. With AI we will see such a wide breadth of applications for instance these technologies have the potential to reduce and eliminate car accidents. We have three types of learning and you have seen different aspects of these methodologies throughout the course we have supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. easily the images that get fed from the camera streams of cars um to the decision-making engine of the car. With all small perturbations you can turn the stop sign into a yield sign and you can imagine what kind of chaos this would create on a on a physical Road so machine learning is very powerful for building perception systems for robots but as we employ machine learning in the context of robots it's important to keep in mind the scope when they work when they don't work. In 1995 a Carnegie Mellon project called nav lab built a car that was driven by a machine learning engine called Alvin and Alvin drove this car all the way from Washington DC to Los Angeles. The car was in autonomous mode for a large part of the highway driving but there was always a student there right ready to um to take control. In 1986 German engineer Ernst Dickman started thinking about how he could turn his van into an autonomous vehicle and so he put computers and cameras on the van and began running tests on an empty section of the German Autobahn. It's really super interesting to think about how visual processing improved from one frame per 10 minutes to 100 frames per second and this has been a game changer for autonomous cars. The other thing that happened in autonomous driving was that the lidar sensors decreased the uncertainty and increased safety and today we have many companies and groups that are deploying self-driving cars. It's really exciting um okay now when we think about autonomous driving there are several key parameters that emerge as we Think about what the capabilities are. Alexander: We have very effective and Deployable solutions for robot cars that move safely in Easy environments where there aren't many static nor moving obstacles. Many companies and research teams are deploying and developing self-driving cars. Many of these preconditions revolve around certainty in perception planning learning reasoning and execution before we can get to Robo taxi but we can have many other robot solutions that are much that that can happen today. Alexander: We can use deep learning and reinforcement learning to take us from images ofroads onto steering and throttle and what you can do with this is really great. standard deep neural network and we have asked this network to solve this problem and the attention map of the network is really all over the place you can see that the network the the Deep neural network solution is very confused but check out something else the data that we collected was summertime data and now it's fall so the background is no longer green we have we don't have as many leaves on trees and so the context for this task has completely changed by comparison the the liquid network is able to focus on the task and is not confused. This kind of this kind of ability to transfer from one set of training data to completely different environments is truly transformational for the capabilities of machine learning. that yields models that generalize to unseen scenarios essentially addressing a challenge with today's neural networks that do not generalize well to unseen test scenarios because the models are so fast and and compact you can train them online you canTrain them on edge devices and you can really see that they are beginning to understand the tasks that they're given so you can see that we're really beginning to get at the semantics of what these systems have to do so what does this has to do with the future well I think it's so exciting to use machine learning to study nature and to begin to understanding the nature of intelligence and we in in our lab here at C cell we have one project that is looking at whether we can understand the lives of whales. There is so much opportunity for developing improved machine learning using existing models and inventing new models. If we can do this we can create an exciting work world where machines will really Empower us will really augment us and enhance us in our cognitive abilities and in our physical abilities. Just imagine waking up enabled by your personal assistant that figures out the optimal time and helps you organize all the items that you need for the day and then brings them to you. Just-in-time Holograms could be used to make the virtual world much more much more realistic much more connected. the kind of future that machine learning artificial intelligence and robots are enabling. I'm personally very excited about this future with robots helping us with cognitive and physical work. This future is really dependent on very important new advancements that will come from all of you and so I'm so excited to see what you'll be doing in the next years in the years ahead so thank you very much and uh come come work with us. "Thank you verymuch and uhcome come work for us," he said.