HONG LIU: So if you want to compute, say, some scattering amplitude from alpha to beta-- so alpha's some initial state and beta's some final state. Say alpha consists of momentum p1 and PN-- or pm, and beta, say momentum p m plus 1 and pn. And then you can get this scattering amplitude just by taking your momentum-space correlation function, OK, for the n points. So this is the relation, and here I have stripped out the momentum conservation on both sides. I will explain a few things. OK, so remember this Gn, so let's go back to the definition of this Gn. So this is obtained by doing a Fourier transform. Say-- I think it would be minus sign. By doing the Fourier transforms, the coordinate-space correlation function can be written as the following. So-- yes? AUDIENCE: Right, so time-ordering of x1 to xn right here? HONG LIU: Yeah. It doesn't matter. It just has to act to the right. HONG LIU: To derive that theorem, the time-order matters. So we mentioned that if you have a diagram like this, say minus P1, minus P2, to P3, P4, and then the square root and amplitude are just given by minus i lambda, because you need to throw away all the external propagators. OK, you just need to-- you have to truncate all the External propagators, so that means you also throw away diagrams like this. You can consider arbitrary, complicated diagram, OK, as far as that only happens-- yeah. The Dirac equation is one of the most beautiful equations in mathematical physics. It's actually describing electrons, so it's not only beautiful, but it's actually useful. The Dirac theory is a prime example of how people make great discoveries often for the wrong motivations. But the key is that if you are good enough, you will find something new and that something new will be useful. We'll talk about fermions in the next section of the lecture. We're going to talk about the Dirac equations and its covariance. go to a different frame. OK, yeah, that's what we mean by-- just when you go to adifferent Lorentz frame, the equation, the form of the equation looks the same. Just different observers in different laboratory, they see the same equation, OK? OK, so but for this to be Lorent z covariant, remember, LorentZ transformation transform t to x, so immediately, you conclude that H must be first-order in spatial derivatives. OK. So the only-- then the most general way you can write it is alpha minus i.  Dirac came up with the idea of Lorentz covariant equations. He reasoned, OK, if this is constant which does not work, and then let's make alpha and beta to be matrices. Then in order for that equation to make sense, then psi has to be a n- component vector. OK, it's really, say, a stroke of genius. It's really a strokes of genius because there was nothing like this before. Just even from a mathematical point of view, it is purely, purely imaginative, OK? They're just some constant Hermitian matrices. And then, so then he reasoned that for this equation, if we want this equation to be Lorentz covariant, then at least it should have the relativistic plane wave as its solution. If it does not even have that type of solution, then you, yeah, of course cannot be covariant. So this will be satisfied-- can be satisfied if square of star, OK, satisfies reduced to the Klein-Gordon equation. equation, then you just get partial partial t square psi equal to H square psi. And then we try to make this of this Klein-Gordon form. OK, so the right-hand side, we just have the form minus i with alpha dot with this, and then plus beta m square psi. So cross term now has the form beta alpha i plus alpha i beta. But now remember, beta and alpha, they are not constant. So you have to be careful about the orders. And so now you just try to find matrices, satisfy those conditions. HONG LIU: If we take a n by n matrix where n is not so small, then we can use that --? HONG LIu: No, you get-- just we are not using those matrices in the efficient way. Yeah, this become-- you can reduce always-- yeah, just from physical purpose, you can always reduce it to 4, yeah. OK? Good? OK, so for later convenience, let's introduce a slightly different notation, so now we have this equation. HONG LIU: I know some people develop psychological fears for fermions because you have to deal with those gamma matrices, OK? For a long while, actually, I have this psychological fear myself. But these are beautiful objects if you get used to them. OK, so now I will denote-- introduce a new notation so that it looks nicer. I'll denote the gamma 0 equal to i beta and then the gamma i equal to  i times beta alpha i. And then let's all pull it to the same side, and then this becomes the following equation. they're all physically equivalent. They're just corresponding to a change of basis. So but different forms of the gamma, they may be useful for different purposes. For example, this I, solution I we wrote down before, it's convenient for if you want to take the nonrelativistic limit. OK, they make your algebra a bit more convenient. So now if you look at the Klein-Gordon equation, let's see how this is covariant. And this is a Lorentz scalar, so this is also equal to that.