John Stuart Mill is the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency and respect for individual rights. The transition for classical to neoclassicals utilitarianism really went on in all fields of thinking about the human sciences at more or less the same time. What you're also going to get as a by-product of today's lecture is everything you ever needed to know about neocassical economics in 45 minutes. system of thinking about economics and the theory of value that was going to be tremendously influential. At the same time, more or less, there were very important developments in moral philosophy that I just want to alert you to, that we're going to return to later when we come to consider Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. And this movement that I'm mentioning here is the doctrine that would come to be called emotivism. It was associated with a man by the name of Stevenson who wrote several books advocating the emotivist doctrine. At the start of this narrative, you'll start to see why the transition from classical to neoclassical utilitarianism in economics was essential for the transition in political theory. We will return to the anti-Enlightenment and Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. But today we're going to focus for the rest of our time on the economics of the transition to utilitarianism. And I'm going to ask you to suspend your disbelief and just follow me through the ABC's of neoclassicals price theory. by-product is, you're going to get the whole of ECON 101 reduced to a single lecture. Because indeed it is true that enormously complex and subtle, and as sophisticated as the neoclassical theory of microeconomics is. It's all built out of three ideas that I'm going to spell out for you in what some of you might initially regard as laborious detail. But I think you'll see what I'm getting at once we get towards the end of today's discussion. So imagine a world in which there are just two commodities; in this case wine and bread. than anything I've talked about in these lectures. They didn't want to do that because they were actually concerned with quite another problem. The problem they wanted to solve was to understand the behavior of markets. They wanted to be able to more precisely to predict what prices were going to be in markets. So moving from cardinal to ordinal utility is going to turn out to have huge ideological consequences, which I'm going to unpack for you towards the end of today's lecture. But as an analytic matter, looking at this from the inside, it had the great virtue of providing the building blocks for a theory of price behavior. Prof: These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. Student: Because at the intersection they should have the same utility. Prof: So you've got a kind of contradiction on your hands, is that right? Student: Yeah. Professor: Okay, and just to spell out the contradiction more emphatically--I think you basically made the point. So we have a distribution here, okay? Now what Pareto said, he said, "Let's draw a line north-south through the status quo" which the radical fangs of classical utilitarianism have been ripped out and it is now a doctrine that is very friendly to whatever status quo happens to be generated in a market system. So it ceases to be this radically redistributive doctrine, and in the process imports into utilitarianism a very robust, some would say, hyper-robust doctrine of individual rights. We'll see how that played out in political theory when we come to look at John Stuart Mills' harm principle next Monday.