HONG LIU: So, first, we talk about chiral fermions. So, previously, we showed that the Dirac equation requires, actually, psi to have four components. And so there are two ways to reduce it, and one is called the Majorana fermion. So we first talk about the chiralfermion and one way to do it. And then, we will look at the specific representation of gamma matrices, OK? Consider-- so now I will use a representation which is different from what you-- so i divided by 4. HONG LIU: Let's look at this choice of gamma matrices, OK? So I will call this choice to be star. And so you can also work it out. So you find that they have the following form. So do you see something? Yes? AUDIENCE: They're block diagonal. HONG LIu: Yes, they are. So if sigma is block diagonal, then that means this S is also block. So when S is block, that means, if I write psi x into two component vector, they transform within themselves. HONG LIU: You don't need four components to be able to transform under Lorentz transformation. At least two components can already transform. So this tells you, in a sense, that the LorentZ covariance only requires two component spinors. So we have to do a little bit of work to do much work if you actually find the right trick to do this for any choice of gamma matrices. So you can check yourself that the gamma 5 is actually Hermitian. You need i for this to be true, OK? You can also take the product of all the gamma matrix together and then with a factor of i, OK?" HONG LIU: In the Dirac spinor, which we have talked about so far, is four components. In the chiral spinor we talked about, you have two complex components. The next one I'm going to talk about is the Majorana, in which case, I would argue, we have 4 times 1 real component. And, now, let's talk about the last case-- this case, which is-- you have four real components, OK? So what do you do? Again, we follow the similar strategy to see whether it's possible to have fourreal components. to impose in this basis. And this is now independent of massless or massive particles? HONG LIU: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, this is-- yeah. Good? So this concludes our discussion of the Majorana spinor. Do you have any questions on this? Yes? AUDIENCE: So is the orthogonal component of psi-- the Majoran fermion [INAUDIBLE]?? HONGLIU: Sorry. The orthogona component of this Majorana species-- like, possible-- in the chiral one, like, psi L. we have-- so this real scalar theory-- we can see that before. So this theory has a discrete symmetry because this is invariant under phi. It goes to minus phi, OK? So this is-- if you do it twice, you go back to itself. OK, so this is called the Z2 symmetry. And there are also spacetime discrete symmetries. So you can have so-called time reversal, which corresponding to your t, x goes to plus t. And so, altogether, they are called CPT symmetry. Yeah.