In automotive design Dynamics plays a very important part. In Dynamics there two sides to it one is here's the system what is its trajectory going to be in other words how will its various degrees of freedom behave over time. The Yang is you here's a system how do you modify it so that it behaves in a way that that's analysis so that's the first kind of the yin. The yin and the Yang are the same thing, they're just different ways of looking at it. that you want all right and that is called it starts with a C control so control is given a dynamic system how do you put an actuators Motors Rockets Etc so that the trajectory is what you wanted to be. So we're doing Dynamics end of the course we're going to solve the dynamical equations dou4 is controls where you actually try and put in extra things like cruise control so to make the system behave in a way you want it to behave so if you have a rocket open loop right it's called open loop and open loop system is a system that is not where you don't close the loop. AJ: I'm a little woozy today uh I had some serious drugs this morning prescription drugs and the result is that I might start babbling but you won't notice because I Babble anyway right so all right Sam didn't say that I said that I bet but anyway s was very respectful okay so uh in the last class we did uh uh we did a problem essentially the whole Pro class was we looked at you know the skier situation and there's a handout AJ's published right on the web where we do the energy formulation and we solve the problem. class but he also solves the problem the direct way and by coincidence the problem not comes out to be the same is it a coincidence no I'm joking it's not a coincidence the answer is the same both ways. Today we're going to do angular momentums we're still in points Point masses but this is the stepping stone the link to rigid bodies then we'll do a problem we're very problem oriented in this class and then we'reGoing to do yet another problem but we'regoing to do multi- particle. There's no class next Monday and um we posted the solution to that problem from class uh just one last thing I won't have officers today only because you don't want to hear me Babel I'm really sick um but I'm also going to change my officers um several people suggest so the timing isn't right um so we'll talk about the end of class but I I might go to like a Monday off M um like later on a Monday or maybe Wednesday later or something like that okay does it make sense would you prefer it not be midday Wednesday? I'm referring to something with no Dimensions but with a finite Mass you know that someone asked me the other day and I just want to be sure to say this. Let's say that you have a particle Point Mass heading that way some direction and let's define its velocity we'll call it a v p okay so I have um two questions both of which you probably know the answers to the first is what is the angular momentum of that particle just from your memory go ahead say it aha. this this this thing acceleration right so this is going to come out to be M or in fact I can re you know I can just kind of write the terms simply like this R QP cross m a acceleration of Point P right that's that term H that's right we'll write it yeah we'll get there that's exactly right okay exactly you're getting but you're you're exactly right so give me I'll write in The Next Step all right let's write this what do we do with this guy it's an ugly term right what do you do withthis guy here's what we're going to do. be clear this whole thing is this term and this is thisterm now let's let's write this The Next Step what is this what this m a acceleration of P or acceleration of p with respect to a hm H it's the force on particle P right cross product rqp yes now so I'm just going to put a dotted line so you know that that's what this is is this I don't think you'll disagree let me just write some draw some lines I'm trying to save space as I said. There is this term and you need to know about it okay it just so happens the term vanishes in many situations but it's key that you know see for Force f is equal to D by DT of P momentum completely coer Crystal Clear when you come to angular momentum it's say artifice yeah there's this funky term which vanishes. The reason this will become important is that when you look at rigid bodies it it actually you will end up doing something so this is a silly term but these are the two conditions yeah Q is fixed. it's not Kosher can't do it if I do I need to include that term right and you you've got a figure that a simple thing like my a robot is a very typical Dynamics application okay common mistake okay now that we've done this let's try and figure out why angular momentum is useful let's solve a problem any questions about this any questions bottom line if you're taking angle momenta about moving points be careful bottom line many conditions it'll be okay we'll elucidate we'll Express we'll we'll nail this conditions. she helps Congressional uh you know Congress analyze things from a physics point of view so you know when Katrina occurred someone asked if it would be possible to change the temperature in the when when a hurricane approaches to dissipate the temperature. She did some analysis and showed that you need something like a nuclear weapon but like you know the most the largest nuclear weapon ever conceived to even you know impact it by like 2% because the energy in a in a hurricane all right I told you I'd Babble all right let's do a problem here's a problem so imagine a um a table right. call this Theta the initial length is L one and the initial velocity is we'll call it a scalar because this is how I'm defining the problem of V1 when we actually solve it we might have to define a vector okay. As the thing's going around this person is going to pull the string down and as it kind of goes around it's going to spiral in and end up it's a new length L2 and the question is what is V2 going to be okay. an acceleration in this direction what else is happening maybe there's a potentially a tangential acceleration kind of an Oiler acceleration as well potentially right kind of thing okay maybe it's a drag slowing down speeding up we don't know right so in that direction there might be some acceleration okay so there's going to be a you know a net Acceleration kind of this way do you think we do right so what is the force on this in 2D where is the Force coming from on from this is so where does force get applied on this the string so the string is applying a tension force onthis right are there any other forces gravity is not an issue here are thereAny other forces no so the only Direction it can really accelerate in in fact is what towards this in this Direction right so there is a force onThis so is momentum conserved no is momentum Conserved in any direction linear momentum how about tangentially yeah yeah yeah tangentially it is conserved right it's just not conserved towards the center but the problem with the tangential momentum is when it's here it's the directions change. P right torque of Point Q about Point p is equal to going to be r p R QP cross F and FP is pointing inwards so what is going to happen to that zero right so there is no torque on this particle at any point in time it's just a very long way to say listen things going in circles and the only force is radial if we take a cross product it's going to vanish which is why this is such a convenient formalism. Works in things where Works in situations where the force or something always points to the center. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. The whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem now you know the irony is this problem you could have done before you took this class the only difference is you know all the ways you can do it wrong. you the initial velocity I'll give you the initial angle of veloc angle of speed Theta dot Theta one dot so I'm solving a slightly different problem here with the ma is but it's the same same problem in terms of math. If I have the length of the cord the angular speed is going to double and the reason it's more interesting it could because when you watch a skater you know do the uh what's what's it called the twirl you know when figure skaters kind of rotate.  angular momentum is a vector out of plane in 2D you see that okay is energy conserved for this particle why not well think about it you wor yeah work it out has the energy gone up or gone down. The energy kinetic energy is gone up by the square a velocity right and um so energy is not conserved so where did the energy come come from yeah that's because you were doing work by pulling it right potential energy is constant so the can energies because you can also do this with energy by the way right. Two particle masses basically a dumbbell and they're attached rigidly by a massless bar massless and I scoot them across and it's rotating it's hurling through through you know across this rink. I'm going to try and identify understand the behavior in fact I'll make it even more complicated by attaching two rockets get it Rockets right to this thing. The Rockets are designed such that they always Point North all right so they always point in in the horizontal Direction in the on the Whiteboard right. p and particle Q is that reasonable it's perfectly reasonable but do I have a kinematic constraint and what would the kinematics constraint be H yeah it's a they connected by a rigid body so they can do whatever they want as long as the length between the two of them remains constant right by the way if instead of a rigid bar if I had a string connecting them what would  the kinemic constraint be less than equal to to R right but in this case it's  a rigid bar so it's equal to R to R. stick if I have something at the end of a stick can I apply like a you know does it only have to be a force inwards right. Next week we'll pick up on this and essentially what we'll do is I'll do the three body diagram. Define angular acceleration and moment of inertia and a more General sense okay so let's stop here because we are over time. CL you I mean you're getting that's right so there are a couple of ways to interpret this okay it's a massless rod and I'm invoking the strong form of Newton's third law.