JUDY HOYT: We're going to begin this lecture on handout number 14. We'll be moving now to chapter 7. This will be our first lecture on chapter 7 on the topic of dopant diffusion and profile measurement. The placement of those regions determines many of the so-called short channel characteristics of MOSFETs that we'll talk about. And finally, the doping of other materials, not just the silicon itself, but of the polysilicon gate affects things like things like point defects in silicon. gate depletion and limits how well the gate voltage controls the channel potential. So we really need to understand the placement of these atoms. Let's go on to slide number 5. Here, again, I'm picturing that same MOSFET structure with the resistance of the different regions. And in general, as a rule of thumb, of course, we'd like the resistance. of the regions that are extrinsic to the device, such as. the contact resistance, the source and drain resistance, and the. resistance of these extension regions, hopefully should be no more than 10% of the channel resistance. detailed device physics, but it's just to give you a flavor for why studying dopant diffusion is such an important topic. So let's go on to slide number 8 and talk about a topic called the short-channel effect. This basically takes place when the distance between the source and drain-- that is the channel length L-- becomes comparable to the MOS depletion width in the vertical direction. And then that the source-drain potentials themselves from theSource and drain regions end up having a strong effect on the control of the current in the device. In silicon IC processing, there are two different steps that we refer to in diffusion historically. The first step was so-called predeposition. And what this refers to is that you had an initial step in which the dopants were introduced into the silicon wafer. In the more modern technology, it's usually done by ion implantation, which is a process that we're going to discuss later and is covered in detail in chapter 8. The second process in creating a region of the wafer with a certain doping is typically referred to as the drive-in. This is a subsequent anneal after the pre-dep that then diffuses and redistributes the dopant. get of these dopants if you did a predeposition at that temperature. At 1,000 degrees, you can get something like 3 to 4 times 10 to the 20 electrons per cubic centimeter by introducing arsenic into the lattice. If you introduce more arsenic than that, it may still be below the solid solubility, but you won't get any more electrons. It's not electrically active. It may not precipitate until you get up into the 10 to 21 range. Dopant diffusion is described by Fick's first law, which describes how the flux or the flow of dopant depends upon the doping gradient. When the concentration gradient goes to 0, essentially, the dopant or the atoms are uniformly distributed, say, in the solid, and the flow would stop. Later on, we'll talk about the more atomistic diffusion mechanisms and effects of dopants in the silicon lattice. We're going to consider macroscopic first-- macroscopy models for diffusion. which it's possible to write down or to derive relatively simple analytic solutions to the diffusion equation. In all the other cases and most of the cases we'll end up using in this course, we'll have to do numerical solutions. But for now, let's look at a couple of special cases where we can solve this equation by hand. The first case is pictured on slide 24, which is called the steady state. And what that refers to is that, in fact, we have a profile that is not varying in time. In semiconductor processing, linear scales for dopants are not all that useful. So we often care about how the dopant falls off over many, many orders of magnitude of concentration. In the second case, which is a fixed dose Q, just like we talk about, constant in time. But now we're diffusing near a surface. We can solve it by using, essentially, the prior solution, pretending that the medium is semi-infinite. And the third case is essentially an infinite source of dopant which is made up of small slices. of cases where there are analytic solutions. We talked about the diffusion of a Gaussian profile with a fixed dose. We apply this diffusion to a constant surface concentration. And finally -- we talk about the diffusion of a complementary error function, which we apply for a constant level of surface concentration. The diffusion of this error function can be applied to a fixed level of surface concentration, or a constant level of substance on the surface, for example.