Adam Martin: How do you go from something you're interested in learning about an organism to actually identifying genes and mechanisms that are important for that? Martin: The two heroes of today's lecture will be the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. He also highlights a couple important vertebrate-model organisms-- the zebrafish and the mouse. Martin: Most of them are fairly small, and they're easy to house large numbers of them in a lab. regulator of this orchestra, if you will? And so conceptually, what a genetic screen would involve is taking hundreds, maybe thousands, of orchestras like this one, and just shooting an individual in this orchestra. And rather than taking a gun and shooting members of the orchestra, in genetics, you try to identify mutations. So we're looking for mutations. And these mutations could be spontaneous mutations, meaning you didn't do anything to induce it, but they just appear as a variant in the population. mutations. In the way we can induce mutations is by using some type of mutagen. If you're feeding an organism some chemical mutagen, you're inducing random mutations in different places. And you don't know which are the ones that you want until you look at their phenotypes and try to find the needle in the haystack. In model organisms, we can actually find these types of mutations in the body patterns of flies, humans and other animals, Martin says. "Wingless" mutant defined a gene that has a homologous gene in humans. Haystack: How can you identify genes that have that function in a given process? Haystack: Eric Wieschaus and Christiane Nusslein-Volhard did one of the more famous genetic screens that had been done, and they won the Nobel Prize for their results in 1995. How do you look for incorrect body patterning in flies at some stage of development that are defective in patterning? Yes, what's your name again? And so I'll show you how to do it. Drosophila larvae looks like. And you can see it has a segmental pattern here. But you see there are these segments that alternate between smooth cuticle and hairy cuticle. And because there's a lot of hairlike projections here, it reminded the researchers of a hedgehog, and so this mutant became known as "hedgehog" The hedgehog gene was the founding member of an entire signaling pathway that plays important roles in human development and also, human cancer. There are now a number of drugs that are being developed to target the hedgehog pathway. Robert Horvitz won the Nobel Prize for his work on how cells decide what fates they give rise to. His lab at MIT studied the worm Caenorhabditis elegans, which has 947 somatic cells. 131 cells, during the development of this animal, underwent programmed cell death. This is not random cell death; it's the same cells every time. A mutation that affected cell death that blocked this process is called ced-1. And what you see in this worm is a bubble-like structures that are dead cells but haven't been engulfed.  defects in the genes that were identified in Drosophila actually are relevant to human sleep disorders. So this screen identified a gene called "period" This is a gene. And there's a hammer log of the period gene in humans. And the gene in human is associated with familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome. So these mutants that the Benzer Lab identified had altered period of the sleep-wake cycle, and therefore, the gene was named "period." All right, I'm all set.