MIT OpenCourseWare offers high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourse Ware at ocw.mit.edu.The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT Open courseWare continue to offer high- quality educational resources. The i3 is an efficiency and urban-optimized transport vehicle made by BMW. It's an all-electric, the fact that it's fundamentally an electric vehicle is key to the i3. like the smart car. And so architecturally, distinguishing feature is definitely the electric drive. So I think it's good, but I think you're just missing a little bit on the technology there. What about i3 and EPFL? Anybody do the i3? Nobody. Anybody else here? Yeah, Veronica. AUDIENCE: Thank you. OLIVIER DE WECK: OK. There's a lot there. I would throw a question. A concept you defined could almost apply to a Tramway as well. If this was like a streetcar, don't you think it would apply to that as well? bank, a cafeteria, student services. But you could encompass it in a meeting area. You meet and you do some stuff like eating, going to the bank. In that sense, it's pretty similar. But I think the Rolex Center is such an iconic building that it also serve a kind of a prestige function, to put the institution on the map in terms of it's a statement. It's not just a utilitarian building. Whereas, I would argue our MIT student center, it has very similar functions to theRolex Center. It doesn't have that wow factor. is the beneficiary? That's a stakeholder. The stakeholder has needs. And then this is a funny thing here. The needs have these little bumps. This is meant to indicate a cloud. So this means that the needs are somewhat vaporous. They're not very well defined. And so you interpret and incorporate some of the needs into goals, which become requirements. The goals then are an instrument of the primary delivery value delivering process, which is your value proposition. To then actually deliver that value you need to design the product. EPFL's Olivier De WECK explains how to reduce the spoilage rate of food. He says there are a number of ways to do it, including irradiating, drying, chilling and preserving. He also explains how bears use fat to transform it into fat and store it inside their bodies. The full interview is available on CNN.com and on the CNN iReport app for iOS and Android. For the full interview, visit CNN.co.uk or the CNN YouTube channel. For more, go to www.cnn.com/news. In order to chill, we need a chiller, and there are different types of chillers, like a cooler or refrigerator. The combination of this specific way you're going to operate the system is what we call concept. Once we have that, we can start managing complexity, decomposing function and form. Design, then, selects the actual values for those design variables, and then optimize the cooler and then the refrigerator for those values, if we look at the example of a cooler. The goodness of an architecture is really a pretty complex concept where we have multiple objectives to satisfy, including performance, resource utilization, cost, operability, safety, capacity, and so forth. So architecture requires consideration of both function and form related through concept. It's about starting with the operand. What is the thing that the beneficiary, the stakeholder cares about, and how do we transform that? Concept then elaborate these into architectures that have form function and structural complexity. So the NASA approach is basically described in the system engineering handbook in the SE engine as step 3 called logical decomposition. System design and management program is a full-year program. It's focused on decomposition, which is an important part of architecting. So let me talk about methods and tools for concept generation. So what are different ways of stimulating or organizing creativity? And what I'm showing you here is-- that's essentially a mind map of how to think about the creativity space. And we'll talk about very briefly mind mapping and then morphological matrices. And then we have this whole area here, which I'm going to mention, but we're not going to do as part of the class. How to Think Like Leonardo, Seven Steps to Genius. The seven da Vincian principles of creativity in Italian. Avoid the killer phrases. Creativity killer sentences. This will never work. We don't even need to talk about this. Everybody does it this way. I've already studied this problem for years. Don't worry, I know I'm right. How long have you been with this company? Anyway, so that's the idea. All right Leonardo. Who's been to Italy or tour in France, or who's seen one of the exhibits know where his notebooks are on display? Leonardo's seven principles of creativity are: curiosita, lifelong quest for learning. Dimostratzione, testing your knowledge through experience, trying things out. Sensazione, continual refinement of the senses. Mastering ambiguity, paradox, uncertainty. Arte/Scienza is the whole brain thinking, left-right brain. Corporalita, balance of body and mind, so a healthy mind and a healthy body. Connessione is interesting. That gets close to system architecture, which is the appreciation of patterns, relationships, connections, and systems. conceptual design, don't do all the details. We just go down two levels of abstraction. And then the really cool part, the exciting part in concept generation is the one that it's really a creative activity. And when you look at the set of creativity techniques, you can think of group dynamics like the brainstorming. That's used very heavily, but you have to do it the right way. If you organize a brainstorming session, and there's some wiggle room, but if you violate some fundamental principles of brainstorming you're not going to get the full benefit.