Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side. So I hope that's a good sign. I don't like to have exams out too long before you get a chance to look at them. Ahern: Why do I videotape my exams? I find it decreases the looking around factor by a factor of about 100. [student laughs] It does, Ahern says. Professor Ahern videotapes students' answers to questions. He says he finds most students are honest. But he has had a handful of situations where dishonesty has been an issue. Ahern: "There's just too many eyes here and not enough of our eyes" to see what's going on. "I will post the key outside my door after we give the exams back," he says. "That's something that you should know. I know I will get some answers on that that don't say none" Ahern: How can you have two apparent Kcats? and the answer is it depends on how you calculate the concentration of the enzyme. If you take Vmax and divide it by the total concentration of enzyme, you will see a reduced Kcat compared to the uninhibited enzyme. The fewer the questions I have, the more points each question is worth. And so people are always worried about that. So I have to try to strike a balance. And this balance, I think works fairly well. at least who indicated time problems. Next term, the format of the exam changes in 451. Most people like 451 better because the maximum number of points on a question I think is 3. Professor: We have a lot of shorter answer questions. But we're working problems, we have to work through problems and that's why. If you're going to spend a fair amount of time on something, it should be worth more points. But literally, I rarely have much of an issue with the other two exams. Ahern: I hope everybody got how I start my lecture. The first thing I say is "Okay folks, let's get started." I don't live consciously, I just blurt it out. Alright, well let's turn our attention. Thank you for your feedback. That's not a lot of feedback, but I do appreciate feedback and I'm always happy to listen to what you have to say about exam formats. And I do take suggestions. The suggestion about having other possible choices is one, as I said, I've done and I won't rule out. S1 proteases are a class of enzymes that are called serine proteases. They all have serine, histidine, and aspartic acid as a catalytic triad at the active site. It's very easy to alter the genetic code for any of these proteases and change which amino acid is presence at any given place. When they do that, and they compare the activity, so this is the log of Kcat. The wild type enzyme has an activity up here. One 10 millionth as active when that serine is changed to an alanine. Business of creating nucleophiles is not unique to proteases. One of these is an enzyme we've been talking about some already, that's the carbonic anhydrase. Students: Would you like a joke? Ahern: Yeah. Okay, so let's stretch. So this my, this is my magic genie joke, alright? This is not a computer joke. Depends on where you lean, I suppose. "This is really awesome, "I'm a really powerful guy. "I want every woman to love me." and poof, he turns into a box of chocolates. Carbonic anhydrase can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second. Most enzymes have a fairly narrow pH range where they work that's ideal. At pH 9, the enzyme is far more active than it is at pH 7, indicating that a very, very important step is the removal of that proton. The rate of formation of the nucleophile is the critical step in the catalytic action of this enzyme like that of the proteases that you saw before.