Sarah with register nurse rn.com goes over how to check Vital Signs. Vital Signs are pain oxygen saturation temperature heart rate respirations and blood pressure. You want to provide privacy to the patient and tell them what you're going to be doing. If they do have pain ask them the quality what does it feel like and where it is at. There's several ways you can take a temperature every facility has a different system set up so use what you want. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. they have but you can take it orally you can taken it axillary you cantake it tanic in the ear or you can takes it temporally or rect um rect is the preferred route usually on your pediatric patients but in adult patients normally we do it orally. axillary and temporally the readings are going to run about one degree lower than oral. For tanic and rectal temperatures it's going to usually run about 1 degree higher than your oral reading. A normal temperature is about 97° fit to 99° F okay and take the thermometer out and read it and his temperature is 98.2 and then clean it properly. In this video we're going to go over the one step blood pressure of how to obtain it manually. We are going to palpate the brachial artery this is in the bend of the arm and make sure you ask the patient which arm you can take their blood pressure in because you don't want to take it in arms with if they've had blood clots or they have a shunts things like that. We're blowing it up to about 200 mm of mercury and we're listening for the first sound and that first sound will be our blood pressure. Mark now we're listening for whenever it stops and whenever it stopped that's our diastolic okay it stopped right at 65 so his blood pressure is 114 over 65 so that is how you check bottle signs now whenever you're done remember to let the patient know what their bottle signs were and um do hand hygiene and clean your equipment before you go to the next patient so be sure to check out all my other videos on nursing skills and thank you so much for watching and for all your support.