Prof: You know why I am dressed up? When I do this course and when I do the first half of the French course I do a lecture on the bourgeoisie, the middle classes. Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. So, as a result, look at this. I wear this about once a year. Unfortunately, I wear it to funerals. The last time I wore it was something Bill Clinton had, some mutual friends. The middle classes started dressing like this in the nineteenth century, dark with a little bit of color. When you see Daumier or you see Delacroix's famous Liberty Leading the People, and you see the bourgeois, there with his top hat, he's dressed in a bourgeois uniform like this. That emerges out of the bourgeois century. The French Revolution, and here's an important point, opened the way by removing legal blocks in very many places to the open talents of each soldier. At the very top there are the great bourgeoisie, the big bourgeoisie. These are people who are big financiers. Then at the bottom you have the petty bourgeoisie, and everybody making things together. The middle class likes to see themselves as useful. You find lawyers reaching in there and, slowly, doctors. Doctors increase a self-identity and become more important in the nineteenth century. Notaries know all of the secrets of people with money. Can you imagine going to a conference like the World Congress of the Petty Bourgeoisie? All they do is start up your body and look at your body. as a jungle. Then you have to imagine this as a ladder, like this. Social mobility is the goal. You want to have enough money to leave to your 2.2 children. Then to really make this go you'd have to have vines up here like the jungle. And then you would have to grease this pole through bad economic times. Let's say in Europe 1816-17--don't write this down, if you do, you're compulsive--I'm compulsive. If you can't get credit because people withdraw the credit, same thing. Then here you go. Look out. "This is how the people on the bottom part of this ladder viewed the demands of the working class. They want to vote, too. What if they vote and somebody wants to raise your taxes or something like that? Boy, that's scary. But what's down here? This is ordinary people. This is your jungle and you're trying to make it up there to the big time. The chances are that in these bad years you're going to fall down. But yet lots of people get up and the ranks of the middle class increases everywhere" man doing? He's counting his money. That's a very nineteenth-century profession, as it is for every subject. They still had arranged marriages. Love could count for something, but marriages were still essentially, less so for the middle classes than for ordinary people, but economic relationships. They were economic relationships, wrangling over the dowry and that kind of thing. The bourgeoisie didn't kiss and hug a lot. But he's got his hand draped rather daintily on the old guy's arm. He's not about to embrace him and give him a big kiss on each cheek. LZ Granderson: Buildings reflected how much money you had, and where you lived reflected how well you had. LZ: The more you go up there, you're still within the middle class. People were aware of what these symbols meant, he says. He says the emergence of the public concert as opposed to the chateau or church concert is another theme. Lz: The piano replaces the harpsichord in J.E. Plantinga, who's a retired professor of music, has got great stuff on this. I was trying to explain how people on the top rung were trying to beat down people at the bottom. I ended up smashing this umbrella, sort of the imaginary of somebody smashing their guitar onstage. But the point is that the umbrellas come with the middle class. They're not these big colored things you have now. It was the idea of protecting that one suit. I'm from Oregon. We didn't carry umbrella, because it rained all the time anyway and I'd just lose it. until you have universal male suffrage, by how much taxes you paid and how much property you own. Property reflects one's belief in one's social worth. No longer was it the worth of blood. So, they formed these national guards, particularly after revolutions and after 1848, or after 1830. For all the variety within the middle classes, so beautifully depicted by Daumier and other people, they still, when push came to shove, shared an awful lot in the bourgeois century, that of the nineteenth century.