JUDY HOYT: We're going to begin this lecture on handout number 14. We'll be moving now to chapter 7. This will be our first lecture on chapter 7 on the topic of dopant diffusion and profile measurement. The placement of those regions determines many of the so-called short channel characteristics of MOSFETs that we'll talk about. And finally, the doping of other materials, not just the silicon itself, but of the polysilicon gate affects things like things like point defects in silicon. gate depletion and limits how well the gate voltage controls the channel potential. So we really need to understand the placement of these atoms. Let's go on to slide 3. Since we just talked about the idea of the resistance of these different regions, I just want to remind people what the general form for how one calculates the resistance. We know that the resistance in ohms can be calculated by the product of rho, the resistivity of the material, which has the units of ohm centimeters. your text. Here, again, I'm picturing that same MOSFET structure with the resistance of the different regions. We'd like the sum of those terms to be less than or equal to 1/10 the channel resistance. To reduce those resistances, we would like to increase, in general, the junction depth xj. However, there's a problem that if we make the junctions deeper, it will make it easier for voltages at the drain to affect the current flow in the channel. that also scales down with time to thicknesses by 2009 on the order of 15 to 30 nanometers-- quite shallow. We really need to up the dopant concentration. And there's a fundamental physical limit on how much dopant we can put in the silicon and how much it will be electrically active. So this is becoming a real problem. We need to find new ways to activate dopants to higher levels if we're going to be able to manage this design tradeoff. And what I'm going to spend some time in the next few slides is giving you some sense of how these doping profiles need to be controlled and what their impact is on device performance. detailed device physics, but it's just to give you a flavor for why studying dopant diffusion is such an important topic. So let's go on to slide number 8 and talk about a topic called the short-channel effect. This basically takes place when the distance between the source and drain-- that is the channel length L-- becomes comparable to the MOS depletion width in the vertical direction. And then that the source-drain potentials themselves from theSource and drain regions end up having a strong effect on the control of the current in the device. is not that sensitive to the vertical junction depth, as you can see by comparing the diamonds to the stars. So this lower variation of the Vt with L effective or with channel length allows a larger design window, which we need because there's always going to be some process variations in the channel length across the wafer. And this enables the technologists to push the channellength down to smaller dimensions. So it's not so much a fundamental improvement in device performance, but it really enables you to manufacture circuits with these shorter channel devices. In silicon IC processing, there are two different steps that we refer to in diffusion historically. The first step was so-called predeposition. And what this refers to is that you had an initial step in which the dopants were introduced into the silicon wafer. In the more modern technology, it's usually done by ion implantation, which is a process that we're going to discuss later and is covered in detail in chapter 8. The second process in creating a region of the wafer with a certain doping is typically referred to as the drive-in. This is a subsequent anneal after the pre-dep that then diffuses and redistributes the dopant. get of these dopants if you did a predeposition at that temperature. At 1,000 degrees, you can get something like 3 to 4 times 10 to the 20 electrons per cubic centimeter by introducing arsenic into the lattice. If you introduce more arsenic than that, it may still be below the solid solubility, but you won't get any more electrons. It's not electrically active. It may not precipitate until you get up into the 10 to 21 range. out for a couple of reasons, mainly because it points to the fact that as we increase doping, we don't always get an increase in the electron concentration, and therefore a decrease in resistance. OK, so let's go on to slide number 21. And we're going to consider macroscopic models for diffusion. Later on, we'll talk about the more atomistic diffusion mechanisms and effects. And hopefully, you've read part of chapter 7, and you know that Fick's first law, which describes how the flux or the flow of dopant depends upon the doping gradient. The proportionality constant is called the diffusivity D. It has units of length squared per time or centimeter squared per second. D is related to the atomic hop rate or the jump frequency over some kind of energy barrier. And this energy barrier is associated with the formation of migration energies of mobile species. In the silicon lattice, by symmetry D is isotropic. So it doesn't depend on which direction you're diffusing. And of course, the negative sign in this Fick's first law indicates that the flow is down the concentration gradient. that says the change in the concentration delta C in the time period delta t is just equal to the difference in these two fluxes-- the incoming flux minus the outgoing flux-- divided by the distance, delta x. Mathematically, instead of writing it in terms of these differences, we can write it mathematically as partial derivatives. We can write delta C by delta t as partial C by partial t. So the time rate of change of the concentration isequal to the partial of the flux divided by x. which it's possible to write down or to derive relatively simple analytic solutions to the diffusion equation. In all the other cases and most of the cases we'll end up using in this course, we'll have to do numerical solutions. But for now, let's look at a couple of special cases where we can solve this equation by hand. The first case is pictured on slide 24, which is called the steady state. And what that refers to is that, in fact, we have a profile that is not varying in time, in which case we write partial C partial t. profile of the oxygen through the oxide during thermal oxidation. And again, in that case it's a concentration profile that's not changing with time. So let's go on to slide number 25 and do the first solution of a case that's a little more complicated than that, which is called the limited source case. And we find that the solution that satisfies Fick's second law is written down by this equation. The concentration is a function of x and time can be given by that constant dose Q divided by 2 times the square root of pi Dt times the exponential of minus x squared over 4 Dt. In semiconductor processing, linear scales for dopants are not all that useful. We often care about how the dopant falls off over many, many orders of magnitude of concentration. If we can assume that there's no dopant loss through evaporation or segregation at the surface, then we can essentially solve it by assuming that we have virtual diffusion. So, in fact, if we go on to slide number 27, that same the graph is.see many order of magnitude down below the peak what the broadening actually looks like. shown at the top. Effectively, what this means is that we have a dose of 2Q introduced into a virtual infinite medium by symmetry so that the concentration profile is given, again, just by the same Gaussian we had last time. But instead in that formula wherever we had Q, we replace it with 2Q from the prior solution. So the surface concentration now goes Q over the square root of pi Dt. And so this is what the equation looks like for diffusing with a fixed dose into a surface where we have no loss. the square root of Dt, where the second equation and third gives you the definition of what we mean by the error function. Error function of z is just equal to 2 over the squareroot of pi times the integral from 0 to z of this exponential-- it's integral of a Gaussian, basically. The complementary error function is 1 minus that. And then these error functions and complementary error functions have been tabulated. So in that sense, it can be calculated analytically. In the predeposition case, at the surface of the silicon wafer, the concentration of the dopant is fixed at the solid solubility. The longer you would do the pre-dep, the more dose you would deposit into this silicon surface. Let's go on to slide number 35 and talk a little bit about dopant diffusion coefficients themselves. And we'll talk about some interesting Fermi level effects that come into play as the dopants become modulated by the carrier concentrations of the species. of cases where there are analytic solutions. We talked about the diffusion of a Gaussian profile with a fixed dose. We apply this diffusion to a constant surface concentration. And finally -- we talk about the diffusion of a complementary error function, which we apply for a constant level of surface concentration. The diffusion of this error function can be applied to a fixed level of surface concentration, or a constant level of substance on the surface, for example.