The size of the ribosome is similar to that of the rhinovirus, a little smaller than the hepatitis virus. In order to make proteins like hemoglobin and antibodies, we need large entities that are made up of either nucleic acids alone or nucleic acid plus proteins. The transfer RNAs are a large entity in the cell. They're big enough to see, whereas the small catalysts are out of view right now. The size of this molecular machine. This is we're getting pretty large now. Proteins themselves are not big enough to see. So that's what you're destined for today. All right, OK, so I've started to place on this board some of the molecular players, the messenger RNA, the transfer RNA, and the ribosomes, which are made up of ribosomal RNA plus protein. And I want to just remind you about the structure of the mature messenger RNA just for a minute because, in the last class, we talked about a lot of manipulations of that pre-messenger RNA. acids that might be designated as the so-called 21st, 22nd amino acid. We have selenocysteine in just very, very few proteins. There are other organisms, for example, in archaea, that have another amino acid known as pyrrolysine. So it turns out that the genetic code, which forms the basis of this entire concept, has some features to it where it does have some degeneracy. But we'll go through the degeneracy, and we'll take a look at the Genetic code because it will tell us exactly how the words made of three bases encode everything we need for translation. have the ideas, but, really, the definition by doing a process known as cell-free translation where they could very carefully add components to understand how the code, the genetic code, was formulated. So that's the work that Khorana and others did. And that was awarded them a Nobel Prize for that work. Later on, things started to get-- you know, these are decades of work I want to point out to you. The ribosomes were discovered. That was a decade later, the sort of details of the structure, but not the structure itself. And it was really exciting in the 2000s when Ramakrishnan, Steitz, and Yonath solved the structure of the prokaryotic ribosome. The ribosome is an important structure in the mechanisms of protein translation and synthesis. The 3 prime hydroxyl group of the last ribose within this ribosomal sequence is where the amino acid that's going to be loaded into your protein is attached. One of the loops has a special name. It's called the anticodon loop. It comprises three nucleotides that are complementary to the nucleotide in your messenger sequence. So this really is a decoder because, at one end, it's carrying an amino acid, but it's also carrying the aminoacid that corresponds to the code that's in the messenger via that anticodon loops. The genetic code gives you the identities of what are known as the codons, which is how we designate the triplet of nucleotides. So you can read, for each amino acid, what three-letter codon would correspond to it. And we'll generally tend to just stick with this one table and stick with it. So, if I'm going here, here, it's going to be starting UU. And then, within each block, there are the four alternatives for the other four bases. In bacteria, methionine equals a modified version of the amino acid. Methionine is fairly rare. There may only be one or two more in the protein. Some organisms might prefer two or three of the degenerate codons, and others may prefer a couple of the others. Some companies now will fix the codons in a gene for you to make them compatible with a different organism for expression. It's at its most extreme with residues such as leucine where there are six codons that specifyLeucine. The genetic code is the code that's going to be embedded within the messenger RNA. When you're looking to read what your amino acids that get put in may be, you're going to look at the codon. And it will tell you exactly the amino acid. A long time ago, I used to be confused because I thought I should be looking at the anticodon. And I was trying to translate everything, and it was a real mess. But it's the genetic code in that box that I just showed you is written down. need to be able to do that quite readily. All right, next portion, those monster-- loading the amino acid. The ATP makes this chemistry feasible, but there's one more player here. And that's the enzyme that brings them all together, which is known as an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. And it synthetases it. So that's how its name gets subtracted. So, with reference to an earlier question, what I'm showing you here are different. synthetases for different amino acids that show you that there's a recognition not just for the amino acid that's being loaded, but, rather, for the entire transfer RNA. So some of these look quite different. The isoleucine one interacts in one way. The valine one is a little different. And the glutamine one is different again. So they vary in the way they interact with the transfer RNAs. And, on those synthetases, there will also be specificity for the acids side chain. That's how you get the specificity. The small and large subunit is the messenger, the transfer RNAs, and the ribosomal all to scale in such a way that it can really explain it. What happens, first of all, is that the small subunit kind of floats along, looking like a fish. And so here's the messenger. It's being read 5 prime to 3 prime. And there's one more unit on here that I won't describe too much. Generally, it's thought to help the loaded tRNA come to theribosome, get it in place, and then go away. In each step, you're bringing in a tRNA that's loaded with an amino acid where the anticodon of the amino acid is complementary to the codon that's within the messenger RNA. Methionine is the first amino acid. And it's always at the N-terminus. Then there's another amino acid comes in. And then the next thing that happens is there's a movement such that a new bond gets-- a new amide bond is formed between the methionine and the phenylalanine. That's how that comes together. When proteins are made on the ribosome, they have a bit of a choice. They can get made and fold beautifully into active proteins. Those proteins could be modified. They could go to different places in the cell. Occasionally, proteins misfold. Maybe the rate of synthesis is too fast, or the environment isn't right. So there will need to be mechanisms whereby proteins get degraded if they're not folded properly. It's not always perfect, but what is known now is that they're starting to fold almost immediately from that N-terminus to, ultimately, attain their compact shape. fix errors is editing when you've loaded the wrong amino acid onto a tRNA. But what happens when the DNA message, the DNA starting point, is wrong, which means the messenger is wrong? So I'm just going to give you a couple of terms here. First of all, this entire chunk would be called the reading frame. It's the portion of DNA that's going to be read and transcribed into the messenger RNA. And, when you look at the two strands, you're going to have to figure out which one is the template strand. an error in the DNA that then causes anerror in the messenger RNA. So we have what's known as a frame-shift mutation. And what we've done by doing that is introduce wrong codons. The next types of mistakes are ones that are what are called silent mutations. Then the last ones are the ones where we start to encounter errors in DNA that result in errors in proteins that may cause genetically inherited diseases. The last one is a missense mutation where we've got an error in DNA, which has resulted in an error. quite what we would call conservative. Nonsense mutations are not so bad because you probably just truncate the protein. The missense mutations are the more serious ones because you end up with a full length protein that might have a mistake in it. And then that would affect the function. Am I being clear enough to everyone? Yeah? Good. OK, I am going to tell you that I'm handing over the baton to my colleague, Professor Martin. He'll take over on Monday. He's keen on genetics, yeah. "I think this field is fascinating. Once you get used to the mechanics of it, it's really cool to think of how you go from DNA to RNA to folded proteins," he says. "Don't forget my office hours on Monday if you need them," he adds. "I'll be in the lab all day, every day, if you want to talk to me about it." "I've got a lot of questions for you," she says, "but I'll be happy to answer them."