hey everyone it's sth register nurse rn.com and in this video we're going to be going over our weekly inlex practice question. Don't forget to check out the other practice questions in this series. Let's see what our question says a patient who has a health history of uncontrolled hypertension coronary artery disease and diabetes militis is prescribed to take propanolol. You have provided the patient with education about this new medication which statement by the patient indicates your teaching was effective. An ool these are our beta blockers so propanolol is a beta blocker. There's several groups of beta blockers you have ones that act on just that heart tissue specifically their beta 1 receptor blockers and then you have these which act on both the beta 1 and beta 2 receptors. Whenever you take this drug it acts on those neurotransmitters specifically norepinephrine and epinephrine so those will be blocked and in the heart and what will happen is that you will get a slower heart rate instead of that tacac cardia.  Beta receptors do they increase a process called glycogenolysis. When a patient has hypoglycemia the body tries to correct that so it will do glycogenolyssis which is going to break down glycogen to glucose. However this is being blocked in this patient this process it's slowing it down. If they're taking a beta blocker that is blocking that response they're not going to have that classic Tac of cardia. Later on their sugar will drop so much and it may be too late before they can treat it. Grapefruit juice contains chemicals that can slow the absorption of the medication. If a patient misses a dose of their beta blockers they don't need to double the dose they need to take it as soon as they remember unless that next dose is due. If you're taking double the doses they are at high risk of a cardiac event. If the patient is already diabetic taking insulin probably that's what we assume and um so they have to monitor their blood sugar especially with these non-selective beta blockers. look and see why D is wrong this patient says that they're going to stop their beta blocker immediately if they experience cold hands and feet well this is a normal side effect with these non-selective beta blockers. You would never just immediately stop taking a beta blocker they need to be tapered off of this because if they just all of a sudden quit taking that medication they can go have cardiac death or something worse can happen so that answer is wrong for that reason okay so that wraps up this inlex practice question.