AI is replacing human tasks faster than you might think according to a CNN business article more than half of large US firms plan to use AI within the next year to automate tasks. The New York Times reports that generative AI could automate activities equivalent to 300 million full-time jobs around the world open ai's chief executive that's Sam mman says governments will need to assume the bulk of responsibility in supporting workers AI labor market disruptions and the question will employees just end up training AI systems only to them be replaced by them.  AI is now serving up predictive insights so that if you're a new hire it will say hey did you know this is where you should look to go for your first day. Instead of spending you know 10% of your time looking for information the information to do your job is coming to you. I think it's been a massive massive value ad for our our teams and they give us a lot of feedback on it around the globe as well yeah um it's such an interesting point isn't it you know if it freezes up time it makes us more productive but yeah possibly doesn't. Chintan: There's a danger that we focus on all of this and on what it can deliver but frankly it needs people that understand it. There is no AI without data without the network to actually connect the you know act as the connective tissue to to the algorithms that are answering our questions and giving us our responses. If you can't secure that end to end then that's where that trust issue really comes into as you mentioned around cyber security. Chintan says we have to train the Next Generation in both these Advanced AI skills but also some of the fundamental essential digital skills that we need you. We've got an increasing sort of divide between those who have the topend skills but actually perhaps people who don't have some of the more basic digital skills that we need. And so that's a sort of skills Gap isn't it and and Stephanie I wonder whether firms are ready because I'm looking at numbers here 97% of companies say that yes they know they need to do this but I think what 14% say they're actually ready to do it that's quite the Gap yeah and we just saw yesterday here in the United Kingdom the Prime Minister was discussing this sort of plan for The King's Speech. Stephanie: What can we do to make it so that AI is valuable for everybody and not just the usual people who profit from technology yeah um Natalie let's throw that to you first of all because you've been nodding along here what do you make of of what Stephanie asking it is? Natalie: For us equality inclusion how do we make sure that to your exact point AI is used to democratize access to jobs access to different experiences we're really focused on that even in our hiring organization right now we've been leveraging AI to Source the planet for talent.  AI decoded is our weekly look at the impact of AI in the world workplace. This week we'll focus on the threat posed to workers and how some are fighting back. We'll also speak to one reporter who's been researching the threat to workers. And we'll talk about the case study of a call center worker who was subject to AI training. All this and more on AI decoding on BBC News tonight at 10pm. Click here for the first episode of AI Decoded. Emma asks Emma if we will actually see an increase in Union membership for private sector workers in the United States. She says a lot of workers want to feel that their voices are part of the process in deciding how AI is going to be used. Emma says the model for unions needs to be updated for the 21st century too. Emma: I think we're looking at lower level jobs as a result of AI it's like we're flipping it on its head and maybe we could actually replace CEOs or Executives. were most at risk because of automation. People are realizing you have to throw out the door any ideas you had about who is really at risk and say every job is going to be changed. We just hope that the workers whose jobs are changing have a voice in saying how yeah it's turkeyy is not going to vote for Christmas are they if those are the ones that could find their jobs being replaced but there's so much in there and Stephanie just a final thought from you in all of this about briefly if you will. this and now Emma thank you so much we'll be reading closely uh as your investigations continue uh that is it we're out of time we'll do it at the same time next week bye-bye. This and Now Emma is on CNN at 10pm ET on Monday, November 14. For more, go to CNN.com/This and Now Emmett, or click here for more information on the CNN iReport app. The app is available in the UK and the U.S. and costs £3.99.