The famous example was posed by Comte de Buffon back in the 18th century. It marks the beginning of a subject that is known as the subject of geometric probability. The problem is pretty simple. We take a needle that has a certain length-- l-- and we throw it at random on the plane. The needle might fall this way, so that it doesn't cross any line, or it might fall that way, and it ends up crossing one of the lines. If the needle is long enough, it might actually end up crossing two of the Lines. The joint PDF is going to be equal to 4 divided by pi times d. We have made some assumptions, which you might even consider arbitrary. But these assumptions are a reasonable attempt at capturing the idea that the needle is thrown completely at random. We just need to consider the event of interest, express it in terms of the random variables that we have in our hands, and then use the probability model to calculate the probability of this particular event. The event can occur with any choice of theta. So theta is free to vary from 0 up to pi over 2. to this number. So the upper limit of this integration is going to be l over 2 times sine theta. And all we need to do now is to evaluate this double integral. Let us pull out the constants, which is this 4 with this 2 give us a 2. We have 2l over pi d. And this is the final answer to the problem that we have been considering. And now, a curious thought. How can you figure out the number pi? Take your needle, throw it at random a million times, and count the frequency with which the needle ends up crossing the line. This is a so-called Monte Carlo method, which uses simulation to evaluate experimentally the value, in this case, of the constant pi. Of course, for pi, we have much better ways of calculating it. But there are many applications in engineering and in physics where certain quantities are hard to calculate, but they can be calculated using a trick of this kind by simulation. Here's a typical situation. Consider the unit cube. Inside that unit cube, there is a complicated subset which is described maybe by some very complicated formulas. And you want to calculate the volume of this complicated subset. that these days, physicists and many engineers use methods of this kind quite often and in many important applications. The method is used in a variety of scientific and engineering applications. For more information, visit: http://www.physicists.org.uk/physicist-methods-of-this-kind-used-in-many-important-applied-technologies-and-practical-practices.html. For information on how to use this method in your own research, visit www.physiologists.org/technology/technological-technology.