Political philosophy is the oldest and most fundamental part of political science. Its purpose is to lay bare the fundamental problems, the fundamental concepts and categories which frame the study of politics. Political philosophy can boast a wealth of heavy hitters from Plato and Aristotle to Machiavelli, Hobbes, Hegel, Tocqueville, Nietzsche, and so on. The study of political philosophy often begins as this course will do also, with theStudy of the great books of our field. The best way to learn what political philosophy is is to study and read the works of those who have shaped the field. Yale professor: Study of great thinkers of the past can degenerate into a kind of antiquarianism, into a sort of pedantry. The great works provide us with a repository of fundamental or permanent questions that political scientists still continue to rely on in their work, he says. "The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are right and when they're wrong, are more powerful than is commonly understood," John Maynard Keynes wrote in 1935. "We are called to read and listen to the greatest thinkers, and then enter into a conversation with one that makes it possible for the readers to disagree with one another," he adds. What is justice? What are the goals of a decent society? How should a citizen be educated? Why should I obey the law, and what are the limits, if any, to my obligation? And of course, the all important question, even though political philosophers and political scientists rarely pronounce it, namely, quid sit deus, what is God? Does he exist? And what does that imply for our obligations as human beings and citizens? Those are some of the most basic and fundamental problems of the study of politics. A regime indicates a form of government, whether it is ruled by the one, a few, the many, or as more common, some mixture of these three ruling powers. Regimes are necessarily partisan, that is to say they instill certain loyalties and passions in the same way that one may feel partisanship to the New York Yankees or the Boston Red Sox. The regime is always something particular. It stands in a relation of opposition to other regime types, and as a consequence the possibility of conflict, of tension, and war is built in to the very structure of politics. Fierce loyalty, partisanship: it is inseparable from the character of regime politics. Henry Adams once cynically reflected that politics is simply the "organization of hatreds" This raises the question whether it is possible to transform politics, to replace enmity and factional conflict with friendship, he says. Is such a thing possible? It can't be ruled out, but such a world administered by international courts of law, by judges and judicial tribunals, would no longer be a political world. The study of regime politics is in part a study of the distinctive national character types that constitutes a citizen body. You can't understand a regime unless you understand, so to speak, what it stands for, what a people stand for. This raises a further set of questions that we will consider over the term. How are regimes founded, the founding of regimes? What brings them into being and sustains them over time? For thinkers like Tocqueville, for example, regimes are embedded in the deep structures of human history. Political philosophy is an imminently practical discipline, a practical field. Its purpose is not simply contemplation alone: it is advice giving. None of the people we will study this semester were cloistered scholars detached from the world. But the great thinkers were very far from being just, so to speak, detached intellectuals, writes David Frum, a professor of political philosophy at the University of California, San Diego, and author of "The Politics of Statecraft: A History of Political Philosophy" The study of political philosophy is in many ways a kind of immersion into what we might call today comparative politics. A regime, as I've said, constitutes a people's way of life, what they believe makes their life worth living. What has or ought to have a claim on our loyalty and rational consent? What is the best regime? Even to raise such a question seems to pose insuperable obstacles. But the good citizen, Aristotle goes on to say, is not the same as the good human being, right? Philosophy will never feel fully or truly at home in any particular society. The philosopher can never be truly loyal to anyone or anything but what is best. In the best regime, if we were to inhabit such, political philosophy would be unnecessary or redundant. This is why political philosophy is always and necessarily a potentially disturbing undertaking. Those who embark on the quest for knowledge of thebest regime may not return the same people that they were before. You may not have realized it when you walked in to this class today, but the study of political philosophy may be the highest tribute we pay to love. see you back, and have a very good but thoughtful September 11^(th). See you back on 9/11/11. I'll see you back in a week or so. Thanks for your support and good wishes. I love you all, and see you on 11/11 /11. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. See you in a month or so, and I'll be back to see you in the U.S.