Prof: You know why I am dressed up? When I do this course and when I do the first half of the French course I do a lecture on the bourgeoisie, the middle classes. Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. So, as a result, look at this. I wear this about once a year. Unfortunately, I wear it to funerals. The last time I wore it was something Bill Clinton had, some mutual friends. The middle classes started dressing like this in the nineteenth century, dark with a little bit of color. When you see Daumier or you see Delacroix's famous Liberty Leading the People, and you see the bourgeois, there with his top hat, he's dressed in a bourgeois uniform like this. That emerges out of the bourgeois century. The French Revolution, and here's an important point, opened the way by removing legal blocks in very many places to the open talents of each soldier. It was always in the nineteenth century sort of classic to poke fun at bourgeois culture, and in some cases the lack of it. Of course, this is a caricature of middle class self-absorption, of narcissism, of this inveterate cruelty to the classes below them. But there's been an awful lot of good work done on the middle classes. Among them my dear friend Peter Gay, his five volumes of the Bourgeois Century, take on the idea that the middle class are philistine. class lived without passion, and were philistines, and that sort of thing. Aristocrats didn't form voluntary associations. They didn't need to. The middle class formed voluntary associations, and many of these were for extremely charitable purposes, particularly in Britain. The Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals, these sorts of organizations really are one of the classic examples of bourgeois voluntary associations doing good things. They get together for social reasons in the coffeehouses of England, and in the clubs, circles you call them in France, and their equivalents. in Germany, and Italy, and Spain. One of the more ludicrous kind of mottos, we call it a devise, a motto, of the Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals was in one of the organizations in France. You can see how, in places in which bullfighting over the long run in the nineteenth and twentieth century, such as the very south of France and in Spain. There were always movements to try to protect the bulls, which seems like a reasonable thing to do. church. They found to their horror that it was less than they thought. They also discovered that if everybody who had wanted to go to church had gone to various churches, Anglican, Catholic for the Irish and for a certain minority of British citizens, that they couldn't have accommodated all these people. So there's a massive kind of church building campaign that has its counterpart in almost every country as well. Certainly in France after the Paris Commune of 1871 they start building churches in the working class districts perched on the edge of cities. the 1970s on what they used to call the new urban history, which is counting people up and deciding who might well have considered themselves middle-class. Inevitably I have to talk some about Paris because the work is so rich there. A woman called Adeline Daumard wrote a dissertation that was subsequently published called Les Bourgeois de Paris. She determined that somewhere between 17 and 19 percent of the Parisian population in the first half of the nineteenth century would have been considered bourgeois. you'd find a sizeable middle class, but it would be nothing that you would have if you compared Madrid to Barcelona. Lyon would be a good example. Lyon has the most tightly closed middle class that you can imagine and still is. In Russia, the estimates are about two percent of the population were middle class. And, of course, they are clustered in Moscow and in St. Petersburg, and in Kiev, now Ukraine, always Ukraine but then part of Russia, in the large cities. At the very top there are the great bourgeoisie, the big bourgeoisie. These are people who are big financiers. The nineteenth century bankers will become much more important for perfectly obvious reasons. What also makes them the high bourgeoisie, a small percentage, it doesn't really matter where this line goes, is that they have access to political power. Even if they're in Prussia, a place that's dominated by the nobles who are called the Junkers, they will still have access by virtue of their wealth topolitical power. rule from 1830 to 1848. In the portraits of him, the paintings that he had done to represent who he was are very different than those of the Bourbon kings. The Bourbon kings are all looking like, even the pathetic successors of Louis XIV, they're looking like big people in chateaus. Here we have smaller bankers, not in size but in money, industrialists, merchants, these kinds of people. Lawyers rise up rapidly in popular esteem and usefulness. You find lawyers reaching in there and, slowly, doctors. Notaries know all of the secrets of people with money. Schoolteachers were a way of social mobility for peasant families. The petty bourgeoisie had a self-identity. Can you imagine going to a conference like the World Congress of the Petty Bourgeoisie? They all had their little nametags. It's really pathetic. They do is they start up your body and look at your nameteags, and see if it's worth looking at your face. It was a very pathetic time. good job, even though often they were undereducated and it was kind of hard for them to do that. Schoolteachers you'd find here, and also café or tavern owners, weinstube owners. These are the petty bourgeoisie. When things are going pretty well they do pretty well themselves. But when things aren't going well, they don't do well. That's why they're on the barricades all these times, as you know, in the French Revolution. as a jungle. Then you have to imagine this as a ladder, like this. Social mobility is the goal. You want to have enough money to leave to your 2.2 children. Then to really make this go you'd have to have vines up here like the jungle. And then you would have to grease this pole through bad economic times. Let's say in Europe 1816-17--don't write this down, if you do, you're compulsive--I'm compulsive. If you can't get credit because people withdraw the credit, same thing. Then here you go. Look out. "This is how the people on the bottom part of this ladder viewed the demands of the working class. They want to vote, too. What if they vote and somebody wants to raise your taxes or something like that? Boy, that's scary. But what's down here? This is ordinary people. This is your jungle and you're trying to make it up there to the big time. The chances are that in these bad years you're going to fall down. But yet lots of people get up and the ranks of the middle class increases everywhere" man doing? He's counting his money. That's a very nineteenth-century profession, as it is for every subject. They still had arranged marriages. Love could count for something, but marriages were still essentially, less so for the middle classes than for ordinary people, but economic relationships. They were economic relationships, wrangling over the dowry and that kind of thing. The bourgeoisie didn't kiss and hug a lot. But he's got his hand draped rather daintily on the old guy's arm. He's not about to embrace him and give him a big kiss on each cheek. of thing. Look at our guy on the left. He's working very hard there. He'll work very hard and he's educated. He had probably not secondary education. Most people didn't go to high school, secondary, lycée in France or gymnasium in Germany. It represents this world. By the way, we also know that this takes place in the center of Paris, right behind a big department store, subsequently the Hotel de Ville, but right near the town hall. The more you go up there, you're still within the middle class. You've got an artist up here with not much money, but he still has a little bit of furniture, not much, his nosey neighbor looking at his painting. Then on the top you've got the poorest of them all, besides the cat who's on the roof up there. This is your classic Hamburg financier's apartment. There's more than one room. You'll see in a minute there's even more than two rooms. There are lots of rooms. The middle class arguably helps create the notion of childhood. What the middle class wants, besides social mobility and access to political power, is they want space. Children come into their own in the nineteenth century. To be a middle class person is to want privacy and to be able to look after your own.household. There again you see the trees. We're in the same apartment there. You have real, real copper pots. Back before the Bush dollar, people would buy, bring back from Paris and from Europe these enormously heavy Copper pots. Ordinary people did not cook with things like that. There we go. sure, nobles had children, but it was a different way of bringing up your children. Nobles did not send their children to public schools or even to private schools. They were educated, to some extent at least, by private tutors. Even the notion of the children's hour was inconceivable for the majority of Europeans. The whole salon, the idea of going to see art shows. It really starts in the eighteenth century. The middle class wants to be seen rather like the Dutch middle class that we talked about in the seventeenth century. I was trying to explain how people on the top rung were trying to beat down people at the bottom. I ended up smashing this umbrella, sort of the imaginary of somebody smashing their guitar onstage. But the point is that the umbrellas come with the middle class. They're not these big colored things you have now. It was the idea of protecting that one suit. I'm from Oregon. We didn't carry umbrella, because it rained all the time anyway and I'd just lose it. until you have universal male suffrage, by how much taxes you paid and how much property you own. No longer was it the worth of blood. So, they formed these national guards, particularly after revolutions and after 1848, or after 1830. For a while they go march around. But these are mainly there to protect them against the workers. Should one day all of these people try to rise up, climb up this ladder, you'll be down there to stomp on their fingers or to shoot them down. these bourgeois panicked and start going into a house full of very ordinary people and simply shooting them all. The light lines disappear with Daumier. He did another one of these after a massacre in 1848 in Rouen and it's been lost. We don't have it. The rue Transnonain, where this happened in the center of Paris, simply disappeared. It didn't quite disappear from the collective memory of people thinking about Parisian things. In conclusion, the middle classes extremely vary. They share much. They have a common material culture. They want to vote.