HONG LIU: This is a key relation between the bulk and the boundary theories. The more you go to the interior of the space time, then corresponding to the lower energy process when viewed form the field theory. This actual dimension can be considered as a geometrization of the energy scale. It's called the normalization group flow, how physics evolves when you change the energy or length scale. So you can also view that the evolution in the gravity side, in the field theories. say from the boundary to the interior, and that this flow in the z direction can be considered, again, to geometrize the normalization group flow of the field theory. So now let's talk about some further aspects of the duality. The duality is that once you realize there's such relation, since the two sides are completely different objects, so the game is that you really have to do lots of guess work. Essentially, you have two sides if you want to relate things on two sides. How does this quantity translate into that quantity? And then check the consistency. together, you have eight [INAUDIBLE] four-dimensional supercharges. But the interesting thing is that by definition, the supersymmetry on the gravity side is actually local. So you actually have the same amount of local supersymmetries. So if you look at this correspondence between each other, then you actually see a pattern. So now let me make some remarks. On this side, all these symmetries are global. But on the field theory side, the global symmetry is mapped on thegravity side into the local symmetrie. For each global symmetry in the field theory side, there's a corresponding local symmetry on the gravity side. The isometry is important for the following reason. Even though this is a subgroup, when we talk about quantum gravity, the AdS5 times S5 specifies the asymptotic geometry of the space time. So-called large transformations is that they don't go to the Identity at infinity. These large gauge transformations can be considered as the global part of the diffeomorphism. The gauge symmetry is just redundant freedom. You never see it on the other side. translate into the flux. So the flux N. And then here is corresponding to you have SU(N). So this R, this curvature radius is related to the alpha prime squared and the gs. And so on this side, the dimension parameter is given by R squared divided by alpha prime. From this relation, 4 pi GS is equal just to G Yang-Mills square. And the N is N. This is the relation between the parameters. So on the gravity side, we said these are the two parameters. And of course, you also have this N. expanding 1 over N squared. So as we said before, we often do dimensional reduction on S5. Let me get a five dimensional Newton constant. And the difference is the volume of S5, which is equal to pi cubed R to the power fifth. And then from here, you can just work out. G5 has dimension 3. Then G5 divided by R cubed, again only related to N given by pi divided by 2N squared. And here, when I write these relations, I have all set h bar equal to 1. The classical gravity limit is the same as QFT, Quantum Field Theory in curved space time. So gravity does not fluctuate. But your matter field can fluctuate, h bar equal to 1. In type IIB super gravity, there are many, many such kind of matter fields, and they all should be treated quantum mechanically. Just don't treat the gravity as quantum, but those matter fields should be treating as quantum. And now, we see that the decoupling of the string effect requires on the field. theory side the strong coupling. This is also something roughly we said before. The strong coupling, then the diagram with many, many vertices will dominate. And then the most dominated diagrams are those diagrams with not a lot of vertices. And they essentially are going to continue to limits. So that means that we can actually use classical gravity to, in principle, solve problems which are strongly coupled. So also, of course, there are corrections beyond this. So this is a classical gravity limit on this side. HONG LIU: In principle, the corrections beyond this limit can again be studied on the gravity side. In the classical string limit, still you can see the N go to infinity, which corresponds to GN. But here, the alpha prime can be arbitrary. And here the [INAUDIBLE] coupling can be arbitrarily. So let me just say alpha prime finite no longer zero. And then this is just corresponding to Lambda finite, which is no longer infinite. So this is a standard t Hooft limit. a general correspondence between some conformal field theory and some AdS gravity theory. HONG LIU: Yang-Mills theory lives on Minkowski space. And then you say you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. AUDIENCE: So if it's a sort of postulate that's just thinking about it, it's not required that the theory live on the boundary of AdS. HONG LIU: In the representation line, so if you have the massless [INAUDIBLE] field on the right, what does it map to on the left? We are going to talk about it. So if there are other symmetries, then everything should match. So now, as an immediate check, you can now just open your old papers. And if you load them, you will immediately see they actually map to certain representation of operators on the N equal to 4 super Yang-Mills theory. Then you can immediately check them. a few minutes. So now, given this mapping, any operator is due to a bulk field. Then you can ask some immediate questions. For example, the quantum numbers of these operators will map to the quantum number of the bulk fields. And that's something I said you can check their symmetries. So for local operator on the field theory side, so once we have this mapping we can immediately ask questions related to operators on this side, and try to ask what's the counterpart on the other side. And ask the story about the field on the gravity side. When phi 0 is equal to constant, then this corresponding to a change in the coupling for this operator. So if your Lagrangian previously already included this operator, and then if you add such a term, then you are just changing the coupling. And if this operator is not there, thenyou just add the new coupling. But in general, you can make it space time dependent. And the immediate question is, what does this operation-- so in the field theory point of view,you can always do this operation. guesswork is based on some very small clues. Good physicists do is that they can see non-ordinary things from ordinary things. So here, I will try to deduce the answer to this question by starting from this relation. Related to the GS. GS string coupling can be considered as the expectation value of the dilaton field. Let me actually call it capital Phi. In principle, phi in principle can fluctuate. And its expectation may also be. And so this is the value of AdS, value of phi at the boundary. able to fluctuate in the space time. But the only sensible way to talk about expectation value is to. talk about its value at the boundary because we assume the boundary conditions don't fluctuate. And in the AdS, which is also space time with a boundary, than we can associate the constant parts of the expectation value as the value at. the boundary. This is the coupling or source for the Lagrangian of N equals to 4 super Yang-Mills theory. And this corresponding to you essentially change the boundary value of dilaton. phi 0 O in the boundary theory must be related-- now I'm generalizing this story. The bulk field phi due to O has a boundary value phi 0. In principle, you can choose any O. You can break the symmetry if you want. Impose this kind of boundary conditions. Then you may break AdS symmetry too. So in the end, what we will describe is a self consistent story. I will not contradict myself in my later discussion. So if we assume this, I can also use this to argue. N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory and this type IIB gravity. Any conserved curve in the boundary theory must be equal to some gauge field in the gravity side, and the stress tensor should always be due to the metric. I can use this identification to make star and star star natural for any duality. So this does not prove it, but makes it more natural. The fact that the boundary value of A has such kind of gauge symmetry. So in some sense, this must generalize to some Gauge symmetry in the full gravity side. The mass corresponding to the boundary value of the metric in the gravity side for the following reason. When we consider the information, we always consider the source is small. But now, we can argue this thing, mass corresponds to the boundaries of the AdS metric. So this tells you that the stress tensor must be due to the metric perturbations in thegravity side. So, this is a very general statement valid for any correspondence between the gravity. and the bulk. metric. and the field theory. And that also tells you that if you have a theory which due into a higher dimensional theory, and then that theory has a stress tensor, then this bulk theory must have gravity. So you can say, if any field theory is due to a theory of one higher dimension, that theory must involve gravity-- nothing about quantum gravity. Let's stop here. We're not going to get into quantum gravity right now, we're just going to talk about the theory of gravity.