The Peloponnesian War was fought in 431 BC. After the war, Spartan power had grown to an unprecedented degree. For the first time there were lots of Spartans, who had lots of money. The Spartans had choices that they could take. They could either stay in the Pelop onnesus, or they could contest it in their power to control the entire Greek world in the east. Or they could have some control of the Aegean and the Hellespont. Lysander was the great victor of the Peloponnesian War. His policy was the extreme policy, the "let's conquer it all" He was not a legitimate Spartiate, he was a pure Spartiate. The Spartans disagreed among themselves as to what was necessary, even if you were going to take that path. The most aggressive, overseas, let's conquer and control everything in the Aegean was Lysander. There were great arguments against the Lysander approach, for one thing, the number of Spartans was pretty small. Lysander was a general and the very best general of all, and the man who was put in command of the forces. He was a man of extraordinary ambition, and ancient writers tell us that he had developed the notion of actually bringing about a revolution in Sparta. This newly founded Spartan Empire was different from the Athenian Empire in a variety of ways. The Spartans had simply betrayed the Asiatic Greeks whom they had engaged in the rebellion against the Athenians and instead of liberating them, put them under Spartan rule. Law of Epitadeus allowed people to buy influence and power in Sparta. This money, of course, allowed for corruption. So, there was jealousy and resentment and fear at Sparta that something bad was going to happen to the Spartan way of life. Pausanias and his tradionalists bided their time for the opportunity to put a spike into this development. It was as obvious as it could be. It seems reasonable to me that most scholars would like to place this period in this period. Sparta had been reduced to total defeat, absolutely at the mercy of the Spartans. Athens, which had been the greatest empire that the Greeks had ever seen, feared the same fate they had visited upon some states that had defied them. The Spartans didn't do that. Instead, with Lysander in charge of the settlement that was going to be imposed on the Athenians, they placed in a small group of oligarchic Athenians just as he had in the rest of the empire. should be no democracy in Athens. It was an easy point of view to arrive at in 404. People who were not friendly to the democracy could simply point to the fact that the democracy had just lost this great war. And it was exactly the kind of idiotic idea that a democracy would come up with so that democracy itself was seen to be inherently wicked. The Greeks thought a division into two kinds was the right kind, the most important kind, a division between the high and the low, between the good and the bad. guys and therefore you shouldn't have anything to do with ruling anybody. So, that was the basic widespread view of what was natural in the Greek world. Now, you add to that that they've just lost this terrible war and you could point to what seemed to you to be both a wickedness and foolishness. How in the world could anybody think democracy was a good thing after that? Lest you think there's something special about that, that's such a characteristic of the human race. Critias, in any case, was determined that Athens in the future would not be a democracy. In fact, it looks like he was very much taken--again, this is typical, with the virtues of Sparta, because Sparta had won the war. So, he had in mind a very narrow oligarchy. But Athens, of course, was also inhabited at that time by all of the exiles who had been sent into exile during the democracy, and they were bitter enemies of the democrats, at least lots of them were. Thirty--just to make the case that--actually a man named Peter Krentz, and he is an old Yalie, so, we ought to give him credit. Ultimately, in the course of these months, the Thirty limited citizenship, active participation in the government of any kind to only 3,000 Athenians out of what would have been at least 21,000 and probably more. Only these had citizen rights. The rest of the Athenians did not. Well, pretty soon people objected to what the Thirty was doing, made complaints, and the Thirty began to go after them. When things got really bad, when the Thirty needed money they actually put people to death just because they were rich. as much as they could in collaborating with the Germans just to make their--the fate of the Frenchman less hard and to help France in the future in that way. That's the way it was with most Athenians; most Frenchman and most Athenian didn't do either of those things. They kept their heads down and tried to live their lives as best they could. I think what you need to understand is happening and this all puts what Thrasybulus and Anytus, and their friends did in a very special kind of a light. Spanish Armada was heading for England trying to gain control of the island for the Pope and Catholicism and one thing and another. Great wind came up and it blew the ships out of their path and wrecked many of them. From that day forward there sprang up the legend in England of the Protestant Wind, which had come along to save the new English faith against the forces of the Pope. Well, if they can invent a Protestant Wind I think it's okay for me to speak about the democratic snow that fell on Phyle that went. forces in the state had come, and we might mention also that the ancient sources estimate that something like 1,500 Athenians may have been killed by the Thirty tyrants. When the Thirty brought an army out to try to defeat him there he defeated them. They were forced to flee to Eleusis on the northwestern frontier of Attica, and the democrats were in position to take control of the city again. The Thirty were deposed by the 3,000, because it was obvious they were losers. Cornelius Nepos, a Roman historian of the first century B.C., wrote the following about Thrasybulus: "If excellence were to be weighed by itself, apart from luck, I believe I would rank this man first of all" A few years before 180 A.D., Pausanias the great travel writer of antiquity, wrote his guide to the famous and historic places of ancient Greece. In the section on Athens, he described the graves of the heroes and men that lined the roads outside the city. of him. I mean, the best answer I can give you is there must have been lost histories, and we know there are of the period, and they must have given Thrasybulus the kind of credit for his remarkable achievements that don't show up in Xenophon and Diodorus and the orators. But we at last, and you have an obligation to future generations, must not let the name of Thrasy Bulus lie in obscurity again, and just so that you don't forget him, remember he is the only Greek I know whose name fits a Yale fight song.