Atas model shows what happens if aggregate demand increases and prices go up. As wages fall firms respond to this by saying we want to make more output. As people demand these higher wages shortening our supply curve decreases. It just takes more green pieces of paper to buy the same goods and services at C as it did at a let's see what happens with a decrease in aggregate demand. It's the same employment falls back to where it is normally unemployment increases back to the natural rate of unemployment. firms are seeing here here they're seeing output prices decline and input prices stay the same. What are they seeing in terms of profits exactly here we're seeing profits actually decrease. What's happening to people's real wages they've gone up alright if input prices are staying the same and output prices are declining real wages are actually increasing. firms respond to that increase in the price of labor by doing the same thing that they do for everything they use less of it right and so we see output begins to decline we see unemployment increase and we see employment decrease. The Keynesian model in this framework its alphabet soup right that's where it's gonna be trust me I've been doing this for 20 years questions on the AAAS wanna yes. The reason that we have these two different models is because we got to this model where you're at this point right here. Eventually whenever whatever it was that caused a short-run aggregate supply curve to decline is done then we'll move back to a right and that will eventually happen it really will it might take a long time. Keynesian model has problems too it doesn't work perfectly either so that's why we have these changes in aggregate demand. We'll get to that when we look at fiscal and monetary policy okay so I will see you guys on Wednesday we only have the exam. We only had the exam we only has the exam so we will be back on Wednesday to talk about fiscal and Monetary Policy. We will be talking about the impact of the stimulus package on the U.S. economy and the global economy.