The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. We are now using the coherent states to look at any other quantum state of the electromagnetic field, any statistical operator which describes photons by forming the diagram matrix element of the statistical operator with alpha. Q: What was the purpose of-- whoever discovered eigenstates? The vacuum state is sort of an area. It's a Gaussian. And the area is -- it's an area on the order of 1 or 1/2. We realize that thermal states are also aGaussian centered at the origin. But it is a much wider distribution. So thermal states have much more uncertainty in the electric field than the vacuum state. And now, of course, when we looked at the coherent state, we realize that coherent states are maybe not as wonderful as I tried to make you believe. They have some nasty properties. you have some homework assignment to look at it. In an harmonic oscillator, if you have a plane of x and p, symmetric and anti-symmetric combination of a and a dagger, the quantum state is just rotating circle, a rotation with omega. And indeed we showed that when we apply the time evolution operator-- and some of you were right, of course, with a minus sign-- it moves with e to the minus i omega t. And I want to say something about that in a second. In the analogy with the harmonic oscillator, the electric field was a minus a dagger. In those quasi-probabilities-- and we will see more about it-- something which is sharp in momentum is a sliver parallel to the x-axis. And therefore everything rotates in a clockwise way. Now, there are two things we want to continue. One is I want to show you that the coherent state is a minimum uncertainty state. The product of delta x delta p is just-- is it h-bar or h- bar over two? One of the two. which is less fuzzy than the coherent state. So this fuzziness here is the intrinsic uncertainty of quantum physics. But then we will immediately start with non-classical states. And that is, well, if this area is determined by Heisenberg's uncertainty relation, what can be maybe deform the circle into an ellipse, and these are three states of light. That's what you're going to do in the second half of the class. But before I do that, I want to be a little bit more accurate about quasi-probabilities. have a product which is fully symmetric i in the ordering of x p, which is anti-normal or normal. In an operator product, you can have symmetric ordering, which means not x p but x p plus p x, then it's over 2. That's symmetric. You can have an ordering which is normal and one which is called anti- normal. All three have their advantages and disadvantages. So they all have pluses and minuses. The reason why I picked for the course Q of alpha is that it's a real probability, it's always positive. it is sharp. It's actually worse than a delta function. But at least here, in the probability P, you get the delta function, which may be very natural for certain purposes. The Wigner distribution has the advantage that the projection on the x- and y-axes are indeed psi of x squared, psi of p squared. So you get actually the x wave function and the p wave function. It is closest to the classic phase space distribution, as close as you come without violating commutators. But of course it has a disadvantage that it has negative values. Using elementary commutator, we can calculate what are the expectation values in a coherent state for P, P squared, Q, and Q squared. For P, it is-- the P operator is a dagger minus a. If we act with a on alpha, we get alpha, because alpha-- the coherent state-- is an eigenstate of alpha. With P squared and Q, you have to use one or two more steps to get rid of the products. But ultimately, you can express space all that just in powers of alpha, alpha squared, alpha star. In other words, the coherent state is the solution to the following question. If you plot the quasi-probability distribution, you give yourself an uncertainty area. The fluctuations of the intensity are usually expressed by the second order temporal coherence function. That's what we want to introduce now. What I'm always encountering in this course is I would just like to immediately tell you how it is defined in terms of a's and a daggers. It's simple. It is quantum mechanical. The second order coherence function for classical light, which has a classic description, is always larger than 1. But quantum mechanically, we will see that the g2 function is not necessarily larger than1. And that's actually an interesting-- you can see-- litmus test for the quantumness. And then you have a final state of your harmonic oscillator, and your zero-point fluctuations has zero squared fluctuations. So what is more closely related to an experiment is how you measure the correlation function. single mode-- and what is a single mode? It's just a sine wave. And nothing happens as a function of time. It's constant. So the time evolution of the system you're describing right now is completely boring. And if you would rotate your head at omega, nothing will happen. And this is exactly what you see here. So you find everything you want to for coherence time. Coherence time is the time for the time of the quantum state of light. The g2 function is related to number fluctuations. It's related to an average and an n-squared average. The classical fluctuation-- well, I say classical, classical in the simplest case-- are Poissonian fluctuations. If you use-- kind of pluck together-- the results we obtained with the Fano factor, you have a super-Poissonian fluctuation. The thermal state is quite different. The most interesting from the perspective of non-classical light is the state of thermal light. I'm not sure if it's right, but it's consistent. By the way, if there is a question, I sometimes make a question mark in my notes. And when I post the notes, the question marks are eliminated. So this is now drawing our attention to the single photon. And this is our next subsection. This shouldn't come unexpected. It comes from the quantization of light. And that only happens when you go down to similar photons. This is when certain fluctuations are most pronounced, because the energy is dependant on a singular photon. me first address one misconception. You can say, Well, let's just use a coherent state. Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always Poissonian distribution. And attenuation is not changing it. Attenuation is preserving that. So you can now say that you take your coherent state and you attenuate it down that there is only one photon left. Is that a single photon state? The answer is no. It is an attenuated coherentState. And I will prove that to you very soon. Even, on first sight, a surprisingly large probability to find 3 and 4 photons. The creation of single photons has been sort of a small cottage industry. Single photons are often needed for protocols in quantum computation. One of the leaders in this field is Professor Vladan Vuletic here at MIT. And the idea is the following photons are now heralded-- they are announced now -- in the singleness in which you have an excited state and you have a single photon. But no longer have several photons, you can get several photons. I don't want to go into details-- but those who have an understanding of that-- is the following. If you n atoms and you prepare one atom here in state 2, you do not know which of your n atoms is prepared. And if you have n indistinguishable probabilities which atom you have prepared, the emission of the photon back is n times enhanced. So having n atoms makes it much, much easier to construct a high finesse cavity. You get this super radiance increase of the strong coupling for free. study. The idea behind an Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment is that you have a light source and you want to characterize it. The first photon is observed by the first detector, and the second photon is detected by the second detector. We are looking that in a very small temporal window, 2 photons are detected. But in principle, you can now find 2 photons which are only a few picoseconds apart. And this is what we are asking here when we measure the g2 function. simultaneously. In the classic limit, you don't have to worry about it. The classical limit is always a limit of high intensity. So at any given time, you have a ton of photons. And then, at beam splitter, half of the photons go left. You have an equal splitting. So there is no problem at all with the quantization, because this is the classical limit. And if you do the measurement with the coincidence detector, you find the difference between the g2 function, which I discussed earlier. a very narrow spectral filter or Fabry-Perot cavity, the light becomes single mode in frequency domain. In the quantum version, especially when we have a single photon, the photon can go to only one detector. And that means, for this extreme case of a single photons, the g2 function is 0. Anyway, you will look at those situations in more detail in you homework assignment. Yes? Audience: Sir, if you know that different for tau non-zero, then even the single modes in the function would have a final g2. Laser beam is always replenishing the coherent state. The experiment how it is done is often done as in an open system. The only property which distinguishes a laser from the thermal light source-- we're not taking advantage of it. All the laser cooling, all the absorption imaging-- all that would work if you had a single mode thermal source, says Prof. Rieckhoff. "I think you've got the taste. Your homework is a really simple. You just deal with a closed system. You look at a quantum state" course practically, if you take a thermal source and filter it down to a single mode, you will be left with only a few photons. You cannot create an intense enough single mode light source unless you use stimulated emission. And that's a laser. So anyway, what Colin says is there are actually more different light sources that just the laser and the thermal light source. There are LEDs or semiconductor devices, which provide photons with interesting statistical properties. OK. We have to stop. I'll see you on Wednesday.