angular momentum is a set of operators that provided observables, things we can measure. We found that they satisfy a series of commutators in which lx with ly gave ih bar lz. We showed that any component of angular momentum, be it lx, ly, or lz, commutes with l squared. And therefore, we set up for the search of those wave functions that are simultaneous eigenstates of one of the three components of angularmomentum. wanted single valued wave functions-- wave functions would be the same at phi, and at Phi plus 2 pi, which is the same point. You must choose m to be an integer. For the l squared operator we also explained that the eigenvalue of this operator should be positive. That is achieved when l, whatever it is, is greater than 0. And the discussion that led to the quantization of l was a little longer, took a bit more work. Happily we have this operator, and operator we can diagonalize, or we can find eigenstates for it. are the Legendre polynomials. Solve this equation for m equals 0. Are there any questions? Anything about the definitions or? Yes? AUDIENCE: Why do we care about simultaneous eigenstates? Professor: If you have a system you want to figure out what are the properties of the states. In general, you will be led in any physical problem to look for the maximal set of commuting operators. The most number of operators that you could possibly measure. If there is no property that distinguishes them, they should be the same state. most important question to try to enlarge the set of commuting observables. Leading finally to what is initially called a complete set of commuter observable. We'll begin the hydrogen atom and this task why? Having a proton and an electron we can reduce this system to as if we had one particle in a central potential. So that will be also very important physically. And here there is a simple observation that one can make. The differential equation for p l m depends on m squared. We expect to need values of m that are positive and negative. definition solves the differential equation star. This takes a little work to check. I will not check it, nor the notes will check it. It's probably something you can find the calculation in some books. But it's not all that important. The important thing to note here is the following. That this provides solutions. And there's no great honor in finding zero solution of this equation. These are no solutions. So this produces solutions for absolute value of m less or equal to l. And therefore m in between l and minus l. The spherical harmonicas are going to be those wave functions. And they have a normalization, n l m, an exponention, and all that. So let me write, just for the record, what a y l m looks like with all the constants. Well, the normalization constant is complicated. And it's kind of a thing you can never remember by heart. So you could plug this whole mess here. I don't advise it. It's It's all valid for 0 less 0 m positive m. The specific forms of these polynomials we can find them. The only one I really remember is that y 0 0 is a constant. It's 1 over 4 pi. Here is another one. y1 plus minus 1 is minus plus square root of 3 over 8 pi e to the plus minus i phi sine theta. And the last one, so we're giving all the spherical harmonics with l equals 1. Here they are. Plus or minus 1 and 0.