which we are to for next week and here and I'll talk about that actually week from today because it's callay on Monday so it will get behind but if we get any further behind I'll have to make it up sometime. If you don't have that you be copies available upstairs is it c um come to my office okay to dany's office he doesn't have copies of it there that's six six upstairs in the first floor immediately after CL and then on the next Friday I will talk about the parts in the in the inquiry that were assigned and also a that essay of of the oral concept well last time you call. not about political jurisdiction that it must be possible through this series of agreements to Contracting it without being irrational putting noone's life anywh in Jeopardy or without viting any of the duties that one has. The way in which he described absolutism of the kind of he's objecting to is going to be thrown out um and the has if his premises are correct more arguments than he needs that is he's uh believes that today the nature is worse than being subject to an abolute mind. Loot's view is that although of course one is bound I'm sorry one is Born Into into society as a matter of social fact biological fact and so on one is not obligated through the political institutions until one gives at the Age of Reason some form of consent. It's unclear the form in which is tast whether it's an oath of fidelity to the crown upon inher say the family property or whatever it's not expressly said. There's a distinction between express consent and P consent Express consent incorporates us into society and as a Perpetual or presumably taxic consent does not. of the original contract he gives arguments against unlocks View and you have to ask yourself how effective is K's argument against each of these two parts of lock view as you might think that it's not very effective against the Criterion of the general form of regime but yet think it is effective and highly effective against how indidual become bound to particular regime. So that's why I had gone over this question in order to distinguish the two parts or the two things that are discussed namely the just and right and legitimate form of regimes and the other is the conditions under which particular individuals become bound. exclusion crisis of 1679 and 81 um the original part of the second CH was written it believe about 79 and 880 and then other chapters that were were added in 81 83 and two chapters added after. Now by definition a mixed Constitution is a constitution in which two or more constitutionally defined agents let's say share in and each have a part in What L calls the legislative power that is the supreme power in the constitution is the legislativepower. In the English case of course it's the crown and Parliament so we're only actually dealing with two agents in this case and neither is supreme so we want to say that they are coordinate powers. Filmer had argued against anyone's a denying crowns complete Supremacy precisely on the grounds that if there were conflict there would be no way to settle it so MK is granting filmer point on this there's no way around it. In paragraph 168 he says if there is a conflict of the sort then the people have the right to appeal to Heaven which is a euphemism for for go to war that is Civil War and uh the power then refs to them and they have theright of resistance. of Andrew Johnson although didn't past and it tends to make it politically impossible for president to persist over a period of time and a long drawn that conflict of with Congress so I might say that today checks then has this effect and comparable things were not available in the 17th century you had not yet institutionalized these various devices. Mar's problem is to justify existence of the crown in this kind of situ situation now now the source of Lock's constitutional Doctrine the source and thought is a book where at least is belied to be. you see granting uh certainment to we sensibilities and also holds this view of the English Constitution also to sensibility but they're not claiming parliamentary Supremacy that's the I say crucial is that. No such contract contacted government in LW and there isn't in h either but other contract doctrines some sometimes as a talk with a both but here there's only the one contact the concept of power as a fiduciary power the point of that I think is to emphasize the constituent power of the people. all the Clauses it might contain and it would be an useful exercise I think to do that um to find out explicitly all the things that we have gone over. We might say read the people and give some description of who we are perhaps list of names I do here by Compact and we think it just as AAL and express uh consent we hereby compact with one another each with all and all each it's better to unite into more non political Community or political society and we thereby put ourselves each put ourselves under obligation to comply with the loss of political power. changed his mind he thought perhaps it was not all together safe never knew in England the English were regarded in those days as very unstable people. Mark says nothing about the details of of this process that is how does he Enis that this constition power is actually to take place he doesn't give any institutional account of how he supposes actually might be done laon is also vague on this he says something has been done and something has happened to change the form of the Constitution and the government was dissolved against to power of the Comm brought into play. the idea that it would begin in the county courts and they organized there and would then they presented Des sent from there to a parliament now acting in another way now it's sort of something like what we would call the Constitutional Convention but again the details are extremely big I think the reason for that is obvious you want to be pre in some sense to act in accordance with some politically organized party so we don't find inlock what is supposed to happen in that case but the implications are quite are quite uh obvious in somesense this is inly radical U Democratic Doctrine or it could be. Nation than the other now why did L refuse to alter his view I think we have to assume that he didn't change his mind and he persisted in the doctrine that he formed earlier in 79 and 880 I think partly because his views are more radical than the standard view of his college that that would be one reason but also because he felt I think that it was inconsistent now there isn't this view in the trus but if one sort of HS it through perhaps one can see that it is any rate in danger of being insistent. A small percentage of it is able to vote on this view uh now Mar is not arguing that point one way or the other taking it for granted and also when he talks about property he's not attempting to justify property in the sense of explaining it and justifying it to those who don't think there should be part of father. He's trying to give an account of the institution how much it come about an institution which politically Tak from point of view everyone accepts D's argument had been that MOX or any social compact view or contract view the earlier agreements could not account for prodate property. This scheme uh or show that that could happen without violating some of these other conditions now presumably the answer is something like or at least would be one answer that one might get. Given the hazards the defects and the lacks of the data nature given the benefits to be expected under government and very thing it's rational even for those who lack efficient land to agree to social Compact and for the majority to vote or to place the legislative in the form of a regime that excludes most people from actually voting. It would be rational to do that and given the circumstances it would not violate any of the other conditions which are consequence of the fundamental law of nature. and who does not have the right to vote and what the conditions on it are maybe we want to free it from that of course what I'm thinking of eventually um is that that that would be one motivation for introducing an idea like the origal position that say it's a way of conceiving how con power might be exercised. No point in criticizing someone for something they didn't intend to do okay well I think it's stop so remember there's no class here Monday so the next class here will be next Friday.