A random variable is a number that's produced by a random process. Number of faulty pixels in a monitor is also produced from an unpredictable randomness. The number of alpha particles that are detected by a Geiger counter in a second is believed to be a random number. And finally, we'll look at the standard abstract example of flipping coins. And if I flip coins then the number of heads in a given number of flips-- let's say I flip five heads in one second. That's a random variable. flip a coin n times. The number of heads is a number that comes out of this random process of flipping the three coins. C is greater than or equal to 1 when there is at least 1 head. M greater than 0 means all the coins match. This is an obscure way of describing the event all heads, and it has a course probability 1/8. So formally, a random variable is not a variable. Or it's a function that maps the sample space to the real numbers. the real numbers. Might be a subset of the real numbers like the integer valued random variables. Occasionally we'll use complex valued random variable. Actually, that happens in physics a good deal in quantum mechanics, but not for our purposes. We're just going to mean real value from now on when we talk aboutrandom variables. So for every possible real number, if I look at the event that R is equal to a, that's an interesting event. And if you knew the answer to all of these R equals a's, then you really know a lot about R. could say explicitly where it comes from as an equation. It means that the probability that R1 is equal to a1 and R2 isequal to a2 and Rn is. equal to an. And the definition then of mutual independence of the random variables R1 through n, Rn holds is that this equation it holds for all possible values, little a1 through little an. So let's just practice. Are the variables C, which is the count of the number of heads when you flip three coins, and M, [? the 0-1 ?] valued random variable that tells you whether there's a match, are they independent? Well certainly not. R to R, total function. R is independent of f of S, any transformation of S by a fixed non-random function. If I have k random-- if I have a bunch of random variables, a large number much more than k, they're k-way independent. If we have k coins and Hi is the indicator variable for how coin I came out, whether or not there's a head, now O can be nicely expressed. The notion that there's an odd number of heads is simply the mod 2 sum of the Hi's. makes the k plus 1-- k plus first. And the reason why any k of them were independent was discussed in the previous slide when we were looking at the events of there being an odd number of heads and a head coming up on the i flip. For a bunch of major applications this pairwise independence is sufficient. It's harder to check mutual independence. You've got a lot more equations to check. We'll be making use of it in an application later when we look at sampling and the law of large numbers.