Simple graphs don't have direction. They just correspond to a mutual connection, which is symmetric. A directed graph might have a self loop, an edge that starts and begins at the-- starts and ends at the same vertices. Those are also disallowed in simple graphs. There's a thing called multi-graphs where there are multiple edges between vertices and there could also be self loops, but we don't need those. Let's not complicate matters. We're talking about simple graphs, not directed graphs. A basic concept in graph theory, which is what we're going to make a little bit of in this video segment, is the idea of the degree of a vertex. The degree is simply the number of incident edges, the number. of edges, that touch it. So let's examine some properties of vertex degrees that are motivated by a simple example. Let's see what it looks like. If I'm going to have a graph with vertices of 2, 2, and 1, implicitly it's a 3 vertices graph. to have a vertex of degree 1, then I know what it looks like. There can't be a degree 3 graph with this spectrum of degrees 2, 2, 1. It's impossible. Well, we could have reasoned more generally. And there's a very elementary property of degrees that we're going to actually make something of in a minute. It says that the sum of the degrees summed over all the vertices is equal to twice the number of edges. So that's the cardinality symbol. Absolute value of a set means the size of the set. vertex gets numerated twice. So the sum is twice the number of vertices. And by the way, since 2 plus 2 plus 1 is odd, we could have without that ad hoc analysis figured out that the sum of the degrees can't be odd, because it's twice something. All right, so here's the applications designed to get your attention. It is an application of graph theory to sex. And we ask the question, are men more promiscuous than women? And there have been repeated studies that are cited in the notes that show again and again that when they survey collections of men and women and ask them how many sexual partners they have. to model the relationships between men and women by having a graph that comes in two parts. It's going to be called a so-called bipartite graph. So looking back at this graph, this edge from that blue M to that orange F indicates that they had a sexual liaison. They were partners. And what we've just figured out then is that there's a fixed relationship between the average number of partners of men, the average degree of the M vertices. And these two average degree, these average numbers of partners, is simply related by the ratio of the populations. 3 and 1/2 percent more partners than women per man. But this has nothing to do with their behavior, or promiscuity, or lack of it. It's simply a reflection of the ratio of the populations. One explanation would be that men exaggerate their number of partners. But the truth is that nobody knows exactly why we get these consistently false numbers. But we do get them consistently in one survey after another. You will no longer be fooled by such nonsense. It is time to stop this nonsense.