MIT OpenCourseWare offers high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourse Ware at ocw.mit.edu.The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT Open courseWare continue to offer high- quality educational resources. The i3 is an efficiency and urban-optimized transport vehicle made by BMW. It's an all-electric, the fact that it's fundamentally an electric vehicle is key to the i3. like the smart car. And so architecturally, distinguishing feature is definitely the electric drive. So I think it's good, but I think you're just missing a little bit on the technology there. What about i3 and EPFL? Anybody do the i3? Nobody. Anybody else here? Yeah, Veronica. AUDIENCE: Thank you. OLIVIER DE WECK: OK. There's a lot there. I would throw a question. A concept you defined could almost apply to a Tramway as well. If this was like a streetcar, don't you think it would apply to that as well? bank, a cafeteria, student services. But you could encompass it in a meeting area. You meet and you do some stuff like eating, going to the bank. In that sense, it's pretty similar. But I think the Rolex Center is such an iconic building that it also serve a kind of a prestige function, to put the institution on the map in terms of it's a statement. It's not just a utilitarian building. Whereas, I would argue our MIT student center, it has very similar functions to theRolex Center. It doesn't have that wow factor. is the beneficiary? That's a stakeholder. The stakeholder has needs. And then this is a funny thing here. The needs have these little bumps. This is meant to indicate a cloud. So this means that the needs are somewhat vaporous. They're not very well defined. And so you interpret and incorporate some of the needs into goals, which become requirements. The goals then are an instrument of the primary delivery value delivering process, which is your value proposition. To then actually deliver that value you need to design the product. EPFL's Olivier De WECK explains how to reduce the spoilage rate of food. He says there are a number of ways to do it, including irradiating, drying, chilling and preserving. He also explains how bears use fat to transform it into fat and store it inside their bodies. The full interview is available on CNN.com and on the CNN iReport app for iOS and Android. For the full interview, visit CNN.co.uk or the CNN YouTube channel. For more, go to www.cnn.com/news. a very different way, but it's essentially the same function. So the chilling part is not enough. And then you say, well, we need a chiller. And it's the combination of this specific way you're going to operate the system. The element of form and then the specialized element ofform, in this case the cooler, that combination is what we call concept. Once we have that, we can start managing complexity, decomposing function and form, so our system operating process gets decomposed into the primary supporting processes. external heat load, ambient light, and the operator. What's surprising here is when you map the two, there's a surprising amount of complexity. So there's an attribute of the ice, which is essentially its quantity, but also it's form that will influence the-- but that's the heat exchanger function. The powering function is pretty clear. That's essentially the energy storage right there. And then the third one is regulation. How does the ice provide a thermal regulation in the cooler? Physics 101. Celsius. As long as you have ice left, this is the phase transformation, you're at that point. As soon as the ice is all melting, the temperature will rise. The phase transformation of the ice from solid to liquid is what, in fact, is the regulation mechanism inside the cooler. So even though you think of a cooler as being something super simple and trivial, once you start listing its internal functions and how the top, the bottom the ice itself, how they interact and support those functions, it's pretty complex. Swiss refrigerators are much smaller than those in the U.S. That's a big difference between the US and Switzerland. In the refrigerator, each of these elements supports, essentially, one of the primary sub-functions. So the form function mapping in the refrigerator is actually much simpler. It's a much simplerform function mapping than the cooler. But the fact that it has a bottom and a top and it's hinged and it uses this phase transition as the regulation mechanism, that's conceptual design. a refrigerator is much more complex. How can that be? Well, the real complexity comes in when you look at the form form mapping. So this is then the decomposition of the refrigerator in terms of all the elements of form and then how they relate to each other. And I'm not showing here all the sub-processes, but you can see that the mapping and the relationships are more complex than in the case of the cooler. That's concept generation, finding systems that do the right thing. And then once you have several concepts, you've got to select among them, which we'll talk about next week. System architecture requires consideration of both function and form related through concept. It's about starting with the operand. What is the thing that the beneficiary, the stakeholder cares about, and how do we transform that? Concept then elaborate these into architectures that have form function and structural complexity. And then the goodness of an architecture is really a pretty complex concept where we have multiple objectives to satisfy, including performance, resource utilization, cost, operability, safety, capacity, and so forth. And we'll defer that to next week. and then defining those high-level requirements. Level 0, level 1 requirements, but then you get stuck. You get stuck because you have to make some decisions before you can go to lower level requirements definition. And that's what's known here as functional and logical decomposition. Once you've decided on a composition and you can carry several compositions with you for a while, then you can do the lower-level trade studies. And then do functional and performance analysis to see whether you have enough detail. and the logical decomposition work products, which are essentially lower-level definitions of what these subsystems look like. And then you can go off and do the detailed design and then the testing verification and so forth. So let me talk about methods and tools for concept generation. This is another really fun thing we do in the system design and management program, which is a full-year program, is the creativity workshop. So what are different ways of stimulating or organizing creativity? And what I'm showing you here is-- that's essentially a mind map of how to think about the creativity space. There's an ideal group size, and it says 5 to 10 here, but I should probably revise this to be-- what do you think? 7 plus minus 2. If you try to do brainstorming session with 30 people in the room, it's not going to be that productive. What's important is that you have a clear idea of why you're doing the brainstorming sessions. There's this killer sentences you should never say during a brainstorming. Some of these are pretty funny. And then what do we do with the results. How do you actually then take the brainstormed results and use them for further refining. How to Think Like Leonardo, Seven Steps to Genius. The seven da Vincian principles of creativity in Italian. Avoid the killer phrases. Creativity killer sentences. This will never work. We don't even need to talk about this. Everybody does it this way. I've already studied this problem for years. Don't worry, I know I'm right. How long have you been with this company? Anyway, so that's the idea. All right Leonardo. Who's been to Italy or tour in France, or who's seen one of the exhibits know where his notebooks are on display? very quickly. So curiosita, lifelong quest for learning. Dimostratzione, testing your knowledge through experience, trying things out. Sensazione, continual refinement of the senses. Mastering ambiguity, paradox, uncertainty. Arte/Scienza is the whole brain thinking, left-right brain. Corporalita, balance of body and mind, so a healthy mind and a healthy body. Connessione is interesting. That gets close to system architecture, which is the appreciation of patterns, relationships, connections, and systems. So the idea is that, this from Leonardo, his work, his way of thinking, these seven principles have been extracted. on this morphological matrix. And I find this to be very, very helpful. When the table gets too big, very quickly because of this being a product, this can really explode on you. And the big challenge with this, of course, is if you have many factors, you could generate many infeasible architectures. So the question then is, how do you prevent that, and that's where so-called architecture enumeration comes in. But the idea is that through creativity, expert knowledge, and analysis you're going to define your components. like 12 different tail geometries here. But at that higher abstraction layer, it's just a single tail. So how do you combine these using compositional rules? That's architecture enumeration. And we'll post some information on this if you want to try this out for your concepts. So let me summarize. So system architecture is definitely very abstract, but it's also, potentially, the most influential activity that we do in system architecting. The concept is mapping function to form. conceptual design, don't do all the details. We just go down two levels of abstraction. And then the really cool part, the exciting part in concept generation is the one that it's really a creative activity. And when you look at the set of creativity techniques, you can think of group dynamics like the brainstorming. That's used very heavily, but you have to do it the right way. If you organize a brainstorming session, and there's some wiggle room, but if you violate some fundamental principles of brainstorming you're not going to get the full benefit.