Chef Todd Moore shares with you the seven basic skills that I think everyone should have to cook food consistently in the kitchen and be proud of the results. If you already have all seven of these skills and cooking techniques great you can work for me on the other hand if you only have one or two of these Skills that's still fantastic why because I know you'll want to add other skills and learn to cook basic methods know the methods behind all written recipes then you'll be making your cooking a winner every single time. To pass this test well the result should be three items that are precisely twice or half the size of the others consistency of cut is consistency of cook so knife skills are very important for excellence results you have failed this test if you give me items of a wide variety of shapes and sizes are all the items cut into the same size. If I see a chef using two hands on their chef's knife the metaluna thing back and forth I just know they're mashing up onions and creating inconsistent Cuts I want to see correct proportion of cuts when you learn how to use the chef's knives you'll love doing it you'll be looking for things to cut up. skill down when I can give someone three different oils types of oils put them in a pan and they can tell me where the variable smoke points are so you pass this test when the chef notices the oil starting to change from being perfectly smooth to beginning a convection process then adds the protein product to the pan just before there's visible smoke. Brown foods are attractive F Foods this is what attracts the eye and to develop golden color in the sauté pan you have to get the sugars in your product to caramelize at 320° fah. one that's lost moisture one that's burned one that shows the lack of involvement in the preliminary steps of the sauté process Chef test number four here's the answer thicken a liquid to make a sauce. Rue flour and cornstarch are fantastic thickening agents but you need to have an understanding of how much to use and this can only happen with controlling the process of gelatinization of starches Chef that can show me that they pass they take a cup of milk they turn it into a thickened sauce that's shiny that's velvety. control heat in a moist convective process is an important Chef's skill number six was to roast something delicate like fish. There's a very fine line between the coagulation of proteins the stiffening and shrinking of what you're cooking at 165° F and the 212° fah when moisture starts evaporating. The key to cooking with dry heat is being able to live in this temperature zone between 165 and 212 where the food Cooks for drying out so you pass the chef test if you give me a nice piece of flounder or tilapia even Cod or Whitefish catfish anything that's fully cooked and it retains its moisture without drying out. and it's dry it's much smaller in its uh cooked State than it was in its raw State because of the drying effect of the oven this Chef doesn't know how to retain moisture in a dry cooking process Chef test number seven how to tell when a grilled steak is done. If you can Master this you are a master griller most people just burn stuff you fail this test if you give me three St Stakes all cooked to the same temperature or if you can't tell which steak is rare medium well done if you're taking them off the grill guest atam the chef that can that can't control direct to Source conductive heat would create waste in my restaurant waste over sales for Stakes being sent back to the kitchen. I don't want this this is a chef's level skill so this is what's going on in my kitchen. If you want to cook great food more consistently you'll want to pay attention to the cooking techniques and have repeatable methods. These are the same methods I'm going to reveal in my webinar it's discover the three secrets to making your cooking a winner every single time.