In this chapter we will discuss two applications, one price control and second taxation, so right. Sir, does this slope of this graph denote anything price demand upon, some price upon some quantity. So, wait little later we will talk about that that topic, right now we are not, we are just talking about movement and shifts. We are not talking about the slope. Slope is also very important very good question but little later, we you have to wait little bit to get the idea about the slopes. Price ceiling is the maximum price for a unit of good established by law or by government. Price floor typically is minimum support price. Excess supply means there will be a downward pressure on the sellers to decrease their price. Government of India buys a lot of grains and what happens to that grain? It gets wasted because not only if you, let us say when market can support 5 rupees per kg and you promise that you will pay 6 rupee per kg you are producing more than what is required in the market. Price ceiling is below the market equilibrium level and this is the price ceiling. Excess demand and when we have excess demand what happens there. There is an upward pressure, but by law sellers cannot increase the rent or buyers cannot pay more. So, then what do we observe in the market. Role of government. Black marketing. Black market you know under the table payment, what else. Nothing will change. If market is operating at the equilibrium price and let us say the price of 1000 rupees per month. this country would like to have gas connection, but the suppliers cannot afford to give those many gas connections at the government-determined price. So, what they say you go to, you go for gas connection if it is your turn if somehow you are getting gas connection. What the seller would say that you want gas connection you will also have to buy gas burner from me then well you will get the gas connection ok. And that is also quite common. You are not interested in buying gas burner at really at the price which is much higher than the price that you will you have to pay in the market for a gas burner. Let us look at what happens when we have a price floor. Here you get excess supply then you have non-market rationing mechanism. Like the payment is not done at the time of buy, it is done after year or after few months. That can be one, again it is very difficult to discern it because of some other reason. And one more thing we have to pay a minimum wage to the laborers. So, to escape from that thing we include child labor. That is stretching too far. we have price control. It is to incentivize the production for a few like for wheat or if we talk if there is a new production of potato and if we put price floor on potato. So, it will incentivize production and they can serve the market better. That is also one more reason now that we do not have a proper distribution system by which we can distribute like some people with like below poverty line people, they are dying because of hunger, and we are throwing a lot of grains as surplus.