Professor Amy Hungerford: Today it is my very great privilege and pleasure to introduce Andrew Goldstone, a TF in this course. Andrew is a fourth-year student in the Ph.D. program in English, and he is writing a dissertation on the autonomy of the work of art in modernism. In preparation for that, for next week I'd like you to finish the novel and then read his essay, "On a Novel Entitled Lolita" It should be bound at the back of your book. amidst the many layers, whether he crosses them or confuses them. I'm going to bracket the ethical question, leave that for Monday's lecture, and the way I want to approach this question of the style in the novel is by placing Nabokov in the context of literary modernism. So, this is a spoof of a poem by T.S. Eliot which I've given you a piece of on your handout, so let's look at that for a second. "Modernism" is the art and literature of the early twentieth century, especially the "high art" In English it begins with the late novels of Henry James around 1900, in poetry with Eliot and with Ezra Pound. In prose its main exemplars in English would be James Joyce, Virginia Woolf. Nabokov will say in that afterword you're going to read, "the novel has as its only purpose to afford aesthetic bliss." So, the parody is of something very close to home. sense that civilization itself is being overturned. The idea that culture itself is the saving, most important activity that people can engage in. A rejection of convention, especially sexual convention, sexual morality, and that's the obvious connection to this book. An idea that the artist is a kind of technician, someone whose values are craft, form and style rather than message, personal expression or wisdom of any kind. And then, this anticipates my last points: Modernism is self-consciously international. For Nabokov, the highest value is originality. He says this in his last Russian novel, The Gift. "Any genuinely new trend in art is a knight's move, a change of shadows, a shift that displaces the mirror," he says. "In chess the knight doesn't move in a straight line. Unlike any other piece, it skips over pieces in the way" The strategy of the knight'smove is to frustrate your expectations, to leap over the apparently important events into something else. The danger for Nabokov is that he will fall too in love with something too like himself. He has to hold off this possibility of being too attracted to these male predecessors who are too similar to him. To think about the word "queer," the treatment of Gaston Godin, that funny French character in Beardsley, to think about Humbert's constant protestations that he's attractive to all women, about his supposed virility. And it should just make you wonder whether pedophilia is in itself a kind of knight's move from homosexuality. Nabokov's relationship to this modernist past is not just the burlesque that he visits on Eliot. An element of admiration is also present, and that's really part of his relationship to Joyce. I'm just going to name for you four features of Joyce's style that are important to Nabokov: stylistic virtuosity, the ability to imitate any style; at the same time, a scrupulous attention to the banality of everyday life and all its detail. Third characteristic, the constant use of a superimposed structure. in the collected poems of Lord Byron. When he had written this title and drawn an ornamental line underneath, he fell into a daydream and began to draw diagrams on the cover of the book. The version of this that comes up in the novel is in the midst of Humbert's diary. And I've given you a piece of that diary to look at on your own on the handout. But this is the moment that directly alludes to Portrait, and it's really very important for understanding Nabokov's technique. MaryBuck, Daniel… [and so on; I'll come back to this list, actually; just skip to the bottom on page 52] Talbot, EdgarTalbot, EdwinWayne, Lull,--[a lull in the book, right?] Williams, Ralph Windmuller, Louise. So strange and sweet was it to discover this Haze Dolores: she, in its special bower of names with its bodyguard of roses, a fairy princess between her two maids of honor. The artificial has taken the place of the real here, and this novel really reminds you of that all the time. There is a kind of short circuit between the Joycean idea of taking ordinary life and transforming it into an aesthetic order. In other words, chance is already fated. The thing that stands for randomness in this book, the thing that looks like ordinary detail, has already been arranged to give you artistic pleasure. That's why Humbert can be instantly delighted in the list of names. Nabokov takes a narrative of real events and twists it into something that makes a kind of sense, taking fate and making it McFate. Charlotte Haze dies as if by a total accident, but we're aware that the accident is so perfect that it was arranged. In one of those parentheses--"the magician showing the object he is about to palm"-- the ordinary event which is really trickery. This kind of transformation of arbitrary, real fated events into conspicuously artificial tricks is a response in particular to exile. foreign country, lives in a kind of denaturalized world, a world where, instead of everything making instant sense everything has to be decoded. In that afterword to this book, Nabokov says he had to invent America. That's because he didn't know it already; it wasn't given to him. Now, in a way this is a terrible state, a state of discontinuity with the world you exist in. But it has a payoff, kind of, a payoff which is the possibility precisely of inventing. This connection, to remember that the knight's move as a way of avoiding obstacles, in particular, keeps skipping over forms of violence. Nabokov will say that his private tragedy is that, let's see: I had to abandon my natural idiom, my untrammeled, rich, and infinitely docile Russian tongue for a second-rate brand of English devoid of any of those apparatuses. And you might think about that homophobic attitude to a Proustian past. the fear that it's too like what he wants to do. But the main point here to think about is that feeling of damage. On page 152--oh, and by the way, this book was written on road trips. Nabokov's wife, Vera, drove him on thousands of miles of trips around the country while he was writing this novel and hunting butterflies, so think about that--but here is 152, evocation of the landscape. By a paradox of pictorial thought, the average lowland North American countryside had at first seemed to me something I accepted. American landscape is already a work of art, already part of a European memory. "Inutile loveliness" is kind of the key word of Nabokov's technique. So, a European artist actually appears again there, with Claude Lorrain. But, I don't want you to think that this just means everything's okay. Of course, everything is not okay. Even Humbert will tell us so. Just a few pages later, on page 175, he talks about his Humbert Humbert: "We had been everywhere. We had really seen nothing" "I catch myself thinking today that our long journey had only defiled with a sinuous trail of slime the lovely, trustful, dreamy, enormous country," he writes. "We have to pair that with that other evocation of the landscape to see this alternate idea," he says. "This distanced criss-crossing of the landscapes could be damaging," he adds. "Think of those other violent knight's moves, like skipping past the mother's death" in a much more ambivalent position, someone who's trying to become an American writer, as Nabokov says he's doing. He always finds that English is only a kind of second best. He translated Lolita back in to Russian later on, and he added a second afterword where he said this: That wondrous Russian tongue that, it seemed to me, was waiting for me somewhere, was flowering like a faithful springtime behind a tightly locked gate. And there is nothing behind the gate but charred stumps and a hopeless autumnal distance. element of violence that keeps coming back, the trail of slime across this dream of transforming reality, in this Joycean way, into something saved. Could it be that all of this modernist technique that Humbert succeeds in putting to his own ends is not an unambiguous good, but a record of a kind of damage? On Monday you're going to hear about this novel's confrontation with the idea that art could be saving, but here I think is a hint that it's something that the novel simply laughs at hollowly.