JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission, and then we will go on to a few other things. We didn't actually derive the emissivity of it, but we gave ourselves a hand-wavy reason why there may be multiple peaks here. And these peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies-- I'm going to switch into angular frequency units, omega m. And they're evenly spaced. And this is just for a single particle. that, the frequency depends only on the magnetic field. And so, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma. And that was particularly useful when we considered a tokamak because, if we have some magnetic field that goes 1 upon R, then different regions of our toroidal device are going to be emitting electron cyclotron emission with different frequencies. And this is a technique which will give us, by looking at the spectrum for lowish frequencies, we can work out what the temperature is as a function of space. This is correlation ECE, often called CECE. We want to measure temperature fluctuations within the plasma that are maybe on the order of 1% of the baseline temperature, delta T upon T about 0.01. And that 1% is actually extremely hard to measure. And this is because the noise is just too high on these systems. There are lots of different contributions to the noise. But, in general, they all add up to make it very hard toMeasure these very small fluctuations. want to understand in plasmas so that we can build an economically viable fusion reactor. So it'd be very nice to be able to know. Now, the fact that the noise is too high does seem like a big limitation. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. The ASDEX Upgrade system has a band pass filter. This is applying some filter to it that in frequency space looks a little bit like this, some sort of top hat. It's centered around the frequency where most of the electron cyclotron emission is. And this has a bandwidth of 10 gigahertz. So we've cut out an awful lot of the radiation in bands that we're not interested in. We are no longer going to study those, any bremsstrahlung, any higher order things. frequency range. Once we've got our bandpass filtered signal here, 110 kilohertz is still too fast for us to digitize. This would be an extremely expensive digitizer. So, what we actually do is we downmix it with the signal at 100 gigahertz. And so, then we get out our beat signal, which we can digitize, which is at 10 gig ahertz here. So this is-- actually, I will write this as 0 to 10 giga hertz. This is the sort of signal that we can actually digitize now. region. And you can tell that these regions are very small because we're dealing with 100 megahertz bandwidth. And we originally started with 110 gigahertz here. And so, you see we've gone down by a factor of 1,000. And that's how we're able to get down to this 100 microns or so. We digitize these signals. And, just for reference, the reason why we downsampled these is that digitized is now much less expensive. We're doing it something like 4 mega samples a second. Many oscillations. And so, it will average out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: So if we were doing geometric optics, which we're not, then you would have a lens like this. That lens could collimate your beam. And if it collimated that beam, that would mean there'd be a focus point at some distance f away. very small region on the order of 100 microns. Anyone know how micro splitters work? Looking at you? STUDENT: RF. JACK HARE: The answer I got was RF, which I don't think is much more satisfying than my answer. But, you're right, you could come up with some clever analog way of doing the splitting. But this is getting way beyond what I was hoping to talk about on this. So let's get on to correlation ECE see what that does. we're going to write this little tilde here to remind us that this signal is some oscillating quantity or time varying quantity. And that signal has two components to it. It's got some fluctuation, which is due to temperature fluctuation. And then, it's also got some noise. This is the thing that we don't want to measure here. And so, the signal, as a function of time, is going to look like, again, our temperature signal, which might be some nice and smooth function like this corresponding to some turbulent eddy. The size of a turbulent eddy, the size of one of these swirls, is larger than the separation between these two points. We are going to correlate these two signals. And we're going to find that the noise is uncorrelated at random, but these two signal will correlate together, and we'll be able to measure it. And, again, these are really, really closely spaced, 100 microns or so apart. But, the nice thing is now that these two. signals are carrying the same components that we're trying to measure. do correlations, and I'm not going to go into them, but I will give you a citation at the moment. We get out a term here that looks like the temperature term squared, the thing we want. And because this noise is just random, when we do some sort of averaging, this could be in time or best to think of it is a short time integral, then these terms are all going to drop out. And we'll just be left with a correlation signal that is proportional to the temperature squared here. fluctuations in a tokamak. And this is something that has revolutionized our understanding of turbulence. Now we can finally characterize it. That was a lot. Any questions? We're going to move on from ECE [INAUDIBLE]. Yes. Any other questions? Anything online? Now we are going to go to the next segment, which is about turbulence in the Earth's atmosphere. The next segment is about the atmosphere in the atmosphere of the Earth, and how turbulence affects the atmosphere. Bremsstrahlung is a term used to refer to a type of radiation in the universe. It involves electrons being deflected and breaking and emitting these photons. There are lots of different ways to deal with bremsstahlung to do the actual calculation. The main thing we can say in a classical treatment is that the bremstahlt is going to be isotropic in every direction. That's actually quite different from electron cyclotron emission, even though we didn't really look at the anisotropy of that in any detail. here with the ions and electrons as point particles. There's a semi-classical approach where you start bringing in some quantum physics and treat, I think, the electron as a wave. And then there's a full quantum approach. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So we get a small change in coefficient. The scalings are the same. So in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. This is equation 5.3.40 in Hutchinson. This is ne, ni, z squared, T to the minus 1/2 e to minus h nu upon T. And then, there's a factor called G bar, the Gaunt factor, which we'll talk about in a moment. And these constants are things like e, the electron charge, and the electron mass, and epsilon 0, and h bar, and c, all arranged in some way to make all the dimensions work. magnitude. And so, in general, it's reasonable to just treat G as being a constant and then, for this calculations we're doing, where we're going to drop the absolute intensity, we can just drop G with all the other constants as well. So we can drop [INAUDIBLE]. But if you want to go back and do this properly for some measurement that you're doing,. then you'd have to include this. And that is all you need to do Problem Set 3. have any recombination, which we'll talk about next. This is still going to be there. So if I'm doing my ECE and I zoom in on this region here, I'm going to have i frequency here. And, on top of that, I'd have my black body ECE spectrum or something like that. But this bremsstrahlung may be quite small. But even if it's not quite small, it is constant because it varies only slowly as a function of a frequency. There is no mode in a plasma which propagates below the plasma frequency. So it goes back to being optically thin here for the high energy photons. But the low energy photons will get absorbed as well. There's actually another effect, which is in Hutchinson's book, which I haven't covered here. But we're skipping over that this year. But it's in there if you're interested. Yeah. Yeah, I think someone told me that maybe for a high field tokamaks synchrotron could start being significant. But I actually have no idea how big a deal it is. mostly on the magnetic field and the radius. And those are two things in a tokamak you already know. But maybe there's a really clever diagnostic you can do, like fast particles or something like that. So worth thinking about. JACK HARE: Right, but I'm not interested in [INAUDIBLE]. This is a diagnostics course. Any questions online while we pause? So this is bremsstrahlung radiation, and often people call this free-free. Professor Jack HARE: We're going to switch to a slightly quantum model of the atom. We have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And, up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again, HARE says. But, of course, there's another case where this photon takes away so much energy that this starts, I guess it becomes imaginary. a forbidden transition. If I put in some velocity v and I occupy some principle quantum number n, then I will get out a photon here. There's no forbidden solution to this. And if you get up to a point where your energy is so high that you can then access the next level, then that becomes very favorable and, in fact, there are some-- these ones down here, it might continue from the 2 level or it might start occupying this level instead. It's not the condition that there are photons that are released with greater than 12 mv squared the kinetic energy. you would know what the velocity of your electron is, I don't know. But if you're in this single particle picture, if you see a photon that's released with less than 1/2 mv squared, then the electron still has some residual kinetic energy left. And so, therefore, it must be free. And the only way it could have done that is if it fell down into one of these principles. So this long tail here is due to the fact that we have electrons not just with v equal 0 but much more than that. related to the overlap integral between those with a dipole operator, the dipole operators being the thing that emits the photon in between them. So, yeah, you're right, there are inverse processes. We're going to get to that and the idea of detailed balance and thermodynamic equilibrium and things of that ilk. But these are the two simplest ones, free-free and free-bound, that I wanted to discuss before we did some diagnostics. Any other questions? We'll go into some ways of actually making some use out of all this stuff in a moment. processes for all of these that will affect the spectra that you get. So one use of this is a diagnostic called bolometry. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. And so, that is going to be the integral d nu of j of nu. But, of course, the detail matters because you can see the recombination increases the amount of emission above that baseline bremsstrahlung value. So there'll be more emission here. do bolometry is we have some radiation coming out of the plasma. We have a little sensor sitting at the wall of our vacuum vessel. And we'll call this resistor M. It has a resistance M. And that resistance M is a function of temperature here. And so, as this resistor heats up from absorbing the radiation, its resistance is going to change. So by measuring this voltage VR, by knowing the voltage V0, and knowing the reference resistor R, we can measure the voltage M. We're dividing V0 between M and R. And we're measuring the voltage across R, which then, of course, tells us what resistance M has here. And so, this is also a function of time and temperature. And, from that temperature, we can make an estimate of the radiation power incident upon it. We'll talk a little bit more about how to do that in the next step. But this, effectively, serves as a very, very simple system. And you can be digitizing this as a functionof time. radiation can affect this. And so, by measuring delta T up here, the change in temperature in our resistance, we can invert this equation and we can back out the radiation power. So this is just a really simple way of using a resistor to measure the power coming out of the plasma. And bolometry was one of the first diagnostics that we had on many MCF devices. Questions on this? STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: [inaUDIBLE], we'll talk about that in a moment. R2. I think I'm just going to call these R2 and R1. And, in a Wheatstone bridge, what we now do is we still have a potential drop, V0, over the entire bridge. But we now measure the potential difference across these pairs here. And that is called V bridge. So these measurement resistors, they see the radiated power P rad, and their temperature is equal to the temperature of the reference resistors plus a change in temperature due to radiation. The Wheatstone bridge is used to measure a voltage which is proportional to a small quantity. The voltage is entirely due to the change in temperature. So we're now able to isolate the temperature very, very precisely. We also use a phase locked loop measurement, which is a form of heterodyning again, my favorite technique. And so, we actually have V0 is oscillating at around 50 kilohertz or so. So, we can see that our signal, delta T, is a slowly varying signal which is embedded on top of this. have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. It's the heat transport kappa grad T that gives us the time constant for thermal conduction through the substrate from the absorber to the resistor. And, effectively, this tau here sets the timescale at which we can measure. So the larger tau is the slower our measurement of the radiated power is going to be. And if tau gets very large, because we've got a very thick substrate here, or it doesn't have very good heat transport, then we're going to have a very poor time resolution. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.