HONG LIU: So, first, we talk about chiral fermions. So, previously, we showed that the Dirac equation requires, actually, psi to have four components. And so there are two ways to reduce it, and one is called the Majorana fermion. So we first talk about the chiralfermion and one way to do it. And then, we will look at the specific representation of gamma matrices, OK? Consider-- so now I will use a representation which is different from what you-- so i divided by 4. HONG LIU: Let's look at this choice of gamma matrices, OK? So I will call this choice to be star. And so you can also work it out. So you find that they have the following form. So do you see something? Yes? AUDIENCE: They're block diagonal. HONG LIu: Yes, they are. So if sigma is block diagonal, then that means this S is also block. So when S is block, that means, if I write psi x into two component vector, they transform within themselves. HONG LIU: You don't need four components to be able to transform under Lorentz transformation. At least two components can already transform. This property that you can reduce to two components should exist for all choice of gamma matrices. So if we can do it in this choice of Gamma matrices, then we should be able. to do it with any choice ofGammaMatrices, OK? So, now, let me tell you how toDo it for the general gamma matrix. to separate the psi into psi L and psi R is more subtle. You no longer-- is just simple the upper two component or lower two component. So we have to do a little bit of work, OK? Actually, we don't need to do much work if you actually find the right trick. And so the beautiful trick to do this for any choice of gamma matrices is that you can introduce the following object-- what is called gamma 5. So gamma 5 is defined to be i gamma 0, gamma 1, gamma 2, gamma 3. HONG LIU: Gamma 5 actually have 0 trace, OK? So, this, I will leave as an exercise for yourself, what you can do is you did before with other-- yeah, in your homework. So, now, from this properties-- now we can say the following things about the gamma 5 matrix. And so each eigenspace is two-dimensional. So there's 2 plus 1, 2 minus 1. It must be. So then, by definition-- OK, so now this psi L, psi R, which is now defined for any choice of gamma matrices-- so they have to two independent complex component. sometimes also called Weyl spinors. So, now, we will check this actually, indeed. psi L and psi R defined this way will transform under themselves under the Lorentz transformation. They will not mix with each other, OK? So you can check the gamma 5 actually commutes with sigma mu, nu. So that means, under transformation, S will not change the eigenvalues of gamma 5. That means that psi L prime, S lambda, psi L, and gamma 5 acting on psi Lprime is still gamma L. Dirac equation have the following form of Dirac Lagrangian density. And then since psi is just equal to the sum of the-- so psi-- psi R, OK? And then you can just write this in terms of psi L and psi R. Write this interms psi L and psi R, and then you find that the cross term vanish. You can write it as psi dagger partial sub 0, plus i sigma i, partial i, psi L. And this behavior is actually general. HONG LIU: Symmetry is only present in the classical level but not in the quantum level. Without the chiral symmetries, there's no pion. It's also important in many condensed matter systems, like liquid helium, et cetera. The way to understand that these two are related-- so think about the transformation here. And then, now, you have a new symmetry. Gamma 5-- OK. And now you can put the gamma 5 in the exponents. Any questions on this? HONG LIU: In physics, the massless case actually gives you very much richer structure, normally, than the massive particle. Mathematically, it's because the representation of the Lorentz group is very different from the massive case. Why is it called gamma 5 rather than, say, gamma 4? It's a historical reason, so people often like to go to Euclidean space, you continue gamma 0 to gamma 4, and then the gamma 5 is the next one. HONG LIU: In the Dirac spinor, which we have talked about so far, is four components. In the chiral spinor we talked about, you have two complex components. The next one I'm going to talk about is the Majorana, in which case, I would argue, we have 4 times 1 real component. And, now, let's talk about the last case-- this case, which is-- you have four real components, OK? So what do you do? Again, we follow the similar strategy to see whether it's possible to have fourreal components. HONG LIU: We have chosen a very specific representation for gamma matrices, which psi can be chosen to be real. But how about for the general representation? So now we talk about the general Majorana spinor. Majorana is, like, half electron. It has very stable topological properties, which a single electron does not have. And whether you can engineer in your condensed matter systems, Majoranaspinor then became a Holy Grail. If you can do it, you can achieve more stable quantum computation, et cetera. HONG LIU: For this Majorana representation, the B is just equal to identity. And, now, let's try to give you an example of the B in the other representation. So suppose, in the chiral representation, which I wrote down before, that gamma 0, gamma 1, and gamma 2 are imaginary, pure imaginary. And the gamma 2 is real, OK? So this pure imaginary means, when you take the star of them, you get the minus sign. to impose in this basis. And this is now independent of massless or massive particles? HONG LIU: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, this is-- yeah. Good? So this concludes our discussion of the Majorana spinor. Do you have any questions on this? Yes? AUDIENCE: So is the orthogonal component of psi-- the Majoran fermion [INAUDIBLE]?? HONGLIU: Sorry. The orthogona component of this Majorana species-- like, possible-- in the chiral one, like, psi L. we have-- so this real scalar theory-- we can see that before. So this theory has a discrete symmetry because this is invariant under phi. It goes to minus phi, OK? So this is-- if you do it twice, you go back to itself. OK, so this is called the Z2 symmetry. And there are also spacetime discrete symmetries. So you can have so-called time reversal, which corresponding to your t, x goes to plus t. And so, altogether, they are called CPT symmetry. Yeah.