HONG LIU: So if you want to compute, say, some scattering amplitude from alpha to beta-- so alpha's some initial state and beta's some final state. Say alpha consists of momentum p1 and PN-- or pm, and beta, say momentum p m plus 1 and pn. And then you can get this scattering amplitude just by taking your momentum-space correlation function, OK, for the n points. So this is the relation, and here I have stripped out the momentum conservation on both sides. I will explain a few things. OK, so remember this Gn, so let's go back to the definition of this Gn. So this is obtained by doing a Fourier transform. Say-- I think it would be minus sign. By doing the Fourier transforms, the coordinate-space correlation function can be written as the following. So-- yes? AUDIENCE: Right, so time-ordering of x1 to xn right here? HONG LIU: Yeah. It doesn't matter. It just has to act to the right. HONG LIU: To derive that theorem, the time-order matters. So we mentioned that if you have a diagram like this, say minus P1, minus P2, to P3, P4, and then the square root and amplitude are just given by minus i lambda, because you need to throw away all the external propagators. OK, you just need to-- you have to truncate all the External propagators, so that means you also throw away diagrams like this. So all these diagrams, you can ignore them, OK. HONG LIU: Z is the same for different processes, but it's different for different particles. Z is a constant for all of them, yeah. If it depended on momentum, then it would be kind of useless, right? So for our purpose, actually, it's not important. So we will not go into details of the Z. And that is in the QFT2. But the leading order, they don't matter, and so we will start with 1. single particle, and you can have such a diagram like this and all these diagrams. Correspondingly, you have a particle propagating, but that particle can interact with the virtual particle, its own virtual particle. And so that, this kind of interaction, will affect the property of the propagation but can have the most effect by prefactor, but actually can change the mass, too. But for the-- oh, it can correct for the mass-- and also, that's the subject of the QFT2. The Dirac equation is one of the most beautiful equations in mathematical physics. It's actually describing electrons, so it's not only beautiful, but it's actually useful. The Dirac theory is a prime example of how people make great discoveries often for the wrong motivations. But the key is that if you are good enough, you will find something new and that something new will be useful. We'll talk about fermions in the next section of the lecture. We're going to talk about the Dirac equations and its covariance. go to a different frame. OK, yeah, that's what we mean by-- just when you go to adifferent Lorentz frame, the equation, the form of the equation looks the same. Just different observers in different laboratory, they see the same equation, OK? OK, so but for this to be Lorent z covariant, remember, LorentZ transformation transform t to x, so immediately, you conclude that H must be first-order in spatial derivatives. OK. So the only-- then the most general way you can write it is alpha minus i.  Dirac came up with the idea of Lorentz covariant equations. He reasoned, OK, if this is constant which does not work, and then let's make alpha and beta to be matrices. Then in order for that equation to make sense, then psi has to be a n- component vector. OK, it's really, say, a stroke of genius. It's really a strokes of genius because there was nothing like this before. Just even from a mathematical point of view, it is purely, purely imaginative, OK? They're just some constant Hermitian matrices. And then, so then he reasoned that for this equation, if we want this equation to be Lorentz covariant, then at least it should have the relativistic plane wave as its solution. If it does not even have that type of solution, then you, yeah, of course cannot be covariant. So this will be satisfied-- can be satisfied if square of star, OK, satisfies reduced to the Klein-Gordon equation. equation, then you just get partial partial t square psi equal to H square psi. OK, and then we try to make this of this Klein-Gordon form. So the right-hand side, we just have the form minus i with alpha dot with this. And then plus beta m square psi plus cross term. But now remember, beta and alpha, they are not constant. They are matrices, OK, so they don't necessarily commute. So you have to be careful about the orders. with that kind of dispersion relation. So now we just compare the both sides, so for this to be true, we just need to have-- so let's compare the second-order derivative term. And then we need alpha i, so we need-- first, when i not equal to j, the off-diagonal terms, they all should vanish, OK, because here there's only diagonal terms. So that means that the alpha i alpha j plus alpha j alpha i should equal to 0. OK, that should have the plane-wave solution. HONG LIU: To satisfy them needs at least a 4-by-4 matrix, so n has to be 4. And so you can also check 2- by-2 matrices. It's not enough to do this. When you go to 4-By-4, then you finally find the solutions. OK? Good? So now, good, you say we have an equation, OK, so psi-- so alpha is a 4 -by -4 matrix. And alpha acts on different components of psi, and this just acts on-- the derivative acts on all components. alpha 2, alpha 3, they are all-- they are three matrices. Wouldn't we want each alpha i to be diagonal? Is that what you're saying, that each matrix in alpha should be a diagonal matrix? HONG LIU: No, alpha are just matrices, so this means that alpha 1 alpha 2 plus alpha 2 alpha 1, as a matrix product, should give you zero. So that's why I say this was really genius, because just nobody could have thought of this. HONG LIU: If we take a n by n matrix where n is not so small, then we can use that --? HONG LIu: No, you get-- just we are not using those matrices in the efficient way. Yeah, this become-- you can reduce always-- yeah, just from physical purpose, you can always reduce it to 4, yeah. OK? Good? OK, so for later convenience, let's introduce a slightly different notation, so now we have this equation. form of this. So now we have the form of this partial t psi equal to minus alpha plus beta m psi, so now let's multiply both sides by a factor-- by beta. OK, so beta is a matrix, so this is a Matrix equation. So due to different conventions of the Minkowski metric signature you use, different books or different places, you will see i in different places. Some equations have i-- yeah, some books have i here. In my version, there's no i, OK? [LAUGHTER] most simplest in terms of notation anyway, so that's the convention we use. Now let me just write it in the component form. I have gamma mu, which-- each of them is a matrix, alpha, beta, so alpha and beta, they're always run. OK, so this is a little bit intricate equation, but once you get used to it, it's not that difficult. Yes? AUDIENCE: There's no meaning to the upstairsness or downstairsness of alpha andbeta, right? HONG LIU: Yeah, these two indices are not symmetric. HONG LIU: 1, 2, 3 can be written as-- in terms of gamma matrices gamma mu gamma nu plus gamma nu gamma mu. So mu nu is always from 0 to 3, OK, equal to 0, or mu not equal to nu, and then gamma 0 squared is equal to minus 1. And you can write this further in a more compact form. You can also write this together in the more-- or equivalently write it as gamma mu dagger gamma 0 gamma mu Gamma 0. are just good-- so these are two different representations of this algebra. OK. So now let me make some remarks. So before I proceed further, do you have questions? Yes? AUDIENCE: For 2, shouldn't the Pauli matrices be-- oh, nevermind. HONG LIU: Oh. Other questions? OK? Good? So nowLet's talk about spinor space. Yeah, so this is a new space, and so that's called-- this is calledspinor space, yeah. same story just here, you just forget about beta. OK, the same story, you forget the beta, and then you only need alpha i alpha j the commutator to be 0 for i not equal to j, essentially just that equation 1 there. And then also, you'd want the alpha i square equal to 1, OK, so for any i. So now these are the conditions for the alphas, and now you can actually satisfy by 2-by-2 matrices. positive definite classically. You will-- later, you will see why, OK? And this, I will leave it to your pset, OK, so this is very similar to the derivation of such occurrence in the case of the just non-relativistic Schrodinger equation. So as I mentioned, you can have infinite number of solutions. What's the meaning of them? So first, let's imagine when we look at this equation-- so as I said, this is a matrix equation. to 0, and the gamma mu prime is equal to B gamma mu B minus 1. So yeah, so this easily can be shown. So then we conclude, any sets, since we can make a basis transformation as you want, OK, that the-- except the basis transformation should not change physics, OK? So any sets of gamma mu related by a similarity transformation are equivalent. OK, and because they should not give you new physics just because one is going to change the basis. they're all physically equivalent. They're just corresponding to a change of basis. So but different forms of the gamma, they may be useful for different purposes. For example, this I, solution I we wrote down before, it's convenient for if you want to take the nonrelativistic limit. OK, they make your algebra a bit more convenient. But still we haven't showed that the Dirac equation is covariant. So we, of course, won't have time to do that today, but let me just remind you how this Lorentz covariance works for the scalar case. Consider such a Lorentz transformation, OK, so and then phi transforms as following, phi prime x prime phiprime. New phi evaluated at the new position should be the same as phi evaluation at the old position. So the phi-- yeah, just equal to phi lambda minus 1 x. So now if you look at the Klein-Gordon equation, let's see how this is covariant. OK, it's the same in any frame. Now we want to show that the Dirac equation has the same property.