David KAISER: Today, we're going to pick up where we were on the most recent classes. We'll look at the coalescence of what came to be called the Big Bang model. And then we'll see how cosmic inflation emerged from that particular moment to try to address some of the shortcomings while retaining some the successes. And the asterisks are to remind you there's a set of strictly optional lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. or our own Milky Way galaxy. Or if we zoom in even closer to home with the solar system or even really in human terms, there are concentrations of enormous matter and energy and activity separated by huge voids. One of the questions is, what could account for that structure across these scales from meters or kilometers up to tens of billions of light years? It turns out that ordinary gravity-- even Newtonian gravity, let alone Einstein's fancier version that we looked at in class, general theory of relativity-- is sufficient to help us make sense of this hierarchy of scales. Nowadays people are pretty well convinced consists of things like quarks and gluons and even some more exotic particles like the Higgs particle. So we have these two ingredients of the structure and behavior of space time as governed presumably by Einstein's theory. And then the stuff that's filling that space time, an idea about matter, especially how matter behaves at very high energies and densities. So with those two ingredients, the goal has been, again, for many decades to account for the observational features of our universe even on very large scales. satisfy Einstein's equation. They took three particularly simple forms. Depending on the amount of stuff, depending on the distribution of matter and energy. If you had more than some critical value, a critical value that came from the equations themselves above that, an overdense region, space itself would warp back onto itself like a closed sphere. And if you had less stuff per volume, if the universe were underdense compared to thatcritical value, then, in fact, the universe would open up away from itself. Einstein thought that was horrible. He had a very strong aesthetic and philosophical preference for a universe that had no beginning that was simply static. But other colleagues showed at least it was consistent with his own equations to have universes that would change over time, that could either expand or contract. That was actually a prediction made by some of these colleagues even before some empirical evidence began to come in starting in the late 1920s with some of the largest telescopes of available on the planet. That's when Edwin Hubble in Southern California were able to prove it. to collect information about not just the distribution of distant galaxies, but could also measure how rapidly they were moving with respect to us. And Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving. And the basic trend holds. There's some interesting deviations. But the idea is nonetheless evidence consistent with our universe expanding, not just having a shape to it, but actually stretching and getting larger over time. So you can actually then work backwards and say for how long has our observable universe been stretching? When did this stretching or expanding phase begin? George Lemaitre was an ordained Catholic priest. He was also an MIT trained PhD astrophysicist. He studied briefly in Cambridge, England with one of the first converge to general relativity, Arthur Eddington. Then he came to MIT to finish his PhD and then was finding many of these solutions to Einstein's field equations even before Einstein did. And it's consistent with the beginning of that expansion being not quite 14 billion years ago, billions of years ago. It's also consistent with things moving further apart from each other on average today. Lemaitre was calling it a primeval atom, that there was this initial fireball from a very, very hot, dense state. And he was very eager to understand the early stages of that expansion. That's where things stood really through the 1930s. And then after the Second World War, new groups began coming back to these somewhat old questions. Some of the newer groups had experience with things like the Manhattan Project and in general were much better versed in things like nuclear physics than had been known even in Lemaitre's day. George Gamow was advising two younger physicists, Robert Herman and Ralph Alpher. They realized that if the universe was very hot and dense at early times, then the conditions in which these elementary particles would find themselves should be quite different than what we find commonly around ourselves today. And in a series of really quite ahead of its time farsighted work starting in the late 1940s, this trio and a small number of other colleagues around the world began trying to fill in this picture, this primeval fireball picture. a measure of kinetic energy of motion. At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. The photons would each be trapped, kicked like soccer balls between all these loose electric charges. Light can't propagate in a charged plasma because it's always bouncing between these very nearby free electric charge. So they could calculate how the universe would have looked. When the average or ambient temperature fell below the average binding energy of a single hydrogen atom, a new phase in the universe would begin to unfold. At that moment, the average energy per photon or per elementary particle would fall so that you could actually begin to form stable atoms of hydrogen. At around 380,000 years, after the start of that stretch after that primeval atom begins to expand, the ambient or average temperature of all the junk inside that universe should've fallen below this Coulomb attractive energy for neutral hydrogen. filled with neutral atoms of hydrogen. And now you have a mean free path for light that's arbitrarily long. Light can pass through electrically neutral matter. It does so in our own atmosphere, let alone in empty space. So they argue that today, this bath of remnant radiation from that early hot, dense state should be filling the sky in every direction. It should be more or less even distribution, a uniform glow. But instead of it being a very, very high energy X-ray or gamma ray radiation, it should be redshifted all the way down into the low energy microwave band. In the early universe, charged particles had a mean free path to cross the dance floor. Gamov, Alpher, and Herman were putting real numbers to try to make sense of these different phases of the very early universe. Very high temperature, early dense state should be qualitatively different in its behavior than a later lower energy state. They predicted as early as 1948 that there should be this remnant glow from the Big Bang, all those photons that only then at 380,000 years after the Big bang were able to start streaming freely. 20 years later, two radial physicists working at Bell Labs, Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias, were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. They couldn't get rid of a residual hum. At one point, they climbed inside that huge horn antenna on their hands and knees to scrub out what they graciously called special dielectric materials from pigeons who had made a nest. in Southern Jersey. They were close to Princeton. They all got together. They said, oh, what you found is actually the remnant glow from the Big Bang. This residual hum in your receiver consistent with an energy of about three degrees above zero, three degrees Kelvin, was really the leftover photons. And the average energy per photon had fallen steadily since the time when they were first released in that early dance party. So let me pause there and ask any questions. Any questions on that stuff so far? So far so good? from every part of space, from every single direction in the sky, those photons began to move freely at this single moment in time. So basically, the universe should've been filled with light, originally a very high energy. And then actually the energy of that light should be falling as the container expands, so as the average energy inside that balloon goes down. So the photons aren't coming from that direction of sky the way we think of with point-like sources. There's a galaxy there, a quasar, a particular bright star in our neighborhood. everywhere. So every part of space that we could see today once had been at the Big Bang, so to speak. The Big Bang happened there. It happened at x equals 0, and x equals 1, equals 2. Any place we could put spatial coordinates to on this model, those all experienced it at the same time. But I say all that as if that's obvious. It's not obvious. But that's the kind of reckoning that people like Lemaitre got very comfortable with starting in the '20s and '30s. In his time, Hubble measured a much quicker average rate of expansion than what we have mostly settled on today. The picture was enough to get a small number of people to pay attention to Georges Lemaitre's otherwise quite obscure mathematical solutions. Hubble actually had a number of assistants, and other groups began contributing as well. But it was Hubble's data that got the biggest splash, that made the biggest impact on the community at the time. And regardless of what you think of Einstein, he was not a fan of this early on. whether we agree with the number he inferred of the actual rate, it seemed pretty clear to many people at the time that this was consistent with an actual overall expansion, with the change over time. Friedmann's and especially the follow up work by Georges Lemaitre, that made those mathematical solutions look much, much more curious and interesting than they had prior to Hubble's data. So this is a, I think, safe to say, remarkably successful set of ideas that eventually becomes called the Big Bang model, going all the way back to really Einstein. what we call conformal time, often labeled by the Greek letter tau, is basically a variable tick rate that is really convenient because then we can start making a dynamical changing spacetime look just like the spacetime of special relativity. In these special, very simple fine coordinates, light just travels on 45 degree diagonals. And then light comes to us at 145 degrees. That sounds very abstract. We do that all the time. This is just an example in space time of a conformal mapping of a sort that we all use every day like a Mercator projection. stretching our time coordinate so time gets more and more stretched out towards earlier times. We can take that into account. We know how to use a Mercator projection. And it makes other relationships remarkably easy. Likewise our conformal maps here make the paths of light, for example, very easy to follow. When people begin using these convenient coordinates, they also go back to some questions about or features of the Big Bang model, and they start having new questions. It's the same Robert Dicke. So he introduced this conundrum in 1969, so soon after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation. stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. It became common after Dicke to just introduce the Greek letter capital omega simply to refer to that ratio. And only for that Goldilocks solution, we have exactly the balanced amount of stuff per volume would you expect to have space obey Euclidean geometry on large scales. If omega is larger than 1, you have more stuff for volume. You expect it's open or hyperbolic geometry. So far so good. Then Dicske plugged this quantity into Einstein's own equations. universe should generically become more and more different from flat over time. If a universe started out being close to but not identically equal to flat at early times, it should look nothing like spatially flat at later times. The universe has been stretching for 14 billion years, what set it to be so exponentially arbitrarily close to spatiallyflat given that is an unstable equilibrium point? That was introduced by Bob Dicke in 1969. And 10 years later, Dicske and Peebles introduced the second big conundrum. And this one's called the horizon problem. direction in the sky. Light travels on these lovely, convenient 45 degree diagonals. From this corner of the sky, looking in the opposite direction, we receive this uniform bath of photons that have been traveling towards us this whole time. We received this remarkably uniform signal on the sky today from opposite sides. However, those photons were emitted at a finite age when the universe was only a short portion of its current age. It was only 380,000 years old as opposed to nearly 14 billion years old. at a fixed speed at least according to Einstein's theory. So if the universe has only been around for so long, then light could only have traveled so far. That's called the horizon distance. What's the furthest possible distance that a light beam could've traveled traveling at that constant speed of light for as long as it was able to? So even though an actual physical light beam couldn't have traveled because the universe was optically opaque, any information, any physical signal, any force, anything that is limited by Einstein's speed limit should only be able to travel up to and limited by the speed oflight. or even exchange a single tweet, to have absolutely no information of this part of the sky about what the average conditions are. That became known as the horizon problem. And this was heightened as more and more data came in. It became clear that signal really is uniform to one part in 100,000. It's remarkably uniform to a tiny fraction of a percent. It was at 1,000th of 1%. That signal is uniform across every direction we look in the sky today, even though it's coming from all these regions that couldn't have possibly had any physical interaction with each other. The Big Bang model had some amazing successes but some pretty stubborn quandaries as well. Fisher asks, is it useful to think of the universe as spherical still? Yeah. These pictures get pretty hard. Fisher: Any questions on the shortcomings of the Big Bang as people began articulating them throughout the '60s and '70s? Feel free to jump in or use the chat or either way. And again, there's more on the quantitative details of that in that optional primer you can find on the Canvas site. we can imagine choosing some point of interest and drawing some sphere around it and asking what's happening in that region? Is that region itself will grow over time? And is that region representative of some larger sample from which it's taken? So we can still ask about the behavior of some randomly drawn sphere even if the global shape of space might not be spherical. Now, it could be that the entire universe has a global shape to it. We could be living in a closed universe where on the largest scales it actually looks like a sphere. But we could, again, do the same trick. like circa 1980. He was not originally asking questions about the cosmos, but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions, again, very much like Tony Zee around the same time. What Alan was interested in was in things like spontaneous symmetry breaking and the Higgs mechanism. That was all the rage for a lot of particle theorists in the early and mid '70s by then. And he was wondering about shapes for the potential energy function of that Higgs field that might have a extra structure. There might be a kind of dimple to that energy function. the origin of its own potential energy function where there's a barrier in any direction, but it's not an infinitely high barrier. According to quantum theory, that Higgs field should eventually decay to the genuine global state of lowest energy, anywhere along this so-called vacuum circle. Alan was realizing upon hearing Bob Dicke's lecture that that could have remarkable cosmological implications. And he calls this a spectacular realization. So my request number 3 to you scientists is both write things down, use neat handwriting. Alan Guth's notebook is now on display in the Adler Planetarium in Chicago. He realized that this kind of feature could actually lead to a cosmologically distinct kind of evolution. If the energy density, the stuff per volume, remains constant, then very counterintuitively, you have a runaway growth in the size of space. That stretch function, the scale factor going back just to Einstein's equations, will grow exponentially quickly, will have a period of accelerated expansion during which universe won't just get bigger. Einstein was worried about exotic features from these Higgs fields that can get twisted up in some topological shape. He was really just wondering what happens if the universe gets stuck even temporarily such that the matter that dominates it, fills it, can't release or relax its potential energy arbitrarily quickly. That's called a metastable state. And as Alan and others were quick to confirm, this happens very naturally, or at least it's a kind of feature that one stumbles upon readily, if when studying these exotic Higgs-like fields. in a stretching space time, if you take that stretching of space seriously, then you don't even need to cook up those exotic Higgs-like potentials that Alan was first thinking about. Quite generically, you'll have a damped oscillator behavior. This comes from the fact that space itself is stretching. And that alone it turns out is enough to find these self-consistent solutions in which the field moves very slowly. You can imagine it rolling down this hill, rolling down-- sorry-- rolling down slowly as a function of time. grows very fast in time-- while the energy density remains nearly constant. Now you'd see this expression, the deviation of the universe from spatially flat. That deviation should rapidly fall to 0. The universe today should look indistinguishable from a flat universe because the difference from flatness was driven to 0 dynamically. By having even a very brief phase of exponentially rapid accelerating expansion, you drive the universe towards a flat shape rather than having it flow away from aflat shape. So the latest measurement from the Planck collaboration using a satellite is that this parameter in our actual universe today is 1. If inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. So we're adding more real estate along our time axis. We're unfurling a little bit extra time that hadn't been taken into account in the standard Big Bang model. So therefore, you could have the horizon distance, the maximum causal distance, becomes much larger. In fact, it could be much, much larger, exponentially larger than the smoothness scale we observed. distance and conformal time. You can see that as you trace backwards from today, instead of going back to saying the universe at early times should've been on the order of 1 meter, you say at those early times, the universe was actually exponentially tinier than you had thought. It grew exponentially quickly to map onto where we see today. And so the universe could very easily have been in a kind of equilibrium or at least a causally self-connected state. And this became clear to people about a year or so after Alan and Paul and Andy and all those folks began writing the first papers on inflation. The universe was filled with quantum fields. At any given moment, that field would be subject to slight, slight quantum fluctuations. That starts to yield this tiny little fluctuation in why there's slightly more matter and energy in this region of space than the other one. So now those very tiny quantum scale fluctuations get stretched as the whole universe stretches. As the scale factor grows exponentially, you have the average length between the distance between crests of those tiny wiggles get stretched to galactic and even super galactic scales. higher energy photons in the CMB and slightly lower energy photons. And the idea now is that the regions of the sky from which these photons were emitted are telling us about the very, very tiny unevenness in the distribution of matter and energy. They have been mapped by three generations of satellites above the ground with increasingly precise ground based measurements as well. Each of these came out 10 years apart with an increase of about a factor of 30 in the angular resolution of thesky. I was a senior in college when the first of these released their data in September 1992. to measure these tiny, tiny fluctuations on the order of about one part in 100,000 but over huge scales. It was like they had very poor eyeglasses. Roughly 10 years later, another NASA mission called WMAP was able to increase the resolution by a factor of 30. So now not only do we know do we live in a universe that is indistinguishable from flat as inflation suggests we should, but the actual pattern of those wiggles, the pattern of the very slight early unevenness in the sky matches predictions to better than a percent level accuracy. Inflation says similar kinds of things should've been happening in the earliest moments everywhere in space through this very violent, rapid stretching of space. At the moment when the electrically neutral atoms start to form, if there were this sea or bath of gravitational waves, then the high school auditorium-- imagine where this dance is happening. These are mathematically more complicated structure. You should have this periodic squeezing, stretching, and then inverted by 90 degrees. So a version of these were found by the LIGO collaboration and announced early in 2016. March of 2014, a team using the BICEP satellite at the South Pole announced they had actually measured exactly that corkscrew pattern. Unfortunately, pretty soon after that, it turned out the BiceP team had measured data consistent with local noise. So basically, the signal they had hoped to measure was actually swamped by foregrounds they had not yet been able to control. And this was found by a number of very sophisticated analyzes soon afterwards. So it remains an open question to this day whether these primordial curling, twisting patterns really can be detected. Maybe there's such small magnitude, it'll evade our detection. makes specific predictions for what we should see on the sky today, including very minute statistical predictions for things like the cosmic microwave background radiation. The simplest models fit to unbelievable accuracy despite what my mean dormmates used to say in the mid '90s. Now we have extraordinary agreement with many, many of these predictions, albeit not the final one. So why is the universe lumpy? Why is this cascade of scales? Because space time is wiggly, and matter is jiggly.