This is the second time we are having this class. We had it last year in a smaller version. That was for six units of a credit, and we had it once a week. And mostly practitioners from the industry, from Morgan Stanley, talking about examples how math is applied in modern finance. And so we got some good response last year. So, with the support of the math department, we decided to expand this class to be 12 units of credit and have twice a week, as you know. "Hopefully, this will give you enough information to decide this is a field you would like to pursue in your future career," he says. "Last year when we finished the class, we had a few students coming to work in the industry" "Some work at Morgan Stanley, some work at elsewhere. So that's really the goal. And at the same time, obviously, you will further solidify your math knowledge and learn new content," he adds. "Some terminologies will be used, which you may not have heard before" and the Sloan school here. So anyway, thanks for that. We will be doing a bit more polling along the way, mainly to get feedback of how you feel about the class. Last year we had it online, so if you feel the class is going too fast, or the math part is. going too slow or the finance part is a bit confusing, the easiest way is really just to send us. emails, which you will find from the class website. So Anyway, I will start today's lecture with a story, and a quiz at the end. Don't worry, it's not a real quiz. Just going to ask you some questions you can raise your hand and give your answer. you the story of Pi or "Life of Pi." That's not a financial story. The rest of the story, alpha, beta, delta, gamma, theta, which you will learn from Peter and Choongbum and Vasily's classes. So I'm going to talk about vega. What is vega? It's a measurement about a book or portfolio or position's sensitivity to volatility. That's all you need to know right now. I'm not going to ask you questions later. called kappa at Morgan Stanley. Kappa is also called vega by some uneducated traders at the Salomon Brothers. They have mistaken vega as a Greek letter after gambling at Vegas. So anyway, so that was my first day. So obviously, I learned how to call kappa very quickly. And I called it kappa in the last 17 years, but you will hear people calling it vega. Obviously, I have probably more people call it the vega, but anyway. But why did I tell you the story? What point I try to make? I did that in the last 20 years. So the point I'm trying to tell you is, before you dive into any details of mathematics or any concept in finance in this class, just bear in mind, this is a field developed in. the last mostly 30 years, or even shorter. And what you really need to ask questions is-- it's not really is it right or wrong in mathematics, is it wrong in physics? So, how the concepts are established and defined and verified. typically specialize in local products, local company stocks, local bonds, and local currencies. So again, what's in common? That's the question you need to ask. And the currencies, money itself, are also traded. So, there are different products. How the stock get listed on the stock exchange? It goes through IPO-- Initial Public Offering process. When a company changes from private to public, it goes through this IPO process. It's called primary market, primary listing. And once the stock is listed and it becomes traded in the market, we call it secondary trading. endowment support, some will come from some other form of research budget. Just borrow from the public-- local governments, states, counties, even. So, that's debt product. Commodities, actually, you know. Metal, energy, agriculture products are traded, mostly in the futures format. When you actually buying and sell, you build a warehouse to take them. You ship a tank to store above the ocean. And the real estate, you're buying and selling houses. type of player is really bank. After 1933 Glass-Steagall legislation, there were two main types of banks. One is called commercial bank, the other is investment bank. Some people blame that, and probably for a very good reason, for the cause of 2008 financial crisis. But why do we need financial markets? This comes back to what I described before. There's a need for it. It's really the need to bridge between the lenders and the borrowers. That's really coming down to the essential relationship. Investors who have money need to have better yield or better return, better interest. When you have a savings account, you don't really earn much at all. And so you would have to take more risk to generate more return, or you have longer horizon CDs, other type of products, or trade the stocks. So the trade between lenders and the borrowers, is again, essentially the main driver of the financial markets. So, banks and so-called dealers play the role of market making. brokers. Mutual funds, who actually manage public investors' money, typically in the long-only format. Insurance companies has large asset. They need to generate a return, generate cash flow to meet their liability needs. And the pension funds, same thing. As inflation goes higher, they need to pay out more to the retirees, so where do you get the return? Sovereign wealth fund, similarly, endowment funds-- they all have this same situation, have capital and needs to deploy and to make better return. Government always have a very large impact on the market, because they are the policymakers. They decide the interest rate and interest rate curve. And the different policies they push out, obviously, will generate different outlook for the future markets. Then the corporate hedges and the liabilities. When corporates borrow money, they create some risk, so they need to be sensitive to the market. So, to summarize the types of trading. The first type is really just hedging. That means you're not proactively adding risk to what you have. In the new regulation, obviously, proprietary trading is banned, right? And so the third type is really the proprietary trader, the risk taker. These are the hedge funds or some portfolio managers. They need to focus on generating return and control the risk. So, that's where the beta and alpha, the concept comes in. It's a format. You want to beat S&P 500, so you want to basically have certain tracking of this index, but you Want to return more on top of that. I mentioned the currency example. Let me give you another example. There are a lot of people issue bonds, or issue debt. So this example I'm going to give you is, let's think about Australian corporate. Because interest rate in Australia is higher than in Japan, so typically, people like to borrow money in Japan. And they invest it in Australia. You earn higher interest rate. So let me ask you a question. Who can tell me, why don't people just do that all day long, just borrow from Japan and invest in Australia? Even if you are not a finance guy, you work in a corporate, you just do you import, export, or building a factory, you have to know, actually, what the exposure is. Risk management, nowadays, becomes pretty widespread responsibility. So, that's on the hedging side. If you're entering in a merger deal, and one company is buying another, you need to hedge your potential currency exposure and your interest rate exposure. And whatever is on the assets or the liability, or the balance sheet, you must hedge your exposure. that liquidity, and then takes the risk. They manage the book by balancing those Greeks, which I mentioned earlier. Delta, which describes the relationship of this whole book to the underlying stock, or underlying whatever currency. That's called delta. Gamma is really the change of the portfolio. Take the derivative to the delta, or the underlying spot. So, that's second-order derivative. Delta is the first order. So gamma, now you have curvature or convexity coming in. And theta is really-- nothing changes in the market. Nothing changes in your position. Trading is really to find the relationships between prices, and try to profit from those relationship mispricing. Not many people focus on arbitrage, because lot of people are gut traders. If you trade gold in the States, the gold price happen in Asia and in Europe matters, right, because you're trading the same thing. If they are not priced the same way, you can profit from the difference. The other type is called a value trader, or relative value strategies. Think there's a deterministic, temporary mathematical relationship. the same thing, that becomes much less effective. Stat arb, finding statistical relationship among large number of stocks, then trade at the higher frequency. And fundamental analysis, you're really trying to understand what's going on in the world. So it goes through those fundamental analysis. And there are special situations. Some companies are going through particular difficulties, assets are priced very cheaply. So, there are firms out there -- you probably heard Bain Capital and many others -- where they focus on these private equity and special situation opportunities. adjust to your assumptions to fit into the market. So, pricing model, which Vasily and many of his colleagues can tell you more-- which is very much a very interesting and challenging area. Risk management itself is very challenging. It's not a purely mathematical question, but yet, math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have. Then, the third is trading strategies. Again, I think a lot of people with math background, or in general, people are looking for the so-called holy grail Trading strategies. Prof. Jake Xia: "I just want to give you the sense how math and intuition and judgment can come into the same place" "When you go to the market, you buy a stock. When the stock goes up, makes bit of money, the natural tendency is to let's take profit," he says. "If you have the discipline to get out, that's great. Trading is really all about how do you risk manage," he adds. "I'm not trying to tell you which one is right or wrong, but think about it" your bank account balance is-- let's say you are a freshman student. Your bank account is $800. Your choice will be very different from someone has $100,000 in his bank account. And also, your risk tolerance, how much you can tolerate. I'm not going to give you say, this is right or wrong. But with that, let me move on and give you some homework. So, before I give you the homework, I want to make a few more comments. Do people always learn from their experiences? In science, we collect evidence, we build models. Learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning during this class. Go to the course website, read what we have put up for the financial glossary. If you still have things you don't understand, compile your own list of financial concepts, which you can search on the web or even ask us. So, that's really-- and read other materials on the course work. So we got maybe-- how about this? We still got about 15 minutes or 12 minutes left, so I'll pass it to Vasily. every time. So, if you want to differentiate this functions and get a derivative, then this derivative will be quite noisy. And so, instead of getting the true derivative, you might obtain something quite different from true derivative just because there is a confidence interval around any point. So obviously, there is somewhere balance, and the question was, is there an optimal shift size to get the derivative? And that's what-- uh oh, the slide got corrupted. There was an answer. And we are implementing it in our systems and plan to use it in practice. what we had, we had the noisy observation of broker data and it was coming out at different non-uniform times. So, we decided to use Kalman filter and to study how it can predict. And that's one of the nice graphs [INAUDIBLE] produced, which again, we will use this strategy and the Kalman filters which he constructed in our e-trading platform in Moscow. Just to remind, the website is fully functional. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there.