Professor Donald Kagan: We have been looking at the question of the rise of the polis and the various significant elements that were part of the making of thePolis. He says we are living in the early years of a polis sometime in the eighth century B.C. Kagan says every time we see a colony, learn anything at all about it, it appears to exist in the form of aPolis, which powerfully suggests that that was the typical style of life that had already been established for Greeks. These dates tend to be confirmed in a general way, not in a specific way, by the archaeological discoveries that we find at the sites. So it's that combination, archaeology plus Greek tradition that lies behind the date of any city. But you shouldn't take the date that I give you, the traditional date, as being firm. It's a general thing; it's around that time is the best we can really say. But in fact, the earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773. the natural thing to do given the character of life, which was based upon farming, if you leave you lose your farm, and based upon the difficulty of transportation. The Greeks were, even though they went to sea plenty, they were terrified of the sea for very good reason. So, what I'm saying is, when you leave the place you were born, you leave your ancestors as well. All of that means we need to explain why these folks do what they end up doing, and we have some hints, but of course we do not know with any certainty or any confidence. The vast overwhelming majority of people needed to farm land, in order to stay alive. One answer, and it's the one that is most widely believed among Greek scholars, is that the growth of population that we have mentioned in connection with the rise of the polis is still working. But I don't think that's the only answer. I think the desire for commerce would have been also--I agree with the traditional view which is that this would has been at a lesser consideration, but still very important. Some of the places where they settled leave us puzzled, and have left the ancients puzzled. One of my favorite examples is the colony on the south shore of the Bosporus, which is called Chalcedon. They would have had to be damn fools to have settled there without that being in their minds. The Greek word for this is, apoikia, and most literally it would mean a home away, an away home. They are establishing for themselves a household, a home someplace away from where they started. Delphi was thought by the Greeks to be the omphalos, the navel of the universe, the center in every way. There the god Apollo had established an oracle. Gases would escape through this gap in the earth and there were priests who worshipped Apollo there. They would place a young woman there who would sit as these gases came up and she would after a while begin to, I suppose in the biblical languages, she would speak in tongues, which is to say she would rattle off a lot of language. The French School of Archaeology late in the nineteenth century dug everything up and concluded this was baloney; it was a myth. There were no gases coming up from any of this stuff, and so everybody believed for the next century. John Hale of the Yale Class of 1973, who is now an archaeologist at the University of Louisville, decided to investigate this. He took with him a fine geologist from Wesleyan just to go to the place there at Delphi and to see whether it could be true that such gases did come out. In Herodotus, many a story in which an oracle is consulted and gives an answer. King Croesus of Lydia, the richest man in the world, decides it would be a nice thing to conquer the Persian Empire, his neighbor to the east. He goes to the Delphic Oracle too, because you want to know what the gods want. He said, "If I cross the Halys River, that's the boundary between Lydia and Persia, what will happen?" The oracle replied, "A great empire will be destroyed" The Delphic Oracle was the best information gathering and storing device that existed in the Mediterranean world. consulting that oracle was a very rational act indeed. The priests would give a response that would be essentially straight. It would either say something like, yeah that's a good place to go or don't do that, that's an awful mistake. These people knew more than anybody else about these things, and so consulting them was a rational act. It was the navel of the universe; everybody came. will decide whether it's a good idea for him or not. Recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. The best time would be at some great festival. There are festivals held in each city just for its own citizens and my guess is that when you could do that, when you felt that you could recruit a full colony from your fellow citizens in Corinth, that's what you did. Syracuse is an independent polis, autonomous, self-governing, whatever regime it wants, etc. It is not a subject of anybody, not Corinth or anybody else. The most typical, the usual, everything else is an exception is that there are friendly relations between the mother city and the apoikia, but keep in mind that they are always independent. The question really is, so now we know that, what kind of relations did they have? I would say there are three categories that they fall into. The city of Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. When Potidaea got into trouble with Athens, and found itself besieged, Corinth sent a real army to go in there and fight. At the other end of the spectrum it's again Corinth and they have a colony up in the northwest called Corcyra. The first relationship between them is a navel battle, and thereafter we hear of them quarrelling and fighting with each other just about at least once a century right on down. More time, that the overwhelming normal situation is the first one I described, friendly relations. These guys that have gone out, let us say to Syracuse, they are your people, they have relatives back home. It is natural--oh by the way, they're accustomed to worship the gods in the same way that the Corinthians do. We do know, again, Thucydides is our source, that it was customary for colonies to send representatives back to the mother city for the religious observations that were common to them all. Kagan: The question is who gave permission for a colony to go in the mother city. The best guess and that's the only thing we have. These would have been aristocratic republics at this stage of the game. Kagan: Nobody was compelled to do anything. Everybody--all of this is voluntary on both sides of every agreement. The British practicing mercantilism passed navigation acts, saying what ships could carry what and so on--nothing like that in the Greek world. By the tenth century B.C., we see Greek cities lining the coast of Asia Minor on the west, and even around on the bottom and to some degree on the north, and on the islands in the Aegean. So, there has been a Greek--what's the word I want? There is an expansion of the Greek world already by the 10th century. The way the Greeks did their immigration into Asia Minor actually had a pattern so that you can go from north to south and you will find some consistency. There are no Greek cities as you keep coming down and pass Palestine. You reach Egypt, and of course, Egypt is one of the great empires of antiquity going back into, perhaps, certainly into the fourth millennium. So that is not territory that you can build colonies; you've got powerful empires to deal with. There is one exception. In the sixth century, I think it's around--imagine around 550 or something like that, the Greeks settle a single colony in the Delta. of the Nile of Egypt at a place called Naucratis, and the root of that word is ship. It is a trading post and it's there by permission of and under the protection of the King of Egypt. When you go west, however, it stops in the coast of North Africa--the reason being the rest of North African is dominated by Carthage. Going west, would you believe, when you get into what is now Libya, there was a very important Greek colony of Cyrene. Greek cities are all over the place. Two-thirds of the coast of the island of Sicily is filled with Greek towns. The inland, the Greeks don't move in there. The natives Sicilians inhabit that territory and the Greeks didn't move there. So Greek was that area that when the Romans do come to dominate most of Italy and sort of move up against the southern region they refer to the whole southern portion of that peninsula as Magna Graecia, great Greece because they're all Greeks down there. Greeks are not interested. You will find very rare of the case of a Greek city, which is founded away from the sea; they always wanted to be close to the sea. Miletus, I mentioned to you from Asia Minor; Corinth on the isthmus; Megara right next door to Corinth. Then we turn to the island of Euboea, that long island that's right next to the east coast of Attica. There were two important cities in the northern part of that island. One was Calkis and the other one was Eretria. is easy to see that where there is that kind of conflict and trouble, there would be people who would want to flee that and to go elsewhere. It might well be that the people who won those wars, internal wars, would have been glad to send them away rather than to have these discontented people and these folks who were their enemies hanging around town and making trouble. It is only speculation, but it seems to make sense and we know we don't hear of such troubles within Athens and Thebes, and Sparta. interesting information from their neighbors in the east and the south and there's no question about it. Anybody who looks at the earliest Greek art for quite some time, I'm talking about sculpture and temple building, will see the influence of Egypt enormously powerfully. The Greeks are sopping up tremendously useful information and talent, and skills, and all sorts of things that help explain what's going to be coming. It is inconceivable the Greeks could have developed a civilization that they did without contact with these eastern civilizations and learned a great deal from them. More and more people would be making their living in a way that was not agricultural. They would be in commerce and industry in this small sense and doing all the various things that are not farming. So you now have classes or groups of people who have interests rather different from those of the most primitive polis you could imagine. Some scholars early on in the century, moved by Marxist theories, suggested that you had a capitalist class growing up, there's just no evidence of that. My guess is that the earliest traders of any scope were probably noblemen who also had land and estates back home. way has to be found to fit them in because, as I say, they don't fit. That creates trouble. As we shall see very shortly, that trouble often takes the form of first of factional struggles within the aristocracy, which then after awhile come to involve people outside the aristocracy. So that's the, what you might say, is the negative side of the story. But colonization, especially, some scholars have pointed out, I think persuasively, also for some considerable time provided an answer to that problem. that colonization provided something analogous to that for the Greek people. So now, here we are somewhere in the seventh century, most of these places I've been talking about have been settled, the currents that I have been describing are flowing and the kinds of problems they have give rise to what will be felt in most of the towns. That is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.