NORVIN RICHARDS: Today is phonetics, which means that today we begin making funny sounds at each other. So everybody limber up your vocal tracts. Let's see. I'm trying to remember if there's anything that I ought to announce. You remember, maybe, that problem set 1, which confusingly is your second problem set, is due on Thursday. Normally, it would be due on Tuesday. But because I am technologically challenged, it's due onThursday. I just figured out how to get the projector to project over there. Linguists have a system for writing sounds down so that we'll all know what kind of sound we're talking about. A lot of the symbols of the International Phonetic Alphabet resemble letters of the English alphabet. The symbol for the sound at the beginning of "paint" is the letter p. And so that's a symbol of theInternational Phonetics Alphabet. As we go along, we will be seeing weirder and weirlier symbols from the InternationalPhoneticphabet. like "thistle" and "this," where you're sticking your tongue between your front teeth and making air flow out. English doesn't spell these differently, at least not reliably, right? So we spell both of these with a "th" That's one of the reasons the International Phonetic Alphabet is there. There are two different IPA symbols for them. The Greek letter theta is used for the sound at the beginning of 'thistle' And that second letter is an old English letter, sometimes called 'edh,' and it stands for 'this' "y" sound at the beginning of "year," yeah? And here's the first IPA symbol that is deliberately designed to confuse you. The IPA symbol for that sound, the "y" at the start of " year," is a "j" This is because the IPA was not invented exclusively by speakers of English, right? So it was invented also by speakers. of languages like German, in which they use this letter for this sound. "Ja," for example, the German word for "yes," spelled J-A, yeah? English doesn't make a huge amount of use of the glottal stop. But it's what shows up at the beginnings of words like "uh-uh" "Uh-uh," meaning "no," right? Or "oh, dear" "Ch" sound at the beginning of a word like "church" is a dynamic sound, right? Ch-- I think your tongue is in motion as you are making that sound,right? So it makes one-- it completely stops the flow of air, and then it gradually peels back. in mind? STUDENT: No. NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh, OK. We'll get to "r," eventually. But actually, people discovered at a certain point-- so people investigate this kind of thing in all kinds of ways. These days, people do a lot of MRIs. I'm going to put on the website a couple of websites that have charts of all of the sounds that we're going to talk about plus many more together with MRIs of the insides of people's mouths making these sounds. "Whisper to dorm" is a controlled experiment to see if you can hear the difference between "r" and "v" "T" at the end of "cat" is voiced or voiceless, and the "g" in "dog" is voicing. "Z" is voiceless and "s" isvoiceless, so it's a distinction in voicing. If you whisper "safe" or "save," you have the feeling that you're hearing the difference. dorm mate, (WHISPERING) "safe." (SPEAKING NORMALLY) And then find out what they think you said. If we go back and forth between "f" and "v," which of them is voiced? The "v" is voiced. OK. Now do it again, but whisper-- f, v, f,. v,f, v. Does anybody feel a difference between " f" and 'v"? Not here, right? Yeah? STUDENT: I guess the 'v' is more-- there's more air. what it means is that your vocal cords are vibrating. But I think maybe what we're learning is that you do some other things, too, to optimize the flow of air so that you will get a good vibration going. There's experimental work on this. This is the kind of thing people try to figure out. OK. So you have voiced sounds and you have voiceless sounds. So "s" and "z" are voiced. And "z," "d," and "t" are voiceless. Polish has a rule that changes "g" to "k" at the ends of words. Voiced "b" becomes voiceless at the end of words in Polish. Some nouns that end in "p" still end in 'p' when you add the 'e' suffix, like corpse. But some change the 'p" to a 'b' and the 'g' to 'k' Joseph: There's a reason that I started with sounds like "s" and 's' "z," and "f" and "v" because you can go s, z, s, Z for as long as you have, breath right? Whereas buh-- there's a limit to how long you can "b," yeah? We just said the way voicing works is that you've got air flowing across your vocal folds and making them vibrate, right? And for a "z," you can see how that would work. So the air just flows. For a " b," well, the air only has so far to go, yeah? That's one reason you can't keep a "b" going for very long. OK. Now we need to talk about another dimension for categorizing sounds, which is called manner of articulation. about any of this? Is anybody looking at this and saying, whoa, this table has grown out of my ability to keep up? Yeah? STUDENT: Question about the [INAUDIBLE].. NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. English doesn't allow words to begin with velar nasals. We don't have any words that start with a sound that's at the end of words like "song" or "year" We haven't yet gotten to the kind of sound that that "j"- the sound of the beginning of "year." English doesn't have a bilabial fricative, but there are languages that do. In Japanese, you must learn to pronounce the "f" bilabially rather than labiodentally. There are dialects of Spanish where you have a "g" between vowels, in words like "agua," in words such as "abuela" In Russian, this sound shows up in the names of authors like Chekhov, that kh has a velar fricatives. The way nasal stops work is you're stopping the flow of air somewhere in your vocal tract, but you're allowing the air to flow through your nasal cavity. You can have an alveolar nasal, right? "n," or a velar nasal, "ng" What would a glottal nasal sound like? Trick question. You would need surgery. So you would need, again, as I say, probably there are unethical surgeons who would modify you so that you could makeglottal nasals. English has interdental fricatives and alveolar stops, "t" and "d" There are languages out there that have what are called dental stops. Part of your job, if you're learning Tagalog, for example, is to learn to make dental 't's instead of alveolars. There's all this work on what people do to compensate for various kinds of obstructions in the vocal tract. And on the website, there will be a link to charts that will have more official charts by the IPA. Uvulars are kind of like "k" except more so. Pharyngeals involve constriction near the pharyngeal wall. Arabic has these. The Berber languages have these. Appants are not stops, and they're not nasals. They involve gesturing towards each other in some part of your vocal tract, not enough to make enough to cause any turbulence in the airflow. And for some reason, the dental stops are still red. I don't know why. "w," let's say, in the middle of a word like "away," that's not a stop. "y" sound at the beginning of "year" or "yard," and "l" and the "r" are all approximants, yeah. They are sometimes divided into glides and liquids. And I'm hoping that nobody will ask me how you know whether something is a glide or a liquid. But that's the prima facie reason for distinguishing them because there are rules for the distribution of sounds for which it's useful to have that distinction. distinction as long as it turns out to be useful for explaining stuff. Yeah? Good, all right. So those are glides and liquids, OK. And then I recall we were asking about this before. Sounds like chuh and juh-- I think I said you could think of chuh as a stop, a "t" followed by a fricative, shuh, or juh. There's a little bit of a debate about whether what I just said is the right way to think about this or not. English has a very large number of vowels and a not-very-good system for writing them. This is one of the things that makes English spelling so difficult that we can actually have competitions where you watch people spell. English doesn't have those. There are languages out there that have labiodental glides. Similarly, there are velar glides, where your tongue is just vaguely gesturing in the direction of your velum. I like the IPA symbol for the velar glide. It looks like something out of Tolkien. is pronounced exactly the way it's spelled. We don't do that in English. So here are two vowels. And those are their IPA symbols. The vowel in "bead" and the vowels in "bad"-- and now so everybody joined me in transitioning from one of those vowels to the other. Go ee-ah, eo-ah,. ee, ooh. Feel your tongue moving back and forth. Ignore your lips, right? And think about your tongue. English only has five vowels, but Latin had 12, 14. English doesn't have words that end in monosyllables that are either front or high. "ooh" is a high back rounded tense vowel. "oh" and "uh" are lax vowels that relax the tongue. "schwa" is the first vowel in "machine" It's not higher or lower than "hoed" or "ah," but it's not front or low, either. Student: "Sue says he's a bad egg." Student: "Top chopstick shops stock top chopsticks" Student: [INAUDIBLE] Student: "[INAUDITED] Top chopsticks. Top chopstick. shops stockTop chopsticks." Got that from a book of tongue twisters. Student: ["INAUDible] Top Chopstick. Shops stock top Chopsticks." Student. "Top Chopstick shops. stock top. chopsticks". Student: "Top chop stick shops stock. top chop sticks." Student.: " top chop stick shop stock top chops" Student."Top Chop Stick Shop Stock Top Chopsticks"