50 years ago, John McCarthy and Marvin Minsky coined the term artificial intelligence. The idea of merging brain research and computer science in the quest to understand intelligence. This was the people that we put together from different labs, from neuroscience, from computer science, from cognitive science, and from a number of institutions in the US. Let me tell you a bit more about the background here. Part of the reason for this was progress and convergence we saw between different disciplines. And one of them was progress in AI. And this started, really, with Deep Blue, I guess it was called. We are still very far from understanding how people can answer questions about images. We would like to know to have a system that does that. But also, to know how our brain does it. It's not enough to pass the Turing Test. There have been, there are, and there will be a lot of significant advances in AI. I think it's a golden age for intelligent applications. But this is kind of engineering. Interesting one, but engineering. And we are not there yet. We want to have a system that does it in the same way as our brain. And we want to compare your model, our system, with measurements on the brain of people, or monkeys, also during the same task. So that's what we call Turing plus, plus questions. And would like to be able to answer how people do understand images. We start with vision. We are not limited, eventually, to vision. But in the first five years of the center, that's the main focus. Those kind of questions at all these different levels. But some, we are. One example is, who is there? It's essentially face recognition. And this is an interesting problem. We know from work, originally in the monkeys, and then with fMRI in humans. Shown here, parts of the brains of cortex, which are involved in face recognition and face perception. And then, it's possible to identify analog regions in the monkey. And look at their properties when the monkeys is looking at the face. And make models of what's going on.