Protein three-dimensional structure, how you get at it experimentally and computationally. implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. We will in short order get to the scary pumpkin-like molecule. The connection to last week was this diagram showing palindromicity in three cases and a direct repeat in the fourth case. And I offered that this might reflect the symmetry of the proteins and the three dimensional structure of the nucleic acid and these symmetry elements would align. In order to get at this issue of where there is a code-- and I just take this as one of the ways of dealing with the incredible complexity. of proteins is to give this a theme that connects it to the last class and connects, I think, to many of the sentiments of people in this sort of audience interested in computational biology is ways of having simple codes. And of course, one way of breaking up proteins and thinking about them is these ABCs-- the alpha helix, the beta sheet, and the coil. Each of these can be characterized by the hydrogen bonds that hold it together. OK, now how can we use these basic motifs? These are the smallest meaningful units of protein three dimensional structure. How can we used these to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acids? The binding constant is measured in the molarity, roughly where you get half maximal or equilibrium binding. This is not going to be by staring at long sequence alignments where we're going to get the weight matrices. We can get them by actual experimental measures of the binding in vitro. Then I'll show you a little math how we got those apparent binding constants, which means you can get the binding constant at a lower concentration. Instead of being a single stranded nucleic acid, it's ready to bind to double stranded. It's not the only way, but this is a way. sequence that you're interested in is present. And what you do is quantitate the fluorescence of the zinc finger protein indirectly by the binding of the covalently-attached phage to the antibodies, which are fluorescently labeled by [INAUDIBLE] fluorescence. But how you relate that to the binding constant we had in the previous slide is the subject of this slide number eight. Now we call this the apparent equilibrium association constant because these experiments, just like many binding in living cells is not at equilibrium. that the helix that causes the dimerization of proteins-- you can think of this as your really most elementary protein-protein interaction code. A very fundamental one that comes again and again, so-called coil-coil, two alpha helices interacting. Can we extend this to RNA? This is a much more complicated situation with RNA because you don't have these long perfect double helices anymore. You have these very short RNA helices that I I think I can predict new regulatory protein DNA interactions with double-stranded DNA. showed in the last couple of classes. This is transfer RNA, one of our favorite molecules here, with the anticodon at the bottom of each of the pink structures. And the amino acid acceptor three prime end of that 70-some nucleotide-- 70 to 80 nucleotide nucleic acid. So the pinks are all the tRNAs, and there are at least 20 different types of amino acid and has 20 types of-- at least20 types of transfer RNAs. for the real world of interacting with input and output from various devices. The topic today is proteins, and this really is the main contact between the exquisite regulatory mechanisms. Here, we need sensors to sense the environment. We need actuators to then deliver back into the environment what the cell wants to do or to interact with other cells. You have to have feedback, synchrony, so on that you can basically program the almost digital nucleic acid world inside the cell but via clearly analog inputs and outputs. not inside the cell. But the whole complex gets internalized. Still, topologically, it's as if it were outside the cell when it's inside this little vesicle. But now the pH change that happens when this vesicles goes in the cell, part of the natural cell biological processes causes some act. The seven-mer complex of proteins does yet another conformational change and turns into this hairy beast that allows the lethal factor to get into your cell and kill it. of the constant for that process is around 50 nucleotides per second. These are important numbers, because a typical gene size piece, say, after RNA splicing in higher organisms or naturally, it might be a kilobase. So that's about a half a minute to transcribe and translate. That could be used as a timer in a circuit of these longer time frames, like cell cycle, circadian rhythm, very long time frames in ecological systems with bamboo and various pests, and then development and aging. your accuracy, as you can get from NMR and X-ray crystallography, you now are in a position to study catalytic mechanism and design and improve ligands, such as drugs. This is really where we want to be. There may be a day where we can do this all from ab initio prediction or modeling at very great distances. But for now, modeling atvery short, say, 80% to 90% amino acid similarity, is important. We will contrast this, or show the interplay of the computational biology, that can be aided by actual measurements of drug binding. the AIDS virus changes. And that causes a drug resistance in the HIV, with unfortunate consequences for the patient. We can take-- now, making mutations in polymerases is not entirely of negative consequences. And I'm going to show you a really beautiful example where a DNA polymerase-- a very similar kind of dynamic, where you want to change it so that it can now handle what would normally be an inhibitor of DNA polymer enzyme. And so one of the things that was noticed as the sequences of some of these polymerases were being studied, and some of the resistance mutants, and so on, was that the complex between the nucleotide, whether it's a deoxynucleotide with a 3 prime hydroxyl, which could then be extended by bringing in the next 5 phosphate. space to the position on a phenylalanine or a tyrosine, position 762 of this polymerase. If you now put in a dideoxy inhibitor, you now have too much space in there. And basically, the binding constant, it becomes much less favorable binding when you're lacking both oxygens. This has an 8,000-fold effect on the specificity of the polymerase, and a big impact on the Genome Project. Now, that's how we program a particular atom to achieve an important goal. There are ways that you can program, and conditional, meaning you can regulate under what conditions the protein is expressed or not or active or not with an entire domain, or with single nucleotide polymorphisms. Another way is by modulating the activity of the proteins from the outside with drugs or drug-like molecules and chemical kinetics. And under the subheadings for that, you can make these by combinatorial synthesis, which can be based on design principles, not just completely random. It can take into account what you know about the nature of the interaction of similar proteins. that we didn't discuss before. But it's related to what we've been talking about. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. With the DNA polymerase, by changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better an inhibitor is very useful. And here, many different-- many of these are enzymes, where you can not just knock out the enzyme, but actually make it recognize a new substrate. eat a lot more fatty things. We live long enough to get Alzheimer's. And so maybe this was something that was-- this bad allele, E4, was good in chimpanzees that have different diets or lifespans. But the other possibility-- and I can't really distinguish between these right now-- is you no longer just think about single nucleotides. You think about haplotypes. Everything insists on that DNA strand has a chance of affecting either the expression level of the protein or insists, on the protein strand, to fall back. think of these things in terms of proteins. You can have-- a disulfide is a very important thing to lose. They tend to be highly conserved. If you introduce a proline into what would normally be an alpha helix, this is something where knowledge of the three-dimensional structure would say, oh, that proline, this a priori, without any knowledge of conservation, could be a huge change. And then these multi-sequence profiles are a good way of looking at the conservation. That's a way of prioritizing single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Solid phase comes up again and again in arrays. It's very obvious why you have a solid phase. You want to be able to address it by its positions in x and y on the array. But the other reason-- technical reasons are, it's a fantastic way of getting purification of your products simply by washing. And it allows you to, in the case of beads, there now-- you can think of it as an ultimate and flexible array. You can move the beads around and put them in new arrays, and identify them later. This is a completely synthetic way of getting short peptides. You can think of these as drug-like molecules. These are naturally related-- they can be analogs of nucleic acids and proteins, not just straight ones. And we'll talk about opportunities for making these analogs. We'll talk more about protein synthesis as part of quantitation next time, and aspart of networks in the last three lectures. And the process is cyclic in the sense that each cycle, you return, and the polymer gets a little bit longer. capping step that can soak up any excess that was left over. After you're done with all of these cycles, then there'll be a step where you remove the protecting groups altogether and remove the polymer from the solid phase if you so choose. Or you leave it there, if you have an array. These are other examples of protecting groups. Some bases don't need protection, like thiamines. If you have a exocyclic amine, then you typically need a benzyl or an isobutyryl group. A large class of pharmaceuticals, including most of the antibiotics, are made by a fairly small set of organisms, such as streptomyces in certain plants. The process by which it's made, which will be illustrated in more detail in the next slide, is very akin to fatty acid synthesis. Another way of biologically making a very compact structure, which actually uses ribosomes, but it uses them to make very tight short peptides and a precursor that then folds with lots of disulfides. they have to have a lot of rigidity. And the thing that you lock in rigidly has to be the correct structure. It does you no good to having a rigid structure that isn't really perfectly complementary to that surface. The immune receptors, B and T cell receptors, the antibodies, and cell-mediated immunity. These use recombination machinery to program various combinations of nucleic acid motifs that encode protein motifs. And as they do that recombination, they have further diversification that occurs due to a template-independent polymerase. where the acyl carrier protein, ACP in the box, binds to the first monomer, and it starts transferring it from protein to protein along this multi-domain huge protein. And there's actually three proteins in a row here. And each of the steps are taken in order along the protein, and they involve things like a synthase step, where you bring in another monomer. But you can see each of these has a substrate specificity. And by changing the order of substrate specificities, you can build up a huge combinatorial collection. You can either collect a big data set of proteins that interact from a proteomic scale experiment, or from molecules that inhibit one or more of those interactions. Now, if you look at the top right-hand part of slide 34 here, you can see this huge diversity of all of these different colored shapes. And if you wanted to use these in a combinatorial assay, you'd connect them in every pairwise combination and try them against your target by some bioassay. However, if that library is too large either to make or to screen, then what you can do is to study a part of the molecule and see-- and then take the subset of the diversity that can bind. if each one has a very low binding constant, then it will be roughly the square of that. And you get some point of diminishing returns, eventually. If they are homologous to previous interesting targets, then that puts them high on the short list. And in fact, a very large class of drugs is aimed at surface-accessible membrane proteins. And so very often, those are prioritized high. There are also-- the surface-acceptable proteins are important if you're talking about vaccines, which is an increasingly important. Once you have a regulated gene, getting the protein sequence is easy. Getting from the sequence to secondary structure is easy in the context of some of these other things. But still, the accuracy is only around 77% for secondary structure and about 25% for ab initio three-dimensional structure. We'll pick up this thread right after a break and carry on to actually how we get the three- dimensional structure, whether it's predictive or experimental, and the computational tasks there. Take a break.