Learn how the solar cell device converts sunlight, the input energy, to some usable output energy, which is in the form of electricity, typically, from a solar panel. Learn how to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed into maximizing amount of life that's actually absorbed. Learn about the duality of light, or how to think about light as a particle, or alternatively, as a quantified particle. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare. photon has a certain wavelength, a certain frequency and a certain wave length associated with it-- frequency and wavelength related, of course, by the speed of light, Planck's constant, and so forth. The visible photon wavelengths are usually in the hundreds of nanometers. And the solar spectrum peaks somewhere around 550, just good numbers to have in mind. So this was that solar spectrum, the integrated solar radiance versus wavelength. The second point that is equally valid, we can describe the wavelengths of the incoming light. you can have, for example, in the visible range, a decreasing depth of penetration of the light with increasing energy, whereas with x-rays, it's the exact opposite. It's because you're dealing with different types of electrons and the material. The real component of the refractive index is material-specific property. And it is related to the attenuation of light intensity as it travels through that material. And so here what I've done for you is placed the equation that describes the complex index of refraction of a material. the interaction of light inside of a medium, inside ofa material. And we use that information to calculate engineering relevant parameters such as reflectance of light off of a surface. So I have an equation here that describes the reflectance. Let me dive a little deeper into it and try to understand what exactly that equation is telling me. So if you have a tinted window, what is typically happening at that tinting window? Why can't you see inside? What would you imagine is going on? With normal incident light, there is a beautiful symmetry involved. If I add a coating, for instance, to a window that increases the reflectivity, then the amount of light that is able to escape from the inside to my eyes decreases. So just the same way that I'm losing the ability to see inside, the folks inside are also losing the able to see out. Why is it that with the same reflectivity they're able tosee outside and I'm not able to seeing in through that tinted window? We need to understand how light gets absorbed inside of matter. We apply a very simple formulation inside of this class, which is called Beer-Lambert's Law. So let's imagine that through the techniques that we're going to be discussing later on in lecture, we manage to minimize the amount of reflectance off the front surface. And now the light that's incident on the material is actually going to go inside and get absorbed by the material inside. We're happy to walk through that perhaps during recitation. very simple yet very powerful formulation that describes not only the interaction of light with the solar cell material but also light through the atmosphere. And for that, I'd like to call Joe up for a quick demo that will allow us to actually plot out Beer-Lambert's Law. And let's see if the hypothesis is correct. It's not. But we're going to test it. And it's a logical thing you might assume. And then we'll walk through a derivation that will correct our missed logic. So go ahead, Joe. Take it away. A laser pointed and a photodiode are used to measure the power of a laser. The current out of this photodiodes is directly proportional to the light hitting it. As we keep increasing and put one layer of polyethylene, that drops to 0.75. So you'd expect the intensity to drop by another factor of 2. Why not? There's kind of this sense that it should be exponential. What don't we add some more filter in front, and we'll see what exactly this comes out to be. to curve down. Exponential. It looks like one at least. And we can test whether or not the hypothesis is correct by an exponential fit, which happens to match pretty well. The amount that's absorbed is following another trend, which is just 1 minus that. And so right now we're ignoring this is 1 minus r component. But it's so small that it really doesn't matter for this experiment. These things don't reflect a lot of light. But we notice that we have some exponential character to be decay of the intensity of the transmitted light. in some function to that medium and a certain amount of light is transmitted, we know, of course, from our little experiment that it follows some exponential function. So if we assume that the change of intensity within that medium in each little delta thickness is going to be affected by some sort of scattering intensity within the medium-- and this sigma here can refer to a variety of processes. So the s Sigma here is independent of thickness throughout. And then as you integrate through, you wind up with that beautiful exponential function at the end, the sigma l times n. a geometric parameter. It's an intrinsic material parameter. This alpha will vary as a function of wavelength inside of a material. The resonances with different electronic states within the material, that light, depends on the energy of the light. So there's a wavelength dependence. That general equation is the same one that drives the reduction of light intensity as it travels through the atmosphere. So if we increase the atmospheric path length, we'll be reducing the amount of light that actually reaches the surface of the earth. for our atmosphere than it was for these little polyethylene sheets. Because the nature of the scattering and absorption processes are very different for the atmosphere. So this alpha here is, I would say, density neutral. What we've done is we have the alpha encapsulating the physical parameters of the material and the absorption processes all in one variable, very nicely and succinctly. And the only geometric parameter that is of essence is really our l. Any questions? Yes? AUDIENCE: What was n? TONIO BUONASSISI: So the n, there's a certain scattering intensity, and then a certain number density. The energy range of light ranges from about 6.2 eV to 0.62 eV. The visible wavelengths range would be somewhere in this regime right here. The infrared out here, ultraviolet over here, and we can see for a variety of different types of materials what the absorption coefficient is. The red would be crystalline silicon, gallium arsenide, indium phosphide, and amorphous silicon. And we're going to calculate the thickness necessary to absorb 90% of the incoming light at 550 nanometers. absorption coefficient and order of magnitude less than gallium arsenide. Most of these solar cells that you see of crystalline silicon are on the order of 100 microns, typically a little thicker for some technological reasons, which we'll get to. At 800 nanometers wavelength light, the optical absorption coefficient is dropped by about an orders of magnitude relative to the peak of the solar spectrum. What could you do to your solar cell device to increase the total amount of light absorbed inside of it? 10% of the light that didn't make it, that's going to get reflected back. The first thing that we can do is texturize our front surface. If we don't have texture, if it's absolutely flat, what we call specular surface-- specular coming from the root mirror. So a flat silicon substrate, a specularsurface, would reflect some finite amount of light. And we can calculate that now because we know that it relates to the real component of the refractive index of the solar cell. As the material goes from one medium to another, the refractive index changes. Texturization increases the probability that light will enter the device. It also increases the path length, the effective path length of the incoming light. The way to understand that particular phenomena is called Snell's Law. So the way in which the electromagnetic wave oscillates the. So we have a texturized front surface. We discussed this right at the beginning of lecture. We're just focusing on the lights, the rays that get reflected. electrons instead of the system is changing from one medium to another, let's say from air into the solar cell device. The light path will obey what is called Snell's Law, which is the product of the refractive index and sine of that angle, the angle relative to the surface normal. So there are two benefits to texturizing your front surface. One is you have an additional pass, additional bounce, an additional encounter with the material. So that reflected light gets more energy. The record efficiency solar cell that was announced this past year in gallium arsenide was achieved because of good light management. To engineer front and back surface reflectances, you really have to carefully select your refractive indices and your materials if you put on either side. So which of these two do you think is which? Why don't you turn to your neighbor quickly and chat about it without peeking at your lecture notes. The answers here are shown, for this particular system, through the equations right here. our reflection condition. I'm going to come back to Snell's Law in a minute. But for the time being, I want to move on to the next concept here, which is Lambertian reflector. Often in the solar industry you'll hear people, probably because of a lack of optics background, just call any randomly reflecting surface a Lambertian scatter. It's a very loosely used term. And it is wrong by the book, but nevertheless, it's one of these things that live on in our industry. the backsides of solar cell devices. We wouldn't want necessarily specular reflectance. We might want to maximize the amount of light reflected off at particular angles. And there is, of course, research being done to figure out how to make light do that. And you don't only have to texture your back skin. You can also texture the bus bars. The bus bars are these little metal wires right here that are collecting the charge from each of the solar cells. And they're connecting essentially the front side of one cell to the backside of the next. There is a limit to how much we can trap light simply by modifying or corrugating the surfaces. The Yablonovitch limit to this day is a pretty good litmus test for the ability of a material to trap light. If you have silicon, for instance, with a refractive index of, let's say, in the infrared some around 3.6, your limit is around 50. You can increase probably in the order of 20 the optical path length inside of the material through texturization. In most solar cells, we want to suppress reflection. We go to great lengths to make sure that this thickness as well as the refractive index of the material is optimized for a particular system. If you add these two together, due to the wave nature of light, you get suppressed reflectance. That's a really interesting property. You can constructively interfere if you like and enhance the amount of reflected light as a result of this interference effect. The anti-reflective coating is not absorbing the light, which is really important. expressions that we just walked through. It's really important to understand the fundamentals behind any simulation software because you will get out of it what you put into it. You will not be able to pick up on obvious things that you might of-- for example, double clicked on this little material here and find the real component of the refractive index completely wrong. And you might not notice it if you don't have some good intuition which is grounded in the fundamentals. And so it's important that you understand what we've presented today. fancier ways of light management as well that don't involve light trapping necessarily but light manipulation or even semiconductor manipulation. You can, for instance, change the wave length of the incoming light. If we can eliminate the longer wavelength stuff out here, which is heat, performance of most solar cell suffers when they get hot. And so if we manage to do spectral up converting or reflect that long wavelength light away from our device, we can improve performance there as well. So again, I wanted to really emphasize that light management is necessary devices. a coating on the back to reflect the light back so that it gets a second bounce through the material. I've engineered the front surface, texturized it so that we have not only the benefit of two bounces, double the chance of light going in. And so all told, the one reason why this boost is so big right here is because I'm increasing the optical path length, the effective Optical path length. And as a result, I'm getting a much larger current output. I'm generating many more free carriers instead of my material. lecture today talking about light management is because of this plot right here. Snell's Law assumes that there's no phase shift of the light as it transfers from one medium to another. If you introduce a phase shift, now you can start doing some fun things. In the lab, 24.2%, in commercial production, 22% and change. 22.4%, I think. The device design can get pretty complicated for these super high efficiency devices. And they're worried quite a bit about trapping, other things as well. surface of a material, let's say right here, then you can cause each node, each point within your material, to lag by an increasing amount, so that your wave front now bends. And that will cause the light, essentially, if you trace through the points of maximum intensity, say the pink, you'll see that the light is bent. And so it's really exciting. There's stuff coming up every day on light trapping and light management. Mostly it's for photonic devices, but they can be transferred over into solar cells. today in class, don't let that constrain your thinking. That's my final message. Thanks. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. Back To the pageYou came from: Back to thepage you camefrom. Click HERE to see the full transcript of this week's episode of "This Is Life With Lisa Ling" with Lisa Ling, Lisa Ling and Lisa Ling on "Lisa Ling: The Next Generation"