Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side. So I hope that's a good sign. I don't like to have exams out too long before you get a chance to look at them. Ahern: Why do I videotape my exams? I find it decreases the looking around factor by a factor of about 100. [student laughs] It does, Ahern says. Professor Ahern videotapes students' answers to questions. He says he finds most students are honest. But he has had a handful of situations where dishonesty has been an issue. Ahern: "There's just too many eyes here and not enough of our eyes" to see what's going on. "I will post the key outside my door after we give the exams back," he says. "That's something that you should know. I know I will get some answers on that that don't say none" Ahern: How can you have two apparent Kcats? and the answer is it depends on how you calculate the concentration of the enzyme. If you take Vmax and divide it by the total concentration of enzyme, you will see a reduced Kcat compared to the uninhibited enzyme. The fewer the questions I have, the more points each question is worth. And so people are always worried about that. So I have to try to strike a balance. And this balance, I think works fairly well. at least who indicated time problems. Next term, the format of the exam changes in 451. Most people like 451 better because the maximum number of points on a question I think is 3. Professor: We have a lot of shorter answer questions. But we're working problems, we have to work through problems and that's why. If you're going to spend a fair amount of time on something, it should be worth more points. But literally, I rarely have much of an issue with the other two exams. Ahern: I hope everybody got how I start my lecture. The first thing I say is "Okay folks, let's get started." I don't live consciously, I just blurt it out. Alright, well let's turn our attention. Thank you for your feedback. That's not a lot of feedback, but I do appreciate feedback and I'm always happy to listen to what you have to say about exam formats. And I do take suggestions. The suggestion about having other possible choices is one, as I said, I've done and I won't rule out. Last time I talked about, in some detail, mechanisms by which these S1 proteases worked. And I hope you've had a chance to look through those mechanisms and sort of lay things out. Because you're going to see when you do that, you will see similarities in mechanisms that other enzymes use to catalyze reactions. And so using genetic techniques today, it's very easy to alter the genetic code for any of these proteases and change which amino acid is presence in the active site. at any given place. Researchers have changed, for example, a serine residue of 221, which is the serine, gives it its name, to an alanine. Or changing the histidine position 64 to anAlanine or changing aspartic acid at position 32 to analine. And when they do that, and they compare the activity, so this is the log of Kcat. So Kcat of course is a good measure of velocity and the wild type enzyme has an activity up here. One 10 millionth as active when that serine is changed to analanine. Aspartic acid residue is not as important as the other two. The other 2 are much more important. The question is A, would I see activity? and B, might it even be better? and the answer is it's all possible, of course, but my question is what if I mean if I go from serine to alanine, at least they look similar, but they're not chemically similar. What if I change theserine to a threonine for example? Threonine also has an hydroxyl group. production would be, in this case, that it would not be, because we're thinking about very precise orientations inside of that active site and threonine is going to have a slightly different configuration. It's possible it will be better but my suspicion is it will probably be somewhere in here. And his question is also good because when we think about the process that gave rise to this proteases in the first place, they were mutation and selection. We think of mutation as mostly being detrimental because most mutations give rise to things that aren't functional, kind of like what these individual ones are here. Ahern: There are other types of proteases that behave very much like S1, well like serine proteases. One of these classes is known as cysteine proteased. Ahern: This class of protease is essentially identical to that of theserine protease, at least for our level of understanding. He says the aspartyl proteases, at first glance, look somewhat different. But those similarities aren't all the way through like we see with the cystine prote enzymes, he says. Business of creating nucleophiles is not unique to proteases. One of these is an enzyme we've been talking about some already, that's the carbonic anhydrase. Students: Would you like a joke? Ahern: Yeah. Okay, so let's stretch. So this my, this is my magic genie joke, alright? This is not a computer joke. Depends on where you lean, I suppose. "This is really awesome, "I'm a really powerful guy. "I want every woman to love me." and poof, he turns into a box of chocolates. Carbonic anhydrase can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second, per enzyme. Most enzymes have a fairly narrow pH range where they work that's ideal. But this guy tops out at about pH 9, where we get up to a million per second. Why is this enzyme odd in this respect? Why is it so fast under the right conditions? It's a pretty amazing enzyme, I hope I've connived you it's apretty amazing enzyme. is its Kcat so high at such a high pH that it really doesn't encounter in the body. If we go to pH 9, we could imagine that it's going to be a lot easier to remove protons off of water than if we're at pH 7. The rate of formation of the nucleophile is the critical step in this process. If the enzyme structure is stable at pH 10, the enzyme will be way better at 10 than it is at 7. There is a lot of interest in manipulating enzymes to infact increase their activity. They use water to break the bond. And that should give you some hint about the mechanism that they use. One of the things that magnesium helps to do is it does help to position the water so that it can lose a proton and make an attack on, in this case, a phosphodiester bond. We're not breaking peptide bonds, obviously. But we're breaking phosphodiesters because those are the bonds between the adjacent nucleotides in a DNA molecule. Now I'll show you something that's really cool and interesting. Let's take a look at this enzyme. common features of sites that restriction endonucleases recognize. It means that we can cut right in the middle of this guy and we've cut both of them. We just cut this guy right in. the middle. Not all of them work in the. middle, but this particular guy works in themiddle. Now I want to explain to you just physically how a restriction enzyme works and then I'll show you very briefly a little bit of mechanism. A restriction enzyme is a protein. That protein grabs a hold of DNA. alkoxide ion. In the case of the restriction endonucleases, that shape change is more dramatic. What it does is it actually causes a bend to occur in the DNA. So we think of the DNA molecules of being straight and linear, but when the enzyme is bound to that proper site, the enzyme goes "oh, whoa!" and it bends. The DNA molecule is physically bent at that point. It's physically bent. Now that bending turns out to be critical for the catalytic action.