Professor Steven Smith: I want to look at two sets of issues. One is Locke's theory of the constitutional state, particularly focusing on the role of the executive, vis-a-vis the legislative branch of government. The other is thinking about Locke and the American regime and the current state of political philosophy, modern contemporary American political philosophy. Smith: Locke doesn't endorse necessarily one particular form of government from any other. He is an advocate of what we have come to call limited government, of constitutional government. John Locke says in his day it was sometimes necessary for the fire department to tear down the house of an innocent person to prevent the fire from spreading to other houses. He understands this as a piece of prerogative power acting for the public good. But the question for Locke, as for any constitutional lawyer, is what are the limits of this power? What check, if any, is there on this power to prevent their abuse? Locke doesn't exactly say. He raises this question to be sure, of fundamental importance for constitutional government. LZ Granderson: John Locke gave the modern constitutional state its definitive form of expression. He says Locke's doctrine of consent and legislative supremacy should make him a hero to Democrats, to radical Democrats. LZ: A judgment on America is very much a judgment on the philosophy of Locke and vice versa. In many ways, if anyone is, I think Locke has the title to be considered America's philosopher-king, LZ says. of Lockean first principles for many other readers of American history. John Rawls' "difference principle" says natural endowments are not ours in any strong sense of the term. They do not belong to us but are the result of a random or arbitrary genetic lottery or social lottery, he says. According to Rawls, justice requires that social arrangements be structured for the benefits of the least advantaged in society. John Locke's theory of self-ownership justifies his conception of limited government in the constitutional state, says David Frum. John Rawls and John Locke represent two radically different visions of the liberal state. Rawls: We never really have ownership in ourselves but are always part of a larger social "we" Locke: Government should reshape and redistribute the products of our individual endeavors for the common interests. The question for you is which of these two views is more valid or which of the two strikes you as more powerful or plausible? We will turn to that problem emphatically on Wednesday when we look at Jean-Jacques Rousseau's Essay on Inequality. satisfy the deepest longings of the human soul? Can a regime, devoted to the rational accumulation of property answer those higher order needs or higher order virtues, like honor, nobility and sacrifice? Can the avoidance of pain, discomfort and anxiety produce anything more than contemporary forms of Epicureanism and Nihilism? In any case, I'm suggesting no more than any other land could America insulate itself from the great heights as well as the great depths of later forms of modernity. We are but a moment in the kind of comprehensive self-dissatisfaction that is modernity so that a return to Lockeanism, in many ways, is not so much a cure for the pathologies ofmodernity.