The all new E1 racing series aims to prove the potential of electric power in the Marine industry. The boats can reach 50 knots that's around 93 km per hour so how do they reach those speeds? Will Smith is here he is who owns our team and uh we're looking to throw down hopefully some good times to get our first win all right have fun all right yeah you did hear right Will Smith owns this team and he isn't the only celebrity backer before the main event tomorrow. above the water to have the speed that's right yeah exactly if you're on the edge of the foil and you're as high as possible it's less drag in the water so you're getting the more the most kph um but you know there's some techniques that are coming into play as we learn these boats on what's fast it's really tough to stay on the foil. Will Smith had a bit of a hard time getting into there can we fire it up of course we can yeah we we can't go to the full full load because we're in the garage. drawing too much power while and while they're lift and that lifts them up onto the foils. The lift is on the left hand side of the of the wheel and the trim on the right hand side and it's we're just altering that by a few points depending on wave conditions or whether we're going into the corner this sport is still in the very early stages the nine teams have the same boat but they're working out how to push the tech and try to get ahead of the competition. bad as he does and so we're doing everything we possibly can to make that happen doing everything means working late into the night to make sure the boats are in the best condition for tomorrow's races. E1 is a brand new racing concept um it's foiling boats with an electric motor in a format that's never been done before course here is basically a big figure of eight but it's a little bit more complicated with the long wrap and the stars and things like that so you'll see a series of single point turns and then turns that have larger apexes. attracted some big name investors despite only being in his first year. There are challenges ahead can it keep those celebrity backers and can it build a big audience for this high-tech reing. I think the ground workor for this Championship is amazing you know the names behind it now are incredible. I've heard some good rumors of teams coming in for next year as well so I Think the format is really exciting I think a lot of people are really interested in excited about the new technology and also the sustainability message.