RAFAEL JARAMILLO: All right, let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. So I want you to recall intermediate phase in a three-phase system. And I'm going to recall it visually, and we're going to remember what the free-energy composition diagram looked like in such a case. And it looked-- let's say an alpha phase and the beta phase. We had some intermediate phase. So the common tangents are to look like this with a common tangency there. is something that's really narrow. So the solution model becomes very narrowly shaped, like a pin. All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point. That point is x of B equals n. That's that one composition that we find in nature. So I no longer need a solution model. All I need is that one point, that point, is one free energy point and one composition. OK. So here, I can't help myself. I got to draw the mouse-face plot. Magnesium nickel has a number of different phases. At high temperature, this Laves phase develops some width. But when you drop down to low temperature, both of these intermediate phases appear as line compounds. So you can kind of see how these are not-- you don't reach this hexagonal magnesium 2 nickel phase just by individually substituting our atoms from the HTP magnesium phase. And they're really fundamentally different structure. mouse.mouse. mouse-face plot. But the point here is that these whiskers are all the common tangents kind of coming together at one point. Magnesium nickel-- actually, magnesium nickel system, right? So, for instance, at some low temperature, we have here this is going to be x nickel. And these vertical distances are related to formation-- related to the formation of free energies. So instead of being like a taut rope, it's just now like-- well, it'm just sort of a string held up between needles, needle points. There's no more curvature apparent. All right. So now let's talk about the size of these vertical segments. of compound from the elements in their reference states. So, for example, I might have 2 moles of magnesium in. its alpha phase plus alpha-- let's say HTP-- plus a mole of nickel in its alpha FCC. phase. And these can react to form magnesium 2 nickel. And there's a normalization that you need to apply in order to use formation free energies in free-energy composition diagrams. So that is kind of a algebraically-simple point, but it's a conceptual point that it's easy to mess up.  silicon tends to be a pretty useful additive for copper-based alloys. There are silicon bronzes and silicon brasses-- that is, bronze and brass alloyed with silicon. There's an infinity of examples of line compounds, so I just want to show you some of different types.have some examples here. So here is a copper silicon system. So you can see that you can get a fair amount of silicon into copper. That's 10%. That's this kind of purple region. Those are ternary systems. solid solution phases. There's this little guy here and this little guys here and then, of course, the big liquid phase. But how many line compounds are there? Trick question. Somebody, please, how many lines are there in this system? Is it three? RAFAEL JARAMILLO: It's not three. that's why it's a trick question. somebody else? AUDIENCE: Four. RAFAel JARamillo: Four Yeah. It's four. the parts-per-billion level. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over Zoom. Without doping, there is no semiconductor devices, no electronics revolution. So the fact that you can dope some metals into silicon is as important as it gets. The transmitters and receivers of all modern telecommunication devices, including your phones, are based on what's called III-V semiconductor, such as gallium arsenide. So there, the transistors and diodes and so forth are just made out of a gallium. Gallium arsenide and alloys, thereof, are the basis for all optoelectronics and photonic technology. Silicon carbide is a refractory-- some people will say it's a ceramic. Some people say no because it doesn't contain oxygen. It's used for grinding, so it's of enormous industrial importance. It also is an emerging semiconductor material for high-power electronics. The idea that you could replace discrete, bulky, power-handling equipment with integrated power- handling equipment. field of power electronics. And the thing is, you can't do it with silicon because silicon doesn't perform well at very, very high voltages. So in 50 years from now, if the idea of a power substation is a thing of the past, it will be due to silicon carbide and similar high-power electronics that are being developed today. And this last one, this is the titanium-sulfur system. This is a neat system because, first of all, it has everything in it. It eutectics. It has peritectics. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's look at the silicon-carbon system at low temperature. Carbon here is a line compound. Silicon is an element that actually does have a pretty wide, solid solution, great range. At low temperature, similarly to gallium arsenide, it's going to be a really boring free-energy composition diagram. It's just a triangle. So it's simplified a lot. Any other questions on the meaning or importance of this stuff? And then if there are no more questions, I'll finish up on the board. tie line there, alpha liquid equilibrium. Just an example, this is no system in particular. We know that, along that line, dG equals mu 1 alpha minus mu 1 liquid. And that means I had a congruent melter. And then I drew as this and then like this, peritectic, and something like this. I had this complicated thing which I do. And the point is not the complicated thing. It's really, I have some two-phase region down here at. low temperature where I have two line compounds coexisting. There are no internal composition variables. That's a key point. Before, we had composition variables because the composition of the phases was variable. Now, we don't have that. What that means is that the equilibrium condition dG equals 0 is satisfied trivially, trivially. There's no need to do common tangents. The compositions aren't changing. And that's what's led to everything we've been enjoying over the last month and a half, is the fact that solution phase is the compositions are variable. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: I want to introduce this and get this in your minds. Let's imagine reacting metal M with 1 mole of oxygen to form an oxide. So zM plus O2 gas reacting to form MzO2. What's z? How do I determine z? Anybody? Does anyone know some oxides? Name for me a common oxide that you know. What is rock? What's the main component of rock? JARamillo: Silicon oxide, OK. z is an integer or a rational fraction, and it's fixed-- SiO2, magnesium oxide, Al2O3, so forth. So when we return on Wednesday, we're going to talk about the thermodynamics of this reaction. We'll use this property of being line compounds, and we're also going to use a bunch of other things as well. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnopin.