In this lecture, we're going to talk about how neurons function and how researchers are able to control that function in order to modify behavior. Then we'll talk about synapses and how synapses function to communicate between neurons. And this is going to involve also sort of understanding how certain antidepressants, like Prozac, work. And then we'll end by talking about how researchers did this experiment to wake up the mouse. And it all starts with something that I told you about at the beginning of the semester, which is the plasma membrane. Sodium ions are concentrated on the outside of the cell and potassium ions on the inside. These ions would prefer, by diffusion, to be equal concentrations on both sides of this plasma membrane. The cell to shift this from equilibrium has to expend energy to set up this situation. This is going against the flow that sodium would normally like to take, which would be going downstream. And it pumps potassium ions into the cytoplasm such that there's a higher concentration of potassium ions in the cy toplasm. In a resting state, the cell's resting potential is negative 70 millivolts. If you open these channels, positive ions are going to flow in, and that's going to make this less negative and this less positive, OK? So this is the situation here, where these sodium channels open, and the sodium channels-- or the sodium ions rushing in is going to create a depolarization, where you now flip the potential. And there's a greater positive charge on the inside of the plasma membrane. restored to its resting state, OK? So it's a transient process. When we think about the neuron at higher resolution, what you're going to see is not only is it transient, but it's also a traveling wave that propagates along the entire length of the cell. And one thing that you can notice about these neurons, or the action potentials here, is that they all depolarize to the same extent. So this illustrates a key property of neurons, in that the level of activity of a neuron is not determined by the size of this action potential. How is it that this nerve cell is told to start depolarizing at the dendrites? Because there's going to be another neuron here, which is going to communicate to this neuron over here. It does this at the location known as the synapse. And the way this process is initiated is similar to the type of signaling that you saw in the past few lectures, where you have a ligand and a receptor. And these receptors are what are known as ligand-gated ion channels. In this case, it's a sodium channel. Whether or not it's open depends on the presence of the ligand. have a spike, and you complete the cycle. It can even get hyperpolarized, where it gets even more negative than it normally does. And then it eventually gets back to this resting potential of around negative 60 or negative 70 millivolts. OK, so this has to happen fast. And I want to tell you about one process or property of neurons and another helpful cell that enables this to go extremely fast. There are these glial cells in your body and your brain that wrap around the axons of the neurons and basically function like electrical tape for neurons. ones, localize to these nodes. And when the action potential is traveling along the axon, because. these regions where the myelin sheath is are electrically insulated, the. axon potential doesn't just move continuously, but jumps from node to node. And if you damage this electrical insulation, you greatly slow down these action potentials, and that has a significant impact on nerve impulses in the brain and throughout the entire body. And that's why multiple sclerosis is such a devastating disease. There are different types of signals that nerve cells can send. Signals can be excitatory, meaning it will tend to depolarize the neuron. There are other signals that bind to different type of receptors that are inhibitory. Neurons are prepared to send signals to each other. They have everything ready to go when they get the word from the next cell that they're ready to send a signal to. The way that multiple neurons communicate with each other are through a type of signal known as a neurotransmitter. in all of the ions outside the cell. It's selective to sodium. And this case, this voltage-gated calcium channel is just going to let in calcium. And then there's a mechanism that links calcium entry to vesicle fusion. And that's going to be shown here. What you see on this docked synaptic vesicles is this calcium-binding protein called synaptotagmin. And so when calcium goes into the cytoplasm, that protein binds to calcium, and it activates the fusion machinery. Prozac and Zoloft affect this reuptake process. And what that does is it keeps the neurotransmitter in the synaptic cleft for longer. And so the idea behind these drugs is that if you are suffering depression from a lack of serotonin, then you can rescue that by preventing the rapid reuptaking of the neurotransmitters. The way they function is to leave the neurotransmitted in the. synaptic clefts for longer so that you enhance signaling, even if you have low levels of the. neurotransmitter to begin with. optogenetics is an approach to control the activity of a cell with light. In this case, we're going to have light inducing depolarization. And the way this is done is there's a protein discovered from photosynthetic algae that's responsive to light, and it is a sodium channel. And if that's expressed specifically in the neurons that you're trying to test, you can then shine a light into the brain of the organism and activate, specifically, this type of neuron. you to test the function of the neuron in the behavior of an organism. So, in this case, this mouse, the light is shined into its brain, and they're testing a specific type of neuron that is involved in arousal of the mouse. And it's going to wake up right now. There it goes. It woke up. You see now its muscle activity is going, OK? So you can test thefunction of specific nerve cells using this approach, and it's because you have a light-sensitive sodium channel.