salt makes up a tiny part of any bread though which has a huge effect on it and most bread is made with salt nowadays. salt has a tightening effect on the gluten it strengthens the dough and makes it more cohesive as yeast consumes the sugars in the dough. salt helps with controlling fermentation it draws moisture through the cell walls of yeast in a process called osmosis. salt can help with preserving the color and flavor of flour unbleached flour has carotenoid pigments which give the crumb of our bread the creamy color and a wheaty aroma.  salt really slows down the enzymatic activity it prevents amylase from breaking down starch into maltose that's why the loaf on the right is completely white there is no sugar in it and whilst too much salt prevents the enzymes from making the sugar not enough salt will make the yeast eat through all the sugar that will also not leave much to caramelize the crust. The bread in the middle with right amount of salt has the rightamount of caramelization so the bread with no salt gained less volume than one wood salt and instead of rising vertically it has spread out more sideways. is quite dry and spongy and it's a little bit rough it almost feels like a dishwashing sponge and taste wise it's pretty bland it's not offensive but it doesn't have any character to it of course the sander loaf is nice and soft it is exactly what you would expect from a regular white bread. Soakers are a great way of adding seeds and grains to your bread often these Seeds and grains are quite hard you don't want to bite down on a piece of barley and break a tooth. starter or yeast you would mix your flour water yeast or starter and then leave to ferment for several hours ahead of time before making the final dough pre-ferments add a great deal of flavor improve the texture and the keeping quality of your bread. Normally brief mints don't contain any salt that's why in hot kitchens or hot climates they can ferment too rapidly. There are ways of controlling this you can lower the temperature of the briefment you can place it in a cooler area or even lower the hydration of it by adding salt.