Sarah with register nurse rn.com goes over how to check Vital Signs. Vital Signs are pain oxygen saturation temperature heart rate respirations and blood pressure. You want to provide privacy to the patient and tell them what you're going to be doing. If they do have pain ask them the quality what does it feel like and where it is at. There's several ways you can take a temperature every facility has a different system set up so use what you want. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. they have but you can take it orally you can taken it axillary you cantake it tanic in the ear or you can takes it temporally or rect um rect is the preferred route usually on your pediatric patients but in adult patients normally we do it orally. axillary and temporally the readings are going to run about one degree lower than oral. For tanic and rectal temperatures it's going to usually run about 1 degree higher than your oral reading. A normal temperature is about 97° fit to 99° F okay and take the thermometer out and read it and his temperature is 98.2 and then clean it properly. The reading on the top it's read as spo2 and then on the bottom you will see his heart rate which is 64 but here in a second I'm going to show you how to actually count the heart rate using the radial artery. While I'm counting the heart rates I count that for 30 seconds if it's regular and then the next 30 seconds I count the respirations which I look at the rise and the fall of the chest and that equals one breath. If you tell a patient you're going to count their respirations they change the rate of breathing so it's good to conglomerate those two together so you can get a more accurate reading. A normal pulse rate in an adult is 60 to 100 beats per minute okay the heart rate I got 60 and his respiration were 16 now we are going to get his blood pressure now whenever you're getting blood pressure you want to make sure that you get the right size cuff in most settings they have the automatic blood pressure cuffs where you don't have to blow it up yourself so you're really blessed with that but a lot of times you may have to learn how to do a manual one now my previous video and a card should be popping up. blood pressure cuff you have these little arrows and it says left arm right arm and this is his left arm so we're going to make sure that we put this Arrow about 1 to two inches above that artery so let's slide it up and then make sure our cff it properly. Put our stethoscope in her ears and you're just going to place it over where you have heard that brachial artery and then you'regoing to blow the cuff up to about 180 to 200 mm of mercury or until you don't hear that braak your artery anymore. Mark now we're listening for whenever it stops and whenever it stopped that's our diastolic okay it stopped right at 65 so his blood pressure is 114 over 65 so that is how you check bottle signs now whenever you're done remember to let the patient know what their bottle signs were and um do hand hygiene and clean your equipment before you go to the next patient so be sure to check out all my other videos on nursing skills and thank you so much for watching and for all your support.