John Stuart Mill is the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency and respect for individual rights. The transition for classical to neoclassicals utilitarianism really went on in all fields of thinking about the human sciences at more or less the same time. What you're also going to get as a by-product of today's lecture is everything you ever needed to know about neocassical economics in 45 minutes. system of thinking about economics and the theory of value that was going to be tremendously influential. At the same time, more or less, there were very important developments in moral philosophy that I just want to alert you to, that we're going to return to later when we come to consider Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. And this movement that I'm mentioning here is the doctrine that would come to be called emotivism. It was associated with a man by the name of Stevenson who wrote several books advocating the emotivist doctrine. Hume thought we could derive an ought statement from an is. Bentham thought people are pretty much the same. Stevenson questioned that idea radically. We should take Hobbes much more seriously in his critique of Aristotle than he was willing to take himself. We don't know whether or not what makes some people happy will make others happy as well, says Hobbes. And so Stevenson was thought to be a proponent of a kind of moral relativism. It's presupposed in everything we discussed last time. If you think about the idea of doing interpersonal comparisons of utility. relativism because he linked ethics to our desires, and preferences, and emotions, and nothing else. Stevenson was criticizing Hume on this point, but he might as well have been criticizing Hobbes or Bentham. That is a doctrine to which we will return, as I said, when we get to the anti-Enlightenment and Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. But today we're going to focus for the rest of our time on the economics of the transition from classical to neoclassical utilitarianism. by-product is, you're going to get the whole of ECON 101 reduced to a single lecture. Because indeed it is true that enormously complex and subtle, and as sophisticated as the neoclassical theory of microeconomics is. It's all built out of three ideas that I'm going to spell out for you in what some of you might initially regard as laborious detail. But I think you'll see what I'm getting at once we get towards the end of today's discussion. So imagine a world in which there are just two commodities; in this case wine and bread. than anything I've talked about in these lectures. They didn't want to do that because they were actually concerned with quite another problem. The problem they wanted to solve was to understand the behavior of markets. They wanted to be able to more precisely to predict what prices were going to be in markets. So moving from cardinal to ordinal utility is going to turn out to have huge ideological consequences, which I'm going to unpack for you towards the end of today's lecture. But as an analytic matter, looking at this from the inside, it had the great virtue of providing the building blocks for a theory of price behavior. we would know about this person A, as I said, is that they prefer four to three, three to two, two to one, one to zero. But we can't say anything about how much they prefer those things because these distances don't actually mean anything. All we get is an ordered ranking. One other thing we can say is, that this is a no-no. These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. C, it must be the case that you also prefer A to C, otherwise you're contradicting the principle of transitivity, okay? So we cannot have these indifference curves crossing one another. Now, instead of one person and two commodities, we're going to think about two people. We're creating a diagram with two people on it. And these axes, the X-axis, here, is A's utility function. So it looks like A's happier than B, but that's misleading. Pareto said there's not an infinite source of utility. He said if you can anywhere into the northeast quadrant both of them are better off. On the other hand, if we went anywhere in this quadrant, southwest as it were, obviously they're both worse off. And about those two quadrants Pareto says we can say nothing at all. We can't assume with Bentham and Hume, with Sedgwick, we can't assumption that everybody's basically the same, perhaps they aren't. diagrammatically, and then if anybody doesn't get it we'll wait up and I'll go through it more slowly. But think about the diagram we just did, okay? Think about A is here in the corner,Okay? But basically now we're putting the two previous diagrams together. We're putting this diagram, where we have two commodities and one person, and this diagram where we've got two people and just utility. And so you'll see why this is helpful once we get to the end of it. With Bentham's utility we said that anything in this whole area, the first shaded area, maximizes the greatest happiness of the greatest number. The Pareto principle, we now know, singles out this Pare to superior area as unambiguously better because people will go there voluntarily. But now the interesting stuff, which is where all of redistributive politics goes on, and all the battles in politics go on, are in the two PareTo undecidable quadrants. which the radical fangs of classical utilitarianism have been ripped out and it is now a doctrine that is very friendly to whatever status quo happens to be generated in a market system. So it ceases to be this radically redistributive doctrine, and in the process imports into utilitarianism a very robust, some would say, hyper-robust doctrine of individual rights. We'll see how that played out in political theory when we come to look at John Stuart Mills' harm principle next Monday.