Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: Let me answer that in a slightly backward way. Professor: If you have a wave function, sine of x, such that, the expectation value in the state SI of x is equal to x naught, and the expectationvalue of p in SI is p naught. Then if you want to change the momentum, increase momentum by h bar k, the way to do that is to take SI and build a new wave function. the wave function is complex content we give the inner product. But the expectation value, the momentum is shifted in state SI tilda, is shifted by each h bar k. So all the intuition you have about momentum, you can translate into intuition about the spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. Oh, and one last thing, a last defining property of the momentum, a central property from the Schrodinger equation is at the time variation d dt of p is equal to the expectationvalue of minus d the potential of x d x. The crystal momentum is defined from beginning, from the following property. Ehrenfest's Theorem tells us that the classical equations of motion are realized as expectation values. So in precisely this sense, the momentum difference is space of the wave function. Here, in the case of a periodic potential, the crystal momentum q is governing the spatial variation of the phase of thewave function. So q is the thing the governs the phase as a function of x. Well what about-- another fact about the crystal. momentum which you show in your problems set, is that if you impose an external force d q, is equal to the minus d v d x. d t, and really d h bar q, is equal to the expectation value of the force. So the central value of your wave packet varies in time according to the external force. If the force is zero, we turn no external driving force, your wave. packet maintains its crystal momentum. So it carries many of the same properties. It governs the phase. It's time independent unless there's an external force applied. It is not the eigenvalue p on five sub e q. the momentum commutes with the energy when you have no external force. When you have a constant potential. So developing an intuition for the crystal momentum, I think, is best done by just playing with examples. And you'll do that more in the course on solids, which I encourage you all to take. Because it's really beautiful stuff. But for our purposes, this is going to be the full set of ideas we'll need for 8.04. Yeah? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Ah. So good. So thank you. equal to alpha, then acting on u sub q, by translate by l, on U sub q of x, is equal to-- well, if we act on Phi sub q we pick up a phase e d i alpha. What happens to e to the minus i q x? x goes to x plus l. So if q l is equalto alpha, those two phases cancel, and we just get u back. u subq of x. If we want u to be always real, we can't impose this periodicity on different wave functions. the imaginary part, h bar over 2 m i. Well, hbar over m times the imaginary part of SI complex conjugate derivative, with respect to x, which is the current, in the x direction of SI. And we need this to be imaginary, or we will get no current. You show this in a problem set, if you have a pure, real wave function, for example. A single real exponential, that's decaying, as on the wrong side of a barrier. can always write it as some q naught plus n pi over l. And this fits nicely into this story, because now all we're going to get here is q. So the current depends on both the part defined mod 2pi over l, and the integer, which tells you how many factors of 2 pi over. l did you have to subtract off to get into that fundamental domain. So let's think back to our band structure. In ourband structure, we had something that looks like this. And here's the value of q. But am I plotting q? No. I'm plotting here q Naught. There isn't a single energy for a given value of q. In fact, there are as many as there are integers. To specify a state, I don't just have to. specify q NAUGHT, I also have to specify N. Which one of these guys I'm hitting. When you unfold this into the parabola picture, remember where these came from. These came from shifting over. And the higher up you go, the more you had to shift over. That's exactly the integer piece in n pi over l. function of q, not q naught, but so here's pi over l. Here's 2pi over l, Here's 3Pi over L. And I need to do this carefully, because it's incredibly difficult to get the straight. OK. So here's the parabola that would have been, if we had not turned on a periodic potential. As we turn on the periodic potential, we know that the energies change. And so in the first band it's easy to see. We don't have to do anything. E as a function of k is always going to look like that. But k is not a well-- so what is k? K is just defined as h bar squared, k squared upon 2 m is equal to e. So this doesn't tell you anything about which states you're at. It just that given an e, there's some quantity that could define k. This is a definition of k, in terms of e. Only some values of e are allowed, right? There are no energy eigenstates with energy in between here and here. Professor: When you have a perfect lattice, there is actually no current flowing in response to an applied electromagnetic field. Professor: You can build a system that has exactly a periodic potential. He says it's very difficult to do this with quantum systems, but you can do it with lattices not of atoms, but lattices of dielectric. Professor says you can build system which incredibly, cleanly, has. a system which has a periodic Dielectric constant. a periodic dielectric constant and no disorder. And then you can put light into the system, and you can ask what happens to this system. So literally what you have, is you have glass, glass with a different index. And you shine your light that's reasonably well localized, in both position, and in phase variation, or crystal momentum. Because you can control the phase of the light. Well not a whole lot happens. It's a wave packet, but we haven't implemented an electric field. To handle an electric fields, you need the potential to be constantly varying. beautiful block oscillations. And this has been proved in a very small number of real honest quantum mechanical systems. The most elegant experiment that I know of was done by Wolfgang Ketterle, who's here at MIT. And he got three data points because it was preposterously difficult and declared victory. But it really needs to be done well. So one of the interesting questions in this part of the field right now is we know that it's true. But we want to see it. We want to feel it. situation, it depends on the system. And exactly how it depends is something that is an active area of research. So don't throw away the model. Observe that you've modeled the wrong system. If you find a system that fits your-- that is-- that shares the assumptions of your model, that's when you ask did it work. And it worked like a champ. OK. So now let's talk about real materials. This is going to close up our discussion bands and solids. talk about the 1 d potential. This state, this single state turns into a band of allowed energy eigenstates. And similarly, this state is going to lead to another band with some width. In 1 d, do these bands ever overlap? No. By the node theorem. Right? OK. Now let's take a single electron, and let's put in-- let's taken a single electrons. What will happen? Well if we put it in the system, what state will this single electron fall into? But which state? have to do? What kind of state corresponds to the position changing in time? Yes. Right? From the superpositions we'll get interference terms. If we put it in a superposition of these guys, then it's meaningfully moving. So in order to induce the current, I must put the electron into a higher energy state. So it's in the next band. The next allowed energy eigenstate. Is anything moving? This system is in a completely antisymmetrized configuration. So, nothing is moving. macroscopic amount of energy. Well, it's not macroscopic. it's large. It's not infinitesimally small. That means that there's a minimum amount of. energy that that incident light must have in order to excite the. electron in the first place. Crystals are transparent unless you look at sufficiently high frequencies. If you looked at low frequencies, your crystal should be transparent. Well that's really interesting. In particular, we immediately learn something cool about two different materials. Consider diamond and copper. These are both crystals.  spin in one dimension is little-- I'm lying about spin. If we include spin, then there are two states for every allowed energy eigenstate of the potential. Electrons spin up, and electrons spin down, will generically have different energies. In 3D, this isn't such a big deal, because those splittings are tiny, and so the states can sort of overlap. But in 1D they can't. So I mean, that's also not exactly true, but it depends on exactly the details of the system. rotor. And when you studied the rigid rotor, you found that you had energy eigenstates and they were degenerate with degeneracy 2 l plus 1. And then we turned on an interaction which was the energy costs, the energy penalty for having angle momentum in z direction. Which added an l z term to the energy. And what you found is that as a function of the coefficient, which I think we called epsilon, of that perturbation of the energies of the energy, these guys split. we add in a lattice we get bands again. The structure's a little more intricate because it depends on the momentum. But these bands now can overlap. OK. Everybody see that? Because there's nothing preventing states from different-- in different multiplates from having the same energy in three dimensions. There's no nodes here that tells you have to keep the ordering constant as you turn on the potential. Now we turned on the multiple particle potential, and they can interact, they can overlapped. As a consequence, when we fill up, let's say we two electrons per potential. the induced electric field? Nothing. Any electric field that you send in will be opposed by an induced current. This behaves like a classical conductor. You turn on an electric field, and the charges will flow to oppose that externally imposed electric field. You get charges then building up on the walls of your capacitor plates. So, this is where we have a conductor. Because there's an unfilled band. And back here , we had an insulator because we had filled bands separated by gap. The gap between the filled band and the next available band. This is actually called a band insulator. could have all sorts of different crystallographic structures. So that's going to go into it, in the same way that l went into it. So different materials for example, diamond versus copper, are going to give you different bands allowed energies. And so when you solve the problem for the energy eigenvalues is a function of now the three different components of the crystal momentum, you'll just get a different set of equations. And working those out is not terribly hard. But it's a computation that must be done, and it is not trivial. yeah. There aren't [INAUDIBLE]. But what would we need? What we need is one of two things. We need either the band gap coincidentally is ridiculously small. What's a good example of that? A free particle. In the case of a free particle, these band gaps go to 0. Right? And so that's a conductor. Just an electron. It conducts, right? OK. So that can certainly happen. But that's sort of stupid. I mean, it's not totally stupid. But it's sortof stupid. The temperature controls an energy scale for a real material. If you have a hot piece of copper, then the lattice is wiggling around. Every once in a while, an ion can hit one of the electrons and excite it, give it some momentum. So at a high temperature, a material with a small gap is basically a conductor. At low temperatures, it's basically an insulator. This is called a semiconductor. And there are notes on the Stellar web page that discuss in a little more detail what I just went through. Photonic crystals have bands of allowed energy and gaps of disallowed energies where no waves propagate through. Photonic crystals form exact crystals that reflect at very specific wavelengths. So why would a butterfly put a photonic crystal on its surface? Well it's extremely light. It's fairly rigid. And it's like the best thing you could ever do if you wanted to be a shiny, fluttery, flying thing. OK. So that's it for band gaps. And I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is going to be entanglement and quantum computation. The probability of finding the particle at point A is given by chi a squared. And similarly, the probability that we find the second particle at b is this thing norm squared. But we also studied the symmetric configuration, which was equal to 1 over root phi, root 2. Chi of a Phi of b. Symmetric, plus chi of b phi of a. And this tells us something totally awesome. So there's a factor of one half. We either find it at chi of a or chi. So it's fine. If we integrate over all phi b, this is the norm squared integrates to 1. "This should be yet another moment of serious discomfort," he says. "How can something here dramatically change the state, the configuration, the initial configuration, of a particle arbitrarily far away?" "If you think about relativity, this should be all the more deeply disconcerting," he adds. "We've run into a bunch of these over the semester. But this one should be troubling to you," he concludes. "It's a problem that should be deeply concerning to all of us" that's kind of amazing is that he created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week called the EPR experiment. And there's a beautiful historical story about the setting and the meaning and the particular person. And unfortunately, I'm not a historian so I can't tell you that story. It sure would be nice if we had someone who wrote a biography of Einstein to tell you a little bit about that. Oh look, it's Tom Levenson. Tom is-- The physicist Bell came to Princeton in '33. He stayed for the rest of his life. He worked with a lot of different, mostly younger physicists. Bell had a lovely way to describe-- I'm trying to find. I had this marked and then I lost my piece of paper. I have already lost it. That's terrible. So Bell has this wonderful way of describing the problem. And I want to share with you, actually, a really lovely description of the way the problem was represented in a way by. of describing this problem of entanglement. And it's based on his description of an actual person. Bell used to say, if you saw Bartelstein and you could only see one leg and that sock was pink, you knew to a certainty that the other sock was not pink. Same thing. If you have a coin and you cut it in half down the-- so you've got two coin shape disks. And they're separated. They get handed to two different gamblers. And one gambler tries to cheat the gambling establishment by tossing in his half coin. And you see the head that you know somebody-- somebody at some other casino is cheating. Einstein argued that the EPR paradox suggested that quantum mechanics was incomplete. Niels Bohr responded that there's no description of reality that excludes the measuring apparatus. Once you know one part of the picture, you know some other part the picture. And that's just the nature of the quantum world, David Frum says. He says it's important to go back to the pre-history of all this, and then speculate on why Einstein reached the position he did. And what that might tell you about the practice of science as a whole. a lived experience as opposed to one reflected in your textbooks. The experiments were done, and I imagine are still being done, as sort of demonstrations. And they showed that Bohr's interpretation was correct and that yes, quantum mechanics produces results that are non-local just as Allan described to you. And that the world really is as strange as people first glimpsed in 1925, '26, and '27. But the question whether or not the framework of quantum mechanics is somehow unsatisfactory in any kind of formal a technical sense is one that's at least partly dependent on your scientific temperament. Einstein's role in the creation of the quantum theory is not widely known. Heisenberg, Schrodinger, maybe Bohr. Maybe Born. Maybe a couple of others. There's no one more important to theQuantum Theory than Einstein. Without Einstein, without quantum theory, there would be no quantum theory. It's a complaint. You know, it's a memo to the Flying Spaghetti Monster that the universe shouldn't be this way if, in fact, experiments turn out to show that it is. In 1905, he publishes The Quantum Theory Of Light. In June he publishes Special Relativity, which treats light as a wave. He's the first person to suggest there might be a problem with causality in quantum mechanics. He nominated Schrodinger and Heisenberg for Nobel Prizes twice. There's a reason that year is called the annus mirabilis, the year of miracles. And in part it's because Einstein is able to actually really focus on these things. And he's capable of doing excellent things. stupid. He was Albert Einstein. But he was aesthetically incapable of pursuing this new physics in ways that were possible under the research possibilities of the time. And that is what I would leave you with. Physics is an aesthetic as well as an intellectual pursuit. So thank you all. [APPLAUSE] Back to Mail Online home. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @MailOnlineernews. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the Daily Mail home.