In automotive design Dynamics plays a very important part. In Dynamics there two sides to it one is here's the system what is its trajectory going to be in other words how will its various degrees of freedom behave over time. The Yang is you here's a system how do you modify it so that it behaves in a way that that's analysis so that's the first kind of the yin. The yin and the Yang are the same thing, they're just different ways of looking at it. that you want all right and that is called it starts with a C control so control is given a dynamic system how do you put an actuators Motors Rockets Etc so that the trajectory is what you wanted to be. So we're doing Dynamics end of the course we're going to solve the dynamical equations dou4 is controls where you actually try and put in extra things like cruise control so to make the system behave in a way you want it to behave so if you have a rocket open loop right it's called open loop and open loop system is a system that is not where you don't close the loop. AJ: I'm a little woozy today uh I had some serious drugs this morning prescription drugs and the result is that I might start babbling but you won't notice because I Babble anyway right so all right Sam didn't say that I said that I bet but anyway s was very respectful okay so uh in the last class we did uh uh we did a problem essentially the whole Pro class was we looked at you know the skier situation and there's a handout AJ's published right on the web where we do the energy formulation and we solve the problem. class but he also solves the problem the direct way and by coincidence the problem not comes out to be the same is it a coincidence no I'm joking it's not a coincidence the answer is the same both ways. Today we're going to do angular momentums we're still in points Point masses but this is the stepping stone the link to rigid bodies then we'll do a problem we're very problem oriented in this class and then we'reGoing to do yet another problem but we'regoing to do multi- particle. There's no class next Monday and um we posted the solution to that problem from class uh just one last thing I won't have officers today only because you don't want to hear me Babel I'm really sick um but I'm also going to change my officers um several people suggest so the timing isn't right um so we'll talk about the end of class but I I might go to like a Monday off M um like later on a Monday or maybe Wednesday later or something like that okay does it make sense would you prefer it not be midday Wednesday? I'm referring to something with no Dimensions but with a finite Mass you know that someone asked me the other day and I just want to be sure to say this. Let's say that you have a particle Point Mass heading that way some direction and let's define its velocity we'll call it a v p okay so I have um two questions both of which you probably know the answers to the first is what is the angular momentum of that particle just from your memory go ahead say it aha. to define the torque caused by let's assume this particle is moving because there's a force on it I'm going to call this Force F Vector P it's the force in particle Peak right so can anyone Define to me what the torque is going to be just from memory from stuff you've seen before you know it just say it R cross F done right nothing new I'm just writing it there by definition two definitions and now I'm ready to go okay and torque is something I made up too right you guys have an intuitive feeling about it I just made it up I could have called it a sanj but I'mGoing to call it a torque right so now let's examine the relationship between angular momentum and torque yep it's a vector sorry uhuh uhhuh that's good I didn't write it so what else do I need to say about torque by the way I'mgoing to write torque on a particle with a tow because Little T looks like time so I write as a tow torque on an system write to the capital T going forward okay now I missed something there what elseDo I need a frame no and why is that anybody say againe that's right we assume we do it from inertial frame and if you look at the definition the a doesn't show up anywhere right so it's same the torque are torque is a torque all right okay no raised hands so nowlet's try and relate these two things right and the analog is this is like momentum this islike force except this is kind of this. rotational R cross thing right how do you think they're related just now intuition just taking the analog a little further. torque is not always equal to rate of change of angular momentum there's a correction term. There are conditions under which it's a rate of angular rate ofChange of angular. momentum but not always you understand because you know it's an analogy so it all kind of makes sense. The MIT way is to do it exactly right using all the mechanisms we've used and guess what you're going to find a stray correction term which you can only ignore. this this this thing acceleration right so this is going to come out to be M or in fact I can re you know I can just kind of write the terms simply like this R QP cross m a acceleration of Point P right that's that term H that's right we'll write it yeah we'll get there that's exactly right okay exactly you're getting but you're you're exactly right so give me I'll write in The Next Step all right let's write this what do we do with this guy it's an ugly term right what do you do withthis guy here's what we're going to do. be clear this whole thing is this term and this is thisterm now let's let's write this The Next Step what is this what this m a acceleration of P or acceleration of p with respect to a hm H it's the force on particle P right cross product rqp yes now so I'm just going to put a dotted line so you know that that's what this is is this I don't think you'll disagree let me just write some draw some lines I'm trying to save space as I said. The term vanishes in many situations but it's key that you know see for Force f is equal to D by DT of P momentum completely coer Crystal Clear when you come to angular momentum it's say artifice yeah there's this funky term which vanishes let's identify the conditions but you need to know it exists when do you think this vanishes so what is this? The reason this will become important is that when you look at rigid bodies it it actually you will end up doing something so this is a silly term but these are the two conditions yeah Q is fixed uh if Q isfixed right now it just so happens that we often take angular momenta momenta about things like this point of this. door about this point so AQ is z everything's good right or you know we're parallel so it vanishes but you know often it's not parallel so you need to be careful that's the point I want to make okay this term will crop up later uh and we'll we'll it's a pesky term so way account for it or we get rid of it yep can you your absolutely absolutely you could right see the problem here is we're calculating the velocity with respect to reference frame a right but Q is moving withrespect to a so let's say there's a car right. it's not Kosher can't do it if I do I need to include that term right and you you've got a figure that a simple thing like my a robot is a very typical Dynamics application okay common mistake okay now that we've done this let's try and figure out why angular momentum is useful let's solve a problem any questions about this any questions bottom line if you're taking angle momenta about moving points be careful bottom line many conditions it'll be okay we'll elucidate we'll Express we'll we'll nail this conditions. she helps Congressional uh you know Congress analyze things from a physics point of view so you know when Katrina occurred someone asked if it would be possible to change the temperature in the when when a hurricane approaches to dissipate the temperature. She did some analysis and showed that you need something like a nuclear weapon but like you know the most the largest nuclear weapon ever conceived to even you know impact it by like 2% because the energy in a in a hurricane all right I told you I'd Babble all right let's do a problem here's a problem so imagine a um a table right. call this Theta the initial length is L one and the initial velocity is we'll call it a scalar because this is how I'm defining the problem of V1 when we actually solve it we might have to define a vector okay. As the thing's going around this person is going to pull the string down and as it kind of goes around it's going to spiral in and end up it's a new length L2 and the question is what is V2 going to be okay. an acceleration in this direction what else is happening maybe there's a potentially a tangential acceleration kind of an Oiler acceleration as well potentially right kind of thing okay maybe it's a drag slowing down slowing down speeding up we don't know right so in that direction there might be some acceleration okay so there's going to be a you know a net Acceleration kind of this way do you think we do right so what is the force on this in 2D where is the Force coming from on from this is.  linear momentum conservation is a vector equation which is the vector linear momentum is conserved right. If if it's not conserved in One Direction but there's no force in the other it's still conserve in the the other direction understand so there's no force on this guy in this direction so instantaneously the velocity stays the same but then it goes to this new position the force is changed now it's pointing towards its Center again so it's a slightly different tangential direction right so linear momentum is conserved instantaneously but not continuously. P right torque of Point Q about Point p is equal to going to be r p R QP cross F and FP is pointing inwards so what is going to happen to that zero right so there is no torque on this particle at any point in time it's just a very long way to say listen things going in circles and the only force is radial if we take a cross product it's going to vanish which is why this is such a convenient formalism. Works in things where Works in situations where the force or something always points to the center. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. The whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem now you know the irony is this problem you could have done before you took this class the only difference is you know all the ways you can do it wrong. you the initial velocity I'll give you the initial angle of veloc angle of speed Theta dot Theta one dot so I'm solving a slightly different problem here with the ma is but it's the same same problem in terms of math. If I have the length of the cord the angular speed is going to double and the reason it's more interesting it could because when you watch a skater you know do the uh what's what's it called the twirl you know when figure skaters kind of rotate.  angular momentum is a vector out of plane in 2D. Energy is not conserved so where did the energy come come from yeah that's because you were doing work by pulling it right potential energy is constant so the can energies because you can also do this with energy by the way right but for that you need to formulate the problem differently. You need to figure out what the forces what work was done and so on so there half there three three ways to solve this problem right you could have done it using Newton just directly without using angular momentum. and state it very clearly and I said it fast when I talking about energy so great question if the particle has an inward velocity when I look at that V2 State the L2 State then I missed some terms if however I State you which I I did not state I screwed up I made a mistake if I state to you that listen you start at length L1 is just going in a circle right and then I pull it in and thenI bring it to an length L2 and I stop pulling. Two particle masses basically a dumbbell and they're attached rigidly by a massless bar massless and I scoot them across and it's rotating it's hurling through through you know across this rink. I'm going to try and identify understand the behavior in fact I'll make it even more complicated by attaching two rockets get it Rockets right to this thing. The Rockets are designed such that they always Point North all right so they always point in in the horizontal Direction in the on the Whiteboard right. p and particle Q is that reasonable it's perfectly reasonable. What would the kinematic constraint be H yeah it's a they connected by a rigid body so they can do whatever they want as long as the length between the two of them remains constant right by the way. If instead of a rigid bar if I had a string connecting them what would the  constraint be less than equal to to R right but in this case it's  a rigid bar so it's equal to R to R all right. Is there a better coordinate system General a non-standard coordinate system you can think about anybody clao. The center of the bar as the kind of the XY location of the dumbbell and then we use the angle of the Dumbbell. How many non-standard dimens do I have non- Standard coordinates do I need to consider a kinematic constraint no because it's implicit in that assumption. The same mass doesn't make any much it doesn't makes a difference the problem just makes our lives easier later yep claudo if they had been different would you have placed them the point in the center of mass for reasons that are not clear yet. different you'll find out later I would have picked the center of mass which would not have been the geometric Center Center okay but you don't know why so I can't tell you why. I just did some slate of hand and I made the masses equal all right a lot of terms cancel out that's the only difference I could still have by the way I could have picked a point on that line anywhere there would still be reasonable generaliz coordinates there wouldStill be three just the math is easier that's it okay. then I'll redraw it there but if I had drawn the dumbbells like this and if I did this right then I would have said this is B1 and this isB2 like we usually do right. Then that's how we're going to do find this R OC which is some component this way and an angle that we know the configuration of this dumbbell at any point in time. Then we'll solve the differential equations to solve it right and you'll see that they come out to be very beautiful. from a free body diagram point of view I'm not going to do it right now but very simply there are each bar applies a force on the part on the particle. I want to figure out the accelerations of the particles I can actually just use the ultra super cool magic formula here directly I need you need have done that but we can do it brute force and just figure it out so um actually let's use the um the uh super cool formula and what we will get is the acceleration of particle p is equal to. stick if I have something at the end of a stick can I apply like a you know does it only have to be a force inwards right. Next week we'll pick up on this and essentially what we'll do is I'll do the three body diagram. Define angular acceleration and moment of inertia and a more General sense okay so let's stop here because we are over time. CL you I mean you're getting that's right so there are a couple of ways to interpret this okay it's a massless rod and I'm invoking the strong form of Newton's third law.