in this video we're going to discuss what externalities are in economics. An externality is when you do something that affects the well-being or the good of another person or a company but you're neither harmed or rewarded for what you did to that person so the externalities can be positive they can be negative. A negative externability is whenyou've harmed someone you've done something to somehow impose a cost on someone or some some company or something and you haven't reimbursed that person. of the wall really loves to play Britney Spears music at 3:00 in the morning. They're creating cost they're doing harm to you but they haven't reimbursed you now. A positive externality is where you are doing something that doesn't harm someone it actually benefits that other person you're doing something good that just as a side test like it's as a tangent it's actually helping some other person or people and so but those people aren't turning around and compensating you for it right. If you're not receiving the full social benefit you're just getting your own private benefit basically things where there's a positive externality the good is going to be under supplied. If you were actually paid if people said hey I really like what you did you might be more likely to get a flu shot. If your neighbor is trying to sell their house they have a for sale sign up they might appreciate if you went out and really did a great job maintaining your home they would really just love that because then when people come to see their house which is for sale that would increase the value of their home. would help them sell their home because the neighborhood would look great but you don't have an incentive to do that why because you're only considering your own private benefit. If you do something nice and for your home then that would help their their home's value but they wouldn't turn around and compensate you necessarily. So that's a positive extra ality and for that reason these type of goods that have a positive externality would be undersupplied in situations where you have a negative externally like pollution or something like that.