Professor: The amygdala is closely connected to the basal forebrain. Professor: The abnormal brain connections that we know occur, at least many types of schizophrenia. He says the earlier the lesion, the greater the plasticity, the more chances of sprouting the connections that are the basis for this idea. In green, there are the very widespread catechol-oligosynaptic projections, which show the extent of the brain's plasticity. In blue, the acetylcholine containing neurons that you see in the medial septum, which we mentioned last time. All right? And this is just to show you binding to receptors for these different transmitters of the various anti-psychotic drugs. The blue shows the D2 dopamine receptor binding drugs. And you can see very commonly that these drugs have a high affinity for those receptors. But there's an affinity for the receptors for the other type of dopamine [? receptor. ?] And that could be a reason. Just saying that it does [INAUDIBLE].. Let's talk about the other part of the basal ganglia, the larger part, the corpus striatum. In mammals and other amniotes, the birds and reptiles, the skates and the rays-- sharks, skates, and rays comes from the ventral tegmental area. And we know that, especially if you look in fish, that a major input to the hypothalamus in those animals is from the taste [? cyst. ?] In mammals it's never been emphasized, but we know taste can be very rewarding and influences the te segmental area cells. The studies of rats have indicated yes, there are some projections, even in mammals, from that system. unique in that way. And it's critical for the balance of this system. So anything that goes wrong with the subthalamic nucleus can cause major problems with movement. OK, so let's stop there today. We're going to take a break from talking about the human body. We'll be back next week with a look at some of the other animals in the animal kingdom. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Back To the pageYou come from.