As the dough ferments it fills up with carbon dioxide expelled by the yeast which is feeding on simple sugars which are broken down by enzymes from the starch in the flour. The gas accumulates in pockets inside the dough held together by the gluten structure. No matter how gentle you try to handle your dough you will always de-gas it if only a little bit in today's comparison video we'll make 4 breads they will be made from the same dough but they will all be treated differently it is a 65 hydration dough containing only flour water yeast and salt. Four breads will be left alone from the beginning of fermentation until it's baked. The first one won't be touched at all and the final one will be folded shaped and degassed three times. It is up to the requirements of the recipe how many times is going to get folded or degassed. understanding these principles will give you the power to create any recipe you like in your style. We will be fermenting them to the same volume this test is not to show what is better or worse it is to show you the differences. the dough will start cooling down and adjusting to the temperature of the kitchen while the middle may still stay warm so as we fold the dough we fold those outside layers into the middle distributing that temperature evenly throughout it and that is folding in short. There are different folding methods for different breads it all depends on what the dough is like but let's get back to de-gassing why would we want to knock the fermentation gases out of the dough why don't we leave it alone and let it rise and it would never punch you so why are you punching it? proof i tried to shape them similarly as i could so that the main difference between these breads would be the steps that we took or skipped now degassing folding and shaping is not just about what the crumb will be like it's also a way of controlling fermentation the loft on the left is almost ready to be baked while the other three they still need about an hour until they go in the oven as we know fermentation builds flavor and it helps develop texture of the crumbs and the crust by degassing the dough we are forcing it to rise back up again it basically has to start over.