Bolek Wyslouch: How do you convert a given physical system with all the forces, et cetera, into some sort of fixed form, fixed type of notation? Bolek: Once we understand two, we will then generalize to infinite number of oscillators, which is actually-- so this model, which consists of weights hanging under the influence of gravity plus the springs will be then used for many applications of the concepts later in this course. MIT OpenCourseWare offers free, online courses. Everything is in Earth's gravitational field, g. We assume that this is an ideal system, highly idealized. We only consider motion with small angle approximation, only small displacement. There's no drag force assumed. Of course, this thing here is very far from being ideal, but hopefully basic behaviors are similar. It's approximately ideal. To study the motion of this thing, to understand how it works, let's try to parameterize it, and displace it from equilibrium, and look at the forces. is-- if it's displaced from a vertical position. Let's say this mass, mass 1, has moved by some distance away from thing Temporarily, let's introduce an angle here to characterize this displacement from vertical. And let's write down all the forces acting on this - force diagram acting on the mass. So there is a tension in the string or the rod. There is a force of spring acting in a horizontal direction. And there is an effect of gravity acting in the vertical direction. for mass 1 in our coupled system. And I could say most of the terms have to do with a motion of mass 1 itself. Mass 1 is its own pendulum. And mass 1 is feeling the effect of the spring force. But because the force of theSpring depends on the difference between positions, there is this coupling. So the motion ofMass 1 knows of where mass 2 is. And motion ofmass 2 influences the motionof mass 1. That's how the coupling shows up. there. This is a two by two matrix. And then we need a third matrix, mass matrix, which simply says that masses are mass of first object is m and the other one is also m, right? So these are three matrices that basically contains exactly the same information as out there. I probably need another matrix. I need an inverse matrix for mass, which basically is 1 over m, 1 overm, 0 and 0. OK, and it turns out that after I introduced these matrices, this set of equations can be written simply as X. But hold on. OK, all kinds of complex numbers can write, but any particular-- AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: That's the physics answer, all right? Complex notation is a mathematical answer, how to solve a mathematical equation. The physics answer is to find fixed frequency modes us such that the system, the complete system, oscillates at one frequency. Everybody moves together. This is so-called normal mode. It turns out that every of the system will have a certain number of frequencies. Real-world examples of how to find the oscillating frequency of a system. The system has been built. The only variable which we have to change is the spring constant and the mass this affects is given. We need to find a parameter which sets this to 0, and then I can put the two identical terms so I can solve this equation. So this is the equation which we need to solve to obtain the solutions to at least one normal mode. We expect that there will be two normal modes, because we have two masses. is basically equivalent to the following equation g over l plus k over m minus omega squared must be equal either to plus or minus. Right? I took a square root of both sides. There are two solutions which corresponds to plus here. The other one corresponds to minus here. So there is one solution, one oscillation, that does not depend on the spring constant. And this is interesting. This is a frequency. It does not depends on the strength of the spring. How is it possible? Somehow spring is irrelevant for this motion. their own natural frequency. So the force of spring is irrelevant. This is a normal mode. And it can go forever at this particular frequency. OK? The other option is usually symmetrically. I move them away from each other. And this is the motion where, again, it's not exactly ideal small angle oscillation, but let me try again, I guess with less. All right, so that's the first step in understanding the system. We now know that there are two oscillations and two normal frequencies. The question is what sort of thing can you put here to get 0. What kind of vector you can plug into those two places such that the matrix times vector will end up with 0? One example is that basically amplitude is the same. Both of them move together. So you plug 1 here and 1 here. Right? So this is a good solution. And every other solution is a linear multiplication of this one for this frequency. There is k over m times 1 minus k overm gives you 0. minus k over m. OK? And then again, for this second possible normal frequency, I have to find the vector A, which corresponds to that frequency motion. And it turns out that they are the same, but the sign changes. So one possible solution is 1 and minus 1. If I plug in 1 minus 1, then this matrix times the vector gives you automatically 0. All right? So this is a systematic way to solve equations. You plug in all the information you know about the system into a two by two matrix. And then you calculate the normal mode. In general, the shape always has to be simple. They either go together, or they go opposite. So the omega 1 and omega 2 are fixed given by the construction of the two coupled oscillators. This shape, 1 and 1, and 1 minus 1 is fixed, because these are the shape of normal modes, which corresponds to those frequencies. And the superposition of x1 plus x2 gives you the most general combination of possible motion. So if I write this down now in terms of position of number 1 and number 2, so I have a position of X1 as a function of time. arbitrary mode-- this is the most general motion of the two coupled oscillator systems. To describe it in specifically-- defined for a specific configuration, you will have to determine the values of alphas and phis. So what you see here is the following-- you have the green is the normal mode, number 1. They are all stationary. This one is at position 0. This is not the ideal decoupled oscillator, right? OK, and then you see the things start moving. The magenta is normal mode number 2. And blue and the red are the actual pendula. And the motion of blue and red is simply a linear sum of the two. And this is exactly what-- this is the computer simulation that shows you that one of them is going up, the other one down, et cetera. But whatever happens, I would be able to-- it will always be a combination of thetwo motions. Now, is there a way to disable one of the normal modes? do it in my program? I don't know. I can, for example, set one of the initial conditions to-- this is still running. The old one is stillrunning. So what I did is I just changed the initial condition. And you see, this is the type of motion where one of. the modes has stopped, just you switched it off, and the other. one is going on, and then, of course, the total motion is equal to that. And both of them happily go with a constant amplitude. could put it with me some spaceship, and go to a place where the gravity is different, right? Why not? So what would happen? So if gravity changes, then basically what will happen is both this term and that term will change. So what do you think will happen when we go to Jupiter? Jupiter, g, is much larger. So the frequency would be larger. Things will be faster. And what happens when the difference in frequency is smaller? You saw that there's the fact that the energy was moving from one to the other. BoleslAW WYSLOUCH: The exact shape, the exact motion, we know that can always be decomposed into simple motions. If you put them together, things may get really interesting and complicated, depending on what sort of frequencies we are running, he says. "Beat phenomenon" is a study of how two objects' motion can be extracted for those with different frequencies. " Beat phenomenon" was first published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of London in 1903. equations. Let's look at these equations here. This is mass 1 and mass 2. So I can rewrite those solutions a little bit different. And what you get is x1-- x1 of t is equal to minus x0 sine of omega 1 plus omega 2 divided by 2 times sine omega 1 minus omega 2 divide by t. So again, we did zero physics here. We just rewrote the simple trigonometric equations. But there is-- we have those two frequencies which are playing a role. 2 is like omega, right? 100 plus 105 divided by 2 is about 100. Whereas this one here carries information about the difference of frequencies-- 100, 102, the difference is 2, which is very small. So we have-- so this term here-- it basically oscillates at the frequency of omega. And the other term is much, much smaller. How does this look? Well, it turns out that if you make a sketch of this, if you do signs, it looks like this. Two speakers go on very, very similar frequencies, all right? So they both work at similar frequencies. And so when I switched on, you should hear-- hear the sound. So if you have two, and I can adjust the frequency, and the frequency is close, then this frequency of changing is very slow. So you can actually hear it. So this is the effect of beats. I can maybe show you another simulation of this works. Let's see what it is. OK, so this is just a single frequency. BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: I don't have to go to Jupiter to modify it, because this one is just a little mass here, right? [TONE] Ah, cool. AUDIENCE: Should both of those sine and cosines have Ts in their arguments? BOLesLAW: Of course always. They are both time dependent, yeah. This is the fast thing, and this is this time-dependent modulation. All right, so where are my notes? So this is the-- this is how the-- so we were able to set up the system. simply x1 plus x2, and I define u2, which is x1 minus x2. So instead of talking about x1 and x2 independently, I have a sum of them and difference. So if I add and subtract the two original equations of motion, which I don't know if I have them somewhere, and you can look back, then you end up having those crossed terms drop out. And you have one, which has only this coefficient, the other one which has that coefficient. The determinants needed no matrices, no nothing. We just added and subtracted the two equations, and things magically separated. So you can always have a linear combination of parameters for arbitrary size coupled oscillators system where you combine different coordinates, and you basically force the system to behave in a way in which it induces the single oscillation, single frequency. So this is, again, a very powerful trick, but usually for most cases, you can do that only after you have solved it, after you've found out normal modes, et cetera.