Adam Martin: I want to show you how you can go from being interested in some property of an organism, or even its behavior. How would you go from there to identifying genes and mechanisms that are responsible for that type of behavior or appearance? And on my title slide here, I have three fruit fly mutant phenotypes that you can see, and each of these mutants defined genes that were subsequently found to be present-- or homologous genes were present in humans and were shown to play important roles in human biology. The roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, are heroes of today's lecture. Bacteria are also extremely important for elucidating the initial mechanisms of gene regulation. The mouse is our lab mascot, but it's also an important genetic model. Human cell lines are important, but you have to understand they're sort of an in-vitro system, that they're not functioning in the context of an entire organism. Most of them are fairly small, and they're easy to house large numbers of them in a lab. They're often cheap to house in the lab and work with. Also, they develop fast. 75% of the human-disease causing genes have a homologous gene in the fruit fly. So we're similar to these model organisms, in particular, genes that are important for understanding human disease. "Genetic approaches are as fundamental to biology as math is to physics," John Rinn said. Genetics really plays a fundamental role in biology and the discovery of new biological mechanisms. I'm going to take you through a type of approach that's called a "forward genetic screen" You don't need a genome sequence in order to do a forward genetic screen because you don't know the genes, but you're interested in a particular aspect of development, or of organismal function, and you want to identify the genes that are important for that. So the mantra of geneticists is that we are going to break genes and then look at the result. regulator of this orchestra, if you will? And so conceptually, what a genetic screen would involve is taking hundreds, maybe thousands, of orchestras like this one, and just shooting an individual in this orchestra. And rather than taking a gun and shooting members of the orchestra, in genetics, you try to identify mutations. So we're looking for mutations. And these mutations could be spontaneous mutations, meaning you didn't do anything to induce it, but they just appear as a variant in the population. mutations. The process of mutagenizing an organism isn't specific to genes. You're just inducing random mutations across the genome of the individual. You don't know which are the ones that you want until you look at their phenotypes and try to find the needle in the haystack. "What kind of a mutant might you look for? Anyone? Rachel?" asks Adam Martin. "A mutant with his head in his ass," says Rachel. "That's what I'm looking for." In model organisms, we can actually find these types of mutations. Maybe you have like a leg where your arm should be coming out, or maybe you have two heads, or something like that. So you look for some sort of defect in the pattern formation. And so this would be, obviously, unethical to do in humans, but in model organisms we can find these.body parts in the wrong place. But now, I want to talk to you about how one might find the needle in the haystack. Haystack: How can you identify genes that have that function in a given process? Haystack: Eric Wieschaus and Christiane Nusslein-Volhard did one of the more famous genetic screens that had been done, and they won the Nobel Prize for their results in 1995. How do you look for incorrect body patterning in flies at some stage of development that are defective in patterning? Yes, what's your name again? And so I'll show you how to do it. Drosophila larvae looks like. And you can see it has a segmental pattern here. But you see there are these segments that alternate between smooth cuticle and hairy cuticle. And because there's a lot of hairlike projections here, it reminded the researchers of a hedgehog, and so this mutant became known as "hedgehog" The hedgehog gene was the founding member of an entire signaling pathway that plays important roles in human development and also, human cancer. There are now a number of drugs that are being developed to target the hedgehog pathway. Robert Horvitz won the Nobel Prize for his work on how cells decide what fates they give rise to. His lab at MIT studied the worm Caenorhabditis elegans, which has 947 somatic cells. 131 cells, during the development of this animal, underwent programmed cell death. This is not random cell death; it's the same cells every time. A mutation that affected cell death that blocked this process is called ced-1. And what you see in this worm is a bubble-like structures that are dead cells but haven't been engulfed. Ced-1 is homozygous, in this case. And the worms are hermaphrodites, meaning they are both male and female sex organs. And therefore, they can self-fertilize. So this is a self-cross. And so ced- 1 remains homozygOUS mutant throughout all these crosses. And because a single worm has just one of these chromosomes, when it undergoes aSelf-cross, a quarter of the progeny will be recessive for the mutation. have these bubble-like structures in the adult world. So they identified a mutant, and thus, a gene, that's called "ced-3," which causes a failure of the cells to undergo cell death. If this is a bona-fide cell-death mutant, then you should have extra cells. And it turns out the ced-3 mutant blocks all 131 of these cell deaths. And this shows that the cell death is an active process. It's not just some random event that's happening. Adam Martin: Researchers looked for flies that didn't have a robust wake-sleep cycle. He says they identified mutations that cause this to happen. Martin: They wanted to mutate the X chromosome and then have the fathers pass on their X chromosome to their sons because there's only one copy of the X chromosomes. The researchers crossed these males to attached X females, and half of the progeny died because you can't have three X chromosomes, Martin says. "This is a really elegant way to look for genes that are important for circadian rhythm," he says.  defects in the genes that were identified in Drosophila actually are relevant to human sleep disorders. So this screen identified a gene called "period" This is a gene. And there's a hammer log of the period gene in humans. And the gene in human is associated with familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome. So these mutants that the Benzer Lab identified had altered period of the sleep-wake cycle, and therefore, the gene was named "period." All right, I'm all set.