s gawan and the Green Knight um I believe this is the last piece where we don't know who the author is where it's unknown um I find the background interesting and that through textual Clues they're able to figure out who wrote it. It's interesting when they talk about some writer character character character is whatever that word is SAR Gowan as a ruthless bloodthirsty Warrior um we really don't see him in that regard. Throughout the story of seral when we again come back to what a knight truly is. if you look down at the bottom of uh uh uh well it's actually on 176 now he comes in and addresses everybody and everybody gets kind of kind of quiet uh because this is a huge monstrous man with a monstrous Axe. He saysi come to uh speak to the person in charge and off Arthur King Arthur says that would be I and he goes I've come to search you based on reputation remember how we talked about the the honor okay people don't do you know if the knights do something it's a reflection of Arthur and Arthur as we know from all of our you know illusions of movies and cartoons and stuff that you know he is a good guy. own land and look for no further trial so if after the deal I'll tell you where you can find me I will give you my name there are no tricks here. If for some reason I am unable to or I choose not to tell you myname then the agreement's done and you don't have to come andLook for me okay it's kind of like those things where be careful what you wish for that type of thing make sure you understand exactly what agreement you're getting into the night from the wife of bath he didn't know that he was going to have to marry that woman did he no would he have still done it. his Steed snatched the bridal stepped into the sturup and swung a loft holding his head in his hand by the hair he settled himself in the saddle as steadily as if nothing had happened to him though he had no head. Then the head will obviously have to tell him his name and where you can find him are you envisioning this cut the head off the body walks over. Here's where you come to find me come or else be called coward accordingly line 232 233 come or be called a coward and it's not just. sir GNE being called a coward we've got to understand that mindset who would that be calling a coward Arthur and everybody else the Knight came here specifically to challenge the best that Earth has ever bred is what he was saying and so this is the moment and now GNE has a year to think about his impending doom is he going to go do we think he's going to take the axe shot is this all a test is he Going to trick something I mean these are all thoughts that should be going through your mind. you receive the the hunter the owner of the house the husband says whatever you receive you must give to me that seems kind of weird what possibly could he receive while he's there well we find out that the wife really kind of starts to come on to him over time okay real flirty she's she's a temptress okay very seductive uh she gives him a kiss what does he do when the husband comes home that day cuz the husband's going to share his his food share his everything with him as long as GNE you share with me and so he gets kissed. comes home and GNE does not give up the girdle because why would I give this this is going to save my life I'm not going to so he breaks his word okay he becomes a coward. He is selfish and coward about his life about hey you gave me a this is a wild card he doesn't know I'm going to have an ace up my sleeve come time to get that shot in the head um and so he does leave and he keeps that GLE for himself um and doesn't give that away page 185. thing and so he hears it you know happening and um so he screams out and the and the um and the Green Knight comes he says by there said one on the bank above his head and you shall swiftly receive what I once swore to give you. He chastises him and tells him take off your helmet and offer no more argument or action than I did when you whipped off my head with one stroke no s GNE by God who gave me a soul the Grievous gash to come I Grudge you not at all strike but the one stroke and I shall stand still and offer you no hindrance. a little Flinch shoulders shrank slightly from the sharp edge could you hear it when we went through this all of those alliterations I mean it's almost hard to say you almost have to slow down but that's those are great examples of alliteration um you are not gain said the Gallant whose greatness is such that by Hill or Hollow no army ever frightened him for now you Flinch for fear before you feel harm I never did know that Knight to be so coward I didn't know the Knights of Arthur were so cowardly that you flinched. take his head off like he did with the like what happened to the Knight he just dinged them and so there was some blood and we find out all along that sir gain was never really intended to get any Nick at all if he stayed true to what his words were. If he never violated his oath the most he was ever going to do was scare him and probably wasn't even going to hurt him. Since you lied that's why you got the Nick the Snick on the neck sir Gowan happy that he still alive relieved angry sad. them say that they were angry at you they can get over the anger I'm sure they'll get over. the disappointment but yet that they just thought so highly of that person then not So Much Anymore okay and that crushed him. The wife was a culprit in this and the Green Knight pushed her along hey try to seduce him see what happens we're testing him to see what's uh if he's truly a good uh a good person or a coward as it turns out. 510 curses on both cowardice and Covetous. Celebrate was it New Year's is that what it is we'll come back and celebrate this cold New Year I'm not mad at you so now we need to go back and look remember the archetypes we talked about. What was the purpose of the Green Knight simply to challenge challenge King Arthurs and his crew and see if they truly are as honorable as they say as legendary as Legend has as the stories have it. Can we really call him a villain probably not but yet isn't he that antagonist early on? good person away with the forbidden fruit you know something similar we could maybe connect uh down the road but it's very similar to to those so um so go and the green. I hopefully you enjoyed it um really story-wise we're done with knights uh. It's a very similar story to the one we did with the knights. It was a very different story but it was very similar. I hope you enjoyed the book. I'm glad you read it. I'll see you next week.