Aristotle was born 384,15 years after the trial of Socrates. He was sent by his father to go to college. Unlike most of you, Aristotle did not spend four years at the Platonic Academy. He remained attached to it for the next 20, until the death of Plato. Unlike his intellectual godfather, Socrates, who wrote nothing but conversed endlessly, Aristotle wrote disciplined and thematic treatises on virtually every topic, from biology to ethics to metaphysics to literary criticism and politics. Aristotle appears from the beginning to look more like what we would think of as a political scientist. He collected constitutions, 158 of them in all, from throughout the ancient world. He was the first to give some kind of conceptual rigor to the vocabulary of political life. Aristotle lived at the virtual cusp of the world of the autonomous city-state of the Greek polis, he says. He is silent because of his foreignness to Athens, and his reluctance to speak to the issues of his time. The authority of Aristotle no longer has quite the power that it once did. The attack began not all that long ago, really only as late as the seventeenth century. Who was this strange and elusive man whose writings seem to have been enlisted both for the support of monarchy and for republics? Who was these man and how did he come to be so controversial? We will read later this semester, named Thomas Hobbes, was one who led the pack, led the charge against Aristotle. Aristotle says man is, by nature, the political animal. He says participation in the life of the city is necessary for the achievement of human excellence. A person who is without a city, he says, who is apolis--without a city--must either be a beast or a god. The city is natural in that it allows human beings to achieve and perfect what he calls their telos, that is to say their end, their purpose. But there is a second sense for him, in some ways, in which he says the polis is by nature. condensed in very deep ways, carry a great deal of freight. There's a lot in there that needs to be unpacked. We need to avoid the temptation, in many ways understandable as it might be, to airbrush or sanitize Aristotle, to make him seem more politically correct for modern readers. The question is what did Aristotle mean by slavery? Who or what did he think was the slave by nature? Until we understand what he meant, we have no reason to either accept or reject his argument. the preserve of the few, of a minority capable of sharing in the administration of justice and in the offices of a city. It seems to be a very elite teaching. Would you agree? Unappealing to us, perhaps, for that reason, very contrary to our intuitions and the way we have been brought up. But before we dismiss Aristotle's account as insufferably inegalitarian and elitist, we have to ask a difficult question. What else is Yale, but an elite institution intended to educate, morally and intellectually, potential members of a leadership class?