Professor: We're describing interaction between the electromagnetic field and atoms. Professor: If you have a perturbative treatment, even if you carry to infinite order, you have, formally, divergences if you have resonant interaction. I want to show you what are the tools to treat those infinity source diverGences in a consistent and a systematic way, professor says. MIT OpenCourseWare is a free, online education resource. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. one hint how we have to do it comes by simply taking this energy denominator and expanding it in gamma, simply a Taylor expansion in gamma. But I can reproduce this result by going to infinite order in perturbation theory. And it means to sum up an infinite number of diagrams. Who of you have actually seen those kind of diagrammatic tricks and summation? A few, OK. So it's maybe nice to see it again. I learned it from those examples. And I really like it. It's a very elegant way to combine equations with graphical manipulations. now the starting point for our discussion today. We want to calculate the Fourier transform of the time evolution operator to infinite orders. So unfortunately, [INAUDIBLE]. We should copy this equation. Because we need it. So OK, we want to take this equation, and now we wants to iterate it. The resolving G in 0's order is G0. Now plug G0 into the right hand side of the equation,. and you get the first order, which is. G0VG0. the structure if you sum over intermediate states, or if you introduce intermediate states. So this is just writing it down in basis function of the unperturbed operator H0. But now we can formulate the problem we are encountering and we want to solve. Namely, we have the problem with one state. Our problem is the excited state b. And we have a resonant excitation from the count state a. So we have terms, and actually divergent terms, which are 1 over Z minus Eb. easy part, which has no divergence, we can make any kind of approximation we want without altering the physics. But the resonant part, this needs special attention. Because if I treat it literally in those expressions, they don't make sense mathematically. Because they cause infinities. So we regroup those infinite sums, these algebraic terms, in such a way that we say, OK, which one has the occurrence of this once, twice, three times, four times? equations. We call this the function Rb of Z. And what I've shown in diagrams above is nothing else than the circle Vbb, the matrix element of the interaction. But now we have sums where we're not allowed to go through the resonant state. We have to go from b to an intermediate state. And it's clear how to go to higher terms. So we've just defined this function R by focusing on two occurrences of the straight line. Well, let's look at higher order terms. What happens when Z minus Eb comes to the power n? we ask what happens when we allow more appearances of the state b, for each of them, we obtain another square box. So by looking at the terms which are bothersome and regrouping the infinite terms according to one occurrence, two occurrence, three occurrence of this divergent denominator, we have now found an exact expression for Gb of Z. And since this is now an algebraic equation with a geometric series, we can write it exactly as this minus Rb. Well, like with every exact result, you have to ask, what is the use for it? The structure of the equation accounts for the physics. And the numerical part has become very harmless. But what it does is even if you do now a lowest order approximation to the function R, even those very simple approximations correspond to an infinite number of terms in the original expansion. So that's pretty neat. But the importance comes now when I pull things together, I want to show you what we have exactly done for treating an atom in the excited state and for treating it in the neutral state. light scattering. I just go now and apply to an excited atomic state. So the state we are interested in is the atomic state b and no photons. And the property of the atomic. state is obtained when we know the function Gb of Z. And if you use the lowest second order approach, then diagrammatically-- just give me one second, photon was emitted. Yeah, sorry, so the process we have considered is that we go to second order. We can go through an intermediate state, can say, absorbing it and meeting a virtual photon. Since this appears in the denominator, that means for G, just make a Taylor expansion in R, that it has this process to all orders. So that propagator, the sort of propagation G, involves now all possibilities that we have to end up in state b again. But we can go through intermediate states a or a prime as often as we want. Or actually, we have summed it up. Our results contain those processes to infinite order. So the question is, what have we neglected? I mean, that looks like a lot. This expression has in general a real part and imaginary part. It's a function of the initial energy E. And it has an imaginary part plus or minus eta. And what we're doing here is-- but I'm not really explaining it mathematically-- we have played those tricks here. But I hope it becomes clear if I say what the real and imaginary parts are. It needs a little bit of correct treatment of functions in the complex plane. But yes, thanks for the question. double sum. But what we use is the principle part of it, which is well defined in the theory of complex functions. And it's divergent, but you take a certain symmetric limiting procedure. So that's something which you have seen. So the imaginary part gets us Fermi's golden rule. And the real part has a 1 over [INAUDIBLE] dependence. So this is actually nothing else than the AC Stark shift not due to a laser beam, but due to one photon per mode. we calculate here-- has no resonant structure at the energy Eb. So therefore, we can neglect the energy dependence of that and simply replace the argument E by the energy we are interested in. So this replace, neglect E and set, or replace the dependence by E, by taking the value at Eb. This corresponds to the Markov approximation. And that means in the temporal domain that we have a delta function. I don't want to go further here. But when we talk about the master equation, we will also make a Markov approximation later on. And the two are equivalent here. imaginary part, which we can approximate by Fermi's golden rule. If we now Fourier transform back and obtain the time evolution of this state, it no longer evolves with the energy Eb. It has a shifted energy by this self energy. And this is called the radiative shift. But in addition, because of the imaginary part, it has now an exponential decay. But there are two things you should learn. The first thing is that the exponential decay would be different if we had not made the Markov approximation. around the resonance energy. Then, the density of states of your photon field is pretty much constant around here. And then, this approximation is excellent. So I hope what you have learned from the treatment is number one, where the exponential decay comes from. Of course, an exponential function has a Taylor expansion, which is an infinite sum of polynominal terms. And therefore, we need infinite order to get the exponential. So it's not really profound what I'm saying. It's pretty much an exponentialfunction is non-perturbative. we have an atom in the ground state, and a photon comes along, and it takes the atom to the excited state b. Then we go back to the same state-- could be also another state-- by emitting a photon k prime epsilon prime. And the relevant matrix element of the time evolution operator, which is the T-matrix, involves now the matrix element, the initial energy minus the intermediate energy. The critical part is really-- you can do it mathematically. large detuning delta here, then the small shift in the line widths don't matter. So everything we have done by correcting the naked propagation of the state b by the correct propagation with this infinite emission and reabsorption of virtual photons, this is only needed if the denominator is 0. And then, we have to figure out what else happens. What else happens is obtained in higher order with this non-perturbative treatment. OK, 20 minutes left. So we now change gears. We move onto the optical Bloch equation. many modes. It emits photons and reabsorbs them. And you can often neglect that in the simple description of your experiment. But if you take certain expressions seriously, they would have divergences. And that's what we discussed without this infinite number of processes which happen. Of course, yes, the whole other regime which I should mention is when you can completely neglect the coupling to many modes. If you do Rabi oscillation with resonant interaction, you don't need all that. Because then, you're really looking at discrete states. things which happen in our experiments and in daily life come because the system we are looking at, it follows Schrodinger's equation. But it is coupled to a much bigger system. And so in this section, what I want to address at the most fundamental limit is, what is the step where we go from reversible equation, unitary time evolution, to something which is called relaxation, which is dissipative, where entropy is increased? And the step, of course, is we go to statistical operators. We describe the big system. But then, we focus on the small system. In general, if you write down the total Hamiltonian and do the time evolution, something will come out which, in general, is very complicated, very entangled. So you have to know, to keep track of all the photons, which have been scattered in the lifetime of an atom. But often, what we do is we simply put the photons in a trash can. We trash them. We're not interested in what the photons are doing. The vacuum chamber has taken care of them. So all that we are interested in-- how do we now describe the atomic system? that happens with the environment-- that there's initial state, that it gets entangled, and then we neglect maybe not keeping track of the photons-- we're not interested in all of that. We really want to focus on what happens to the atom. How does an initial state of the atom propagate into a final state? And this is done by optical Bloch equations. This isdone by the master equation. The master equation, you can see, focuses on the relevant part of the system. And we can neglect the million photons which have been emitted. it causes stimulated emission. And it causes absorption described by the Einstein b coefficient. And you have a similar equation for the excited state. So this is clearly the semi-classical limit of what we want to accomplish. We want to know more. We really want to find the full quantum time evolution. We have to be careful. The time evolution as a Hamiltonian, if you now bring in the environment, cannot be simply included by adding an imaginary term. This here violates the unitary time Evolution. This is actually something which is the frontier of our field, both in theory in ion traps and with neutral atoms, that we have some evolution of an atomic system by coupling it to the environment. So can you engineer the environment in such a way that it does something really fancy to your system? Well, you can dream of it. But you dreams are restricted by the mathematical structure of all possible master equations in the world. Because the environment cannot do everything for you. The environment can only do for you what can come out of all Possible Hamiltonians. I will be telling you is also sort of relevant to understand this sort of frontier in our field which is called environment engineering. OK, density matrix-- good, five more minutes. So what we have is we have a system. And we have this environment. And what we are exchanging with the environment is both energy, but also entropy. And so when we transfer energy or heat, there is a corresponding change in energy. And it's a general property of all quantum systems. It's a consequence of the fluctuation dissipation principle. we need, and I just want to remind you, is for all density matrices, you can always unravel it. The density matrix can be written as a probabilistic sum over states. This will actually play a major role. We will make certain models for damping. And it's really beautiful. On Monday, I will give you the beam splitter model for the optical Bloch equation. I really like it. It shows you a lot of fundamental principles. But the important part is whenever we have a way to construct a density matrix by saying, we have certain quantum states k, and we just add them up probabilistically, this kind of microscopic interpretation of the density matrix is called unravelling. processes. OK, any last questions? Well then, let's enjoy the open house with incoming graduate students, and I'll see you on Monday. I'll be back on Monday to talk to you about the classes we'll be teaching next year. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this interview. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to see the full Transcript of this Interview. Back in the page, please share your questions and comments.