David Kaiser: Today we're going to be talking about the kind of invention or the hybridization of a whole new subfield within physics that now is often called particle cosmology. It studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. It asks about what role they might have in shaping, really, the fate of the entire universe. Kaiser: We'll talk about institutions, and politics, and some broader shifts in the field, out of which come this new now quite flourishing subfield. Quantum theory and elementary particle physics didn't even exist 45 years ago. Today, its annual budget just within the United States is on the order of $1 billion a year. There are on average two new physics papers, two new preprints posted to the central preprint server archive. every hour of every day just in this subfield. So it is really a booming, booming subject of study, and I find that all the more astonishing since it's a fairly recent vintage in terms of the kinds of time scales. or particle physics and that it somehow this set of ideas that bubbled up in the mid-1970s of that we'll look at today. And so there's a lot going for that explanation, but it's also, I think, really, really quite incomplete. So if we start using the kinds of tools that we've been working on together this whole semester, we can dig in a bit more and try to uncover some of the additional factors that really were at play in especially in the early years of this field. to focus on the question of mass. How did physicists in different subfields in the 1950s and '60s think about this. And that helps us trace the precursors for this overlap field of particle cosmology. Then we'll take a look at some of the broader institutional shifts that were also coming to be very dramatic, and some of them quite unexpected, by the late ' 60s and early 1970s. And then we'll zoom back in to see what were some examples of the kinds of research questions that now seemed obvious or natural to ask for members of this new hybrid area. Einstein was inspired by some of Mach's writings on this. Mach himself didn't call it Mach's principle. But it was attributed to Mach by Einstein as early as 1918. The idea was should we be constantly paying attention to the global distribution of matter and energy when we try to make sense of local phenomena associated with mass? So that was a very challenging question, and we'll say more about it soon. But that was one of the ways that the problem of mass took form, was given a concrete form. and '60s. There was quite a different set of conversations happening around the same time. This had nothing to do, at least on the surface, with Mach's principle or even with Einstein's general theory of relativity. But the challenge became very clear very quickly. These nuclear forces are somehow mediated was what arose from particles exchanging certain kinds of force-carrying particles. The point is there were new kinds of matter. And then when particles tossed these back and forth, that would give rise to things like radioactive decay. Self-evidently of short range, unlike gravitation or electromagnetism, the nuclear forces really exert themselves across nuclear dimensions, very tiny fraction of the size even of a single atom. The idea was could have finite range nuclear forces if these force-carrying particles had a very large mass. That will make it very unlikely for that force to be felt across a large distance because of the whole set of ideas about virtual particles and the uncertainty principle. So that broke half of the motivation for it. This was a pretty substantial challenge. It got lots of theorists very exercised over the 1950s and especially 1960s. Can we account for mass of these elementary particles in a self-consistent way? Because there's other set of puzzles that didn't seem to fit together. So the question of mass turns out to have been on many specialists minds in the '50s and '60s, but as embedded in quite different-sounding conversations. So let's look a bit more at some of the proposed solutions to this question ofmass. In Einstein's theory, the unit strength of gravity is set by some universal constant, the same constant G. Brans and Dicke wanted to modify Einstein's general theory of relativity in a very specific way. Their idea was to introduce a whole new kind of matter, a newkind of particle in nature. They labeled it with the Greek letter phi. And they put in an extra dimensionless constant, a fudge factor, that they labeled by theGreek letter omega. And this was basically to control how much mass there was in the universe. Their version would depart from the ordinary behavior from general relativity. As omega becomes larger and larger, the field is much less likely to vary either over space or time. And in the limit that omega becomes arbitrarily large, then phi, in a sense, can't afford to vary at all. The kinetic energy cost is too high. So you get back to the Einstein-like limit. So they had this very clever fudge factor, a coupling constant, so that, in principle, the local strength of gravity could be changing all the time. As omega becomes large, the behavior reduces to the kind of constant strength of gravity of the original Einstein theory. The idea is that this new form of matter, this new field phi, is extended throughout all of the universe through every nook and cranny of space. All of matter interacts with phi. So this would be a way to incorporate Mach's principle going beyond even just Einstein's version of the theory. It's almost like a new ether, you might say, It's everywhere. certain elementary particles have a short range if we can't accommodate a mass while keeping this symmetry? This is now they're back in this question of things like the nuclear forces. Could you have nuclear forces mediated by the exchange of particles? Could those particles themselves be very massive? So they don't go very far-- so a short-range force-- and yet, still be respecting the very symmetries for which people had invented those particles in the first place. So here was, again, a very clever suggestion coming first actually from Jeffrey Goldstone. The Higgs field isn't responsible for the nuclear forces. It's responsible for giving everything else the masses that we measure, including those force-carrying particles. The equations for the governing nuclear forces could retain all the fancy symmetries for which these new particles were introduced to reinforce that symmetry at each point in space and time. However, this is a dynamical field. At some point, it will settle into a local minimum. The system will minimize its energy. That's how it will work. seek its equilibrium. The governing equations maintain the symmetry, but the symmetry is broken spontaneously when the system relaxes to some lowest energy state. When the scalar field gets anchored to some energy-minimizing value, that changes the interactions of the effective dynamics of all the fields that coupled to it. And now they number across space as if they have a very large mass. It's a 50/50 chance that the solutions to this dynamical system will break the symmetries that govern the equations themselves. An induced mass coming from this spontaneous symmetry breaking. So now, again, you can have your symmetries and your short range. So fascinating, a lovely idea being introduced right around the same time as Brans-Dicke also as one way to try to get to this question of why do objects have mass. It got a lot of attention, as I'll say more about in a moment, because it offered the first really concrete quantitative alternative to Einstein's general theory of relativity in nearly 50 years. No one suggested, at least in print, that these two scalar fields with the same Greek letter might be similar or even worth considering side by side for nearly 20 years, until the later 1970s. The sets of ideas were published to very wide acclaim in their own separate fields as early as 1961. It took more than 15 years until people began to say, hey, these two Scalar fields are meant to pervade all of nature. All of other forms of matter interact with them. They give rise to what we measure as local inertial effects. Each of these papers-- the Brans-Dicke paper and the Higgs papers-- became technically renowned within fewer than 20 years. So you can see more than 500 each. In fact, it's 1,083 distinct papers doing the citing if you add up all the ones between these two plots. And yet, only six of those-- so less than 1%-- cited both the BrANS-DICke paper. and theHiggs papers in the same article during this whole 20-year period. on these two fields being literally the same field-- only one new field of nature, not two. So it's not that they're somehow intrinsically totally separate or different from each other. So instead, their status, really, is historical. How people assess them or what they thought they were good for was changing over time. And so what had changed? That's what we'll pick up in the next part. Let me pause here and ask for any questions. So Alex asks, was it an accident that both parties chose phi? Not really. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. So we might wonder, well, was it changes in data? Did experiments force a new evaluation? No, not really. Let's look at the gravity side first. So I mentioned that part of what got the gravitation community so excited about Brans-Dicke gravity was it now gave them something very tangible, very specific to try to test for. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. That is, all the tests were easily consistent with the predictions from Einstein's theory within experimental errors. To match all of these increasingly precise new experimental measurements, Brans' Dicke theory was not highly favored. So that's on the gravity side. Meanwhile, there was literally zero experimental evidence, a big fat goose egg nothing in favor of the Higgs-Boson until July of 2012. two sets of ideas consider them side by side. The main story that's mostly given-- I alluded to this in the very beginning of today's class-- is actually hearkens to changes in ideas and, in particular, on the particle physics or particle theory side. These ideas are well worth appreciating. And they came in rapid fire in 1973 and 1974. The first of them is called asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. The US budget for high-energy particle physics fell in half in just four years. That's a very sudden drop. So even as the whole field starts going through some pretty dramatic changes, particle physics feels the brunt of it in the most extreme way. So that leads to an interesting set of internal migrations within the discipline. And that's where the people who stay within physics at all that you have a net outflow by a factor of 2 just within the field of people fleeing particle physics. was cut most dramatically. And the job scene was most hard hit, and experiments looked like they'd be on hold and so on. And so in some of these reports that tried to make sense of the crash, like this 1972 report commissioned by the National Academy of Sciences, they single out particle theory. They say it's not coincidental that these young theoretical physicists in particle theory had the hardest time when the trouble came because this report claimed, at least, they'd been poorly trained. A blue-ribbon committee recommended that young physicists be trained in particle theory. The idea is to formalize their exposure to more and more parts of the discipline, including explicitly more focus on gravitation and cosmology. More and more departments, including very elite trend-setting departments across the country, start rushing to offer new graduate courses in general relativity. Questions on that field, really for the first time in the United States, start showing up regularly on the general exams for physicists across all fields. vast majority of those came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. So remember that big report comes out in 1972. You start seeing curricular changes as early as '73, '74. By '75, '76, '77, you start seeing, in some sense, the market respond with many textbooks being really rushed into print. Some of these textbooks were basically mimeographed lecture notes. And now there's very, very fancy books published in a more typical way. GUTs, or GUTHs-- I'll throw him a bone-- are the symmetry groups associated with the different kinds of forces. Each of those three symmetry groups are actually sub-- you think about it. You can represent any of them as matrices. And there is the smallest group that includes those three as subgroups is an SU5. So that led to new phenomena that were predicted that turned out not to be measured, but that was the idea at least. And that's super cool and fun and lots more to be said about that but that is, indeed, where that nomenclature came from. In 1979, two separate theorists introduced a whole new model where they didn't only cite Brans-Dicke and Higgs, they literally united them. They wanted to ask why gravity appears to be so weak compared to all the other forces. The idea was that this local strength of gravity, Newton's constant, would get anchored to a very small value when phi gets stuck at a relatively large value. So why is gravity so weak? They suggested maybe it's because it's arising from some broken symmetry. He wandered into this field really accidentally. He finished his PhD at Harvard in 1970. His work was squarely in particle physics, the fancy new symmetries and new nuclear forces. That's what he studied for his thesis. He then had a sabbatical early on in his faculty career, and he happened to go to Paris. He swapped apartments with a Parisian physicist who was about to come to the United States. And as Tony recalls, he found these stacks of preprints all around the apartment that looked interesting. Lee Smolin was the other person who independently introduced that broken-symmetric theory in 1979-- same year as Tony Zee. He was actually, from the start, combining the two fields, both in the courses he took and eventually with his advising team for his thesis and for his dissertation itself. So unlike this accident of trading apartments in Paris and reading a few preprints, more and more members of Lee Smolin's generation were going through a training like his, partly by design, in the wake of the National Academies report. Few physicists today think that Brans-Dicke theory of gravity best describes our. Universe. But the theory hardly died off by his experiments. In fact, arguably, interest in the field grew even as it was getting experimentally less and less favored. The training of people like Lee Smolin and his generation just was importantly different from the very excellent training that people like Tony Zee had had even just a mere 10 years earlier. And so the idea that we're picking single theories and that they replace each other, I think, just misses this fine structure. in turn, these new folks, especially people like Mike Turner and Rocky Kolb, went on to become real institution builders in their own right. So in fact, they were accelerates. Not only had they been trained to think carefully at this new interface, they helped really accelerate the trend. Turner and Kolb became the directors of the very first institutional center devoted to particle cosmology. It was called the Center for Particle Astrophysics at Fermilab when they were still relatively young in their careers. And so they were actively working to perpetuate this new hybrid area. counts as natural can shift in a pretty short time scale. And as we've been seeing throughout the whole term and including today, those shifts can be driven as much by things well outside of the physicist's control, geopolitics, and national scale budgets. So that's where I'll actually pause. And we have time for a few more questions or comments. Any other thoughts on that? With my last moment here, I'll say, before the construction for the new Center for Theoretical Physics, I had an office just down the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.