Best index: 38

Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) are a tool developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and used by various federal agencies. DOE has acknowledged that TRLs can play a key role in assessing the maturity of technologies during the contracting process. Other agencies similarly charged with developing technologies, such as NASA and the Department of Defense (DOD), use TRL's to characterize technologies. The agency recently issued a Technology Readiness Assessment Guide, which lays out three key steps to conducting technology readiness assessments. Using TRLs we developed for these technologies, we found consensus among stakeholders that CCS is less mature than efficiency technologies. We found that the Office of Fossil Energy does not use a standard set of benchmarks or terms to describe or report on the maturity of technologies. DOE’s goals for advancing these technologies sometimes use terms that are not well defined. The lack of such benchmarks or an assessment of the maturity. of key coal technologies and whether they are achieving planned or desired results limits. the Guide is not mandatory, DOE’s Office of Environmental Management uses the Guide as part of managing its procurement activities. The National Nuclear Security Administration has used TRLs recently as well. In the absence of an assessment from DOE, we asked stakeholders to gauge the maturity of coal technologies using a scale we developed based onTRLs. Table 2 shows the TRLes we developed for coal technologies by adapting the NASA TRL for that technology. The TRL was developed to measure and communicate risks associated with using critical technologies in a novel way. The TRLs are used by various federal agencies to rate the extent to which technologies have been demonstrated to work as intended using a scale of 1 to 9. We consulted with the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), which had recently used a similar approach to examine the maturity of coal technologies. For example, EPRI defined TRL 8 as demonstration at more than 25 percent the size of a commercial scale plant. We applied these benchmarks to a coal power plant and came up with the TRL. for review and comment. In addition, we provided selected slides on reliability of electricity supply to NERC for comment. We received written comments from DOE’s Assistant Secretary of the Office of Fossil Energy, which are reproduced in appendix III. The Assistant Secretary concurred with our recommendation, stating that DOE could improve its process for providing a clearer picture of technology maturity. He also said DOE planned to conduct a formal TRL assessment of coal technologies in the near future. We have incorporated technical comments, which we have incorporated as appropriate. Many technologies to improve plant efficiency have been used and are available for commercial use now, but still face challenges. injection wells can be permitted as Class I (injections of hazardous wastes, industrial nonhazardous wastes, municipal wastewater) or Class V wells. According to EPA, once site site is closed, there is no risk of. endangerment of underground sources of drinking water until the operator meets all the closure and post-closure requirements and EPA approves site closure of the well. Injections not included in other classes, including wells used in experimental technologies such as pilot CO for geologic sequestration. EPA plans to finalize the geologic sequestration rule in fall 2010. Well operators will only be liable under the SDWA if they violate or fail to comply with EPA orders in situations where an imminent and substantial endangerment to health is posed by a contaminant. Neither the proposed rule nor the final rule will address liability for unintended releases of stored CO emissions in lieu of more efficient coal plants. In addition, some higher emitting coal plants may be subject to liability for the release of CO emissions. To identify stakeholders’ views on these technologies, we conducted initial scoping interviews with power plant operators, technology vendors, and federal officials. We selected a group of 19 stakeholders with expertise in carbon capture and storage (CCS) or technologies to improve coal plant efficiency and asked them a set of standard questions. This group of stakeholders included representatives from major laboratories, the National Academy of Sciences, International Energy Agency (IEA), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Global CCS Institute, and National Coal Council. operated. We also reviewed available data on the use of key coal technologies compiled by IEA and the Global CCS Institute. In addition to the contact names above, key contributors to this report included Jon Ludwigson (Assistant Director), Chloe Brown, Scott Heacock, Alison O’Neill, Kiki Theodoropoulos, and Jarrod West. Important assistance was also provided by Chuck Bausell, Nirmal Chaudhary, Cindy Gilbert, Madhav Panwar, and Jeanette Soares. May 2010, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We selected this nonprobability sample of states because they contained projects involving advanced coal technologies. To conduct this work, we reviewed key reports including those from the Department of Energy’s (DOE) national laboratories, the National Academy of Sciences, International Energy Agency, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. EPA and NERC provided technical comments, which we have incorporated as appropriate. Unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. If you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. Click here to read the full report. GAO conducted this performance audit from July 2009 through May 2010, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We interviewed senior DOE staff on these Visited coal power plants and research facilities in three selected states—AL, MD, and WV4. all U.S. emissions of COCO2 is the most prevalent greenhouse gas (GHG) program and interviewed seniorDOE staff on the plants and facilities in these states. We conducted the audit in compliance with GAO standards. Review (NSR) requirements that may apply when a plant makes a major modification, a physical or operational change that would result in a significant net increase in emissions. Technologies to improve plant efficiency offer potential near-term reductions, but also raise some concerns. The National Coal Council has also reported temporary declines in reliability during past deployments of new coal technologies. We provided a draft of our report to the Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of EPA for review and comment. In addition, we provided selected slides. IEA estimated that CCS technologies could meet 20 percent of reductions needed to reduce global CO. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) researchers called CCS the “critical enabling technology” to reduce CO emissions while allowing continued use of coal in the future. In 2009, NAS reported that if C CS technologies are not demonstrated commercially in the next decade, the electricity sector could move more.in greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, CCS could allow coal to remain part of the nation’s diverse fuel mix. TRLs we developed for coal technologies by adapting the NASA TRLs. for EOR use. Commercial deployment of CCS within 10 to 15 years is possible according to DOE and other stakeholders. But this is contingent on overcoming a variety of economic, technical, and legal challenges. plants have already been demonstrated commercially. For example, ultrasupercritical plants ranging from 600 to more than 1,000 MW have been built or are under construction in Europe and Asia. There are five IGCC plants in operation around the world, including two in the United States. lieu of more efficient coal plants. Some higher efficiency plant designs also face technical challenges in that they require more advanced materials than are currently available. From a legal perspective, most stakeholders reported that making efficiency upgrades to the existing fleet of coal power plants was limited by the prospect of triggering the Clean Air Act’s New Source Review (NSR) requirements. For example, “advanced” ultrasupercritical plants require development of metal alloys to withstand steam temperatures that could be 300 to 500 degrees Fahrenheit higher. In the next decade, the electricity sector could move more towards using natural gas to meet emissions targets. Most stakeholders told us that CCS would increase electricity prices. MIT estimated that plants with post-combustion capture have 61 percent higher cost of electricity. IGCC plants with pre- Combustion Capture (CCS) have a 27% higher cost compared to plants without these technologies, according to DOE. Some utility officials said CCS could lead to a decline in the ability of individual plants to operate reliably because a power plant might need more water. a commercial scale plant. We defined a commercial scale power plant as 500 megawatts (MW) and emitting about 3 millions tons of carbon dioxide (CO) annually. We based this definition on some of the key reports we reviewed, which used 500 MW as a standard power plant. Such a plant would emit about 3 million tons of CO emissions from a power plant can vary based on a variety of factors, including the amount of time that a power Plant is operated. We also reviewed available data on the use of