==================== [1/100] ====================
Summary:
are practicing in hospitals, for-profit health centers, or other settings (see fig. 3). See appendix VI for more detailed information on the results of our survey of facilities. We estimate that almost all physicians practicing on January 1, 1996, whose waivers were processed through federal agencies were practicing in primary care specialties. Overall, more than half of them werepracticing in internal medicine. The other major primary careSpecialties were pediatrics and family practice. One-third of the waiver physicians who had primary carespecialties also had subspecialties. The most prevalent subspecialty was nephrology (medicine concerned with kidney disease) Other subspecialties included infectious diseases, cardiology, and gastroenterology. Requesting facilities and state officials had mixed views on the usefulness of subspecialies for meeting their needs. Some states have policies to not request waivers for physicians who have sub Specialties. In other states, physicians with sub Specialities are not as desirable because they may not remain in the area to practice primary care. waivers come through the states, other agencies do not. This leads to situations where the states are unaware of the level of placements that are occurring. Waivers for physicians also are not well-coordinated with other programs addressing underservice, such as those operated by HHS. When combined with NHSC physicians, federal agencies and states have requested waivers for more physicians than are needed to remove the shortage designations in some states, authors say. They found that for eight states, the number of physicians who received waivers in 1994 and 1995 (or had waivers in process) exceeded the number in service at the end of 1995.  Waiver physicians are practicing in virtually every state; most are primary care physicians. The number of waivers being processed for physicians to practice in underserved areas each year has grown from 70 in 1990, to 1,374 in 1995. In 1996, waiver physicians were practicing in 49 states and the District of Columbia—every state except Alaska. In five states, the number of physicians for whom waivers were processed equaled more than more than 1,000. The degree to which they are relied on to relieve physician shortages varies greatly from state to state. In some cases, a facility made the request and then determined that the physician was no longer needed. In at least one case, it appears that the employer made this determination before the waiver was even granted. Here are examples in which the facility changed its mind: In letters asking USDA to request waivers, the facility asked for a physician to be removed from the facility. In the states we visited, several reasons they were not practicing at the location had to do with changes made by the facility that initiated the request. waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee that the needs of the underserved will be addressed. An area’s underserved may be only a specific part of the population (such as migrant workers or low-income people) Not all federal agencies’ and states’ policies contain requirements or monitoring to ensure that a physician’'s practice includes such groups. For example, if the underserving part of. the population is low- Income, the requesting agencies' and states' policies do not all require. that a waiver physician in such an area accept Medicaid, have a sliding fee scale, or accept anyone for services. have a sliding fee scale, or accept anyone for services regardless of his or her ability to pay. Establishing penalties against a facility for failing to comply with agency policies. The new regulations and the 1996 amendments do not establish any penalties for facilities that fail to comply. In one area where the identified need was care for migrant farm workers, a waiver physician was in a group practice a block away from a federally funded migrant health center. The waiver physician did not impact the center’s patient load because they both served different patient populations. In 1995, about half of the foreign physicians that were supposed to return home were granted waivers of this requirement to practice in an underserved area in the United States. The number of waivers being processed for physicians was greater than the number of NHSC physicians practicing in underserved areas. It was enough to offset about 27 percent of the total physician shortage identified by HHS. In responding to our survey and during our visits to health centers, physician offices, clinics, we asked why facilities want to employ foreign physicians through the use of the waivers. Be a “travesty’ to health care in rural areas if these waiver physicians were not available. Other reasons cited for hiring these physicians are their superior foreign language skills and cultural familiarity with a facility’s patient population. The sudden increase in the number of waivers being processed in 1994 and 1995 probably reflects the fact that facilities had additional places to turn, says Dr. John Sutter, a professor of medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book, “Wage Waivers: The New Science of Medicine.” of physicians for whom waivers were processed equaled more than 75 percent of the number of physicians needed to remove these designations in the state. In other states, such as California, such physicians equal less than 10 percent. More than one-third of physicians who received their waivers through federal agencies are practicing in nonprofit community or migrant health centers. About one-fourth are in a private or group practice. The rest arepracticing in hospitals, for-profit health centers, or other settings program. State and federal health officials said they have been inundated with inquiries from physicians. Some facility officials and physicians reported paying up to $25,000 in immigration attorney or recruiter fees for assistance in matching a physician with a facility and processing the waiver. In addition, officials at several facilities said that they were contacted by professional recruiters or immigration attorneys regarding the availability of a physician to meet their facility’s needs if the physician could obtain a waiver. During our site visits to facilities where this waiver was offered, we found that the waiver was available. Agency officials said that they would like to limit the number of waivers processed by their agencies, but have not found a way of effectively restricting them. The four federal agencies have no formal process for coordinating their waiver requests and they have overlapping jurisdictions. Coordination between the agencies involved in the requests and other programs to address medical underservice is important. For example, not all the agencies processing the waiver requests have expertise in addressing health care issues, the authors say. In USDA, waivers for physicians are processed in the department’s Agricultural Research Service by an office that has experience processing waiver requests. Warrant policies vary considerably between agencies, authors say. This can lead to ‘shopping’ by physicians seeking the most advantageous terms, they say. ARC restricts physicians to practice locations in federally designated Health Professional Shortage Areas, they write. ARC practice in other areas, including designated Medically Underserved Areas, the authors add. They say there is no mechanism for each federal agency to know how many waivers the other has requested to address the physician shortage in an area. Transportation (DOT) has requested waivers for a handful of physicians to practice in one rural area where the U.S. Coast Guard operates. The rapid growth in waivers began in late 1993 and 1994, when the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) began requesting them for physicians to serve their rural and urban constituents. Senior officials at both agencies said that they initially responded to a constituent request to support a specific physician; but their offices were subsequently flooded with requests for waivers for other physicians. underservice in the United States. Federal efforts to address physician shortages are not coordinated among the federal agencies or with the states. Despite some improvements, monitoring efforts to ensure that physicians fulfill the terms of their agreements remain spotty. The rapid growth in waivers for physicians makes this an opportune time for the Congress to reassess what it wants the waiver provision to accomplish. The running disagreement between HHS and other federal agencies about the role of waivers in physician supply is a major problem, authors say. waivers for these physicians fits into the overall federal strategy to address medical underservice. Designating leadership responsibility for managing the program could be given to a single federal agency, such as HHS. Establishing penalties against facilities that fail to comply with requirements of the waiver could be delegated to the states. Directing the entity(ies) managing theprogram) to implement procedures and criteria for the program, for example, could be done through a memorandum of understanding or through a delegated responsibility. care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in that state as of December 31, 1995. We used the shortage area dedesignation level because it is the primary measurement used by HHS and the requesting agencies to establish the need for physicians. We identified instances where physicians did not comply with the terms of the waiver through (1) discussions with the ARC Inspector General and (2) a identified by HHS as needed to remove primary care Health Professional shortage areas from the state. Although physicians with waivers may also practice in designated Medically Underserved Areas, HHS does not remove this designation. number of physicians needed to remove the shortage area designations in the state. Another HHS program with which physician waivers are not well-coordinated with other underservice programs or with waiver requests by other agencies. The problems of overlapping jurisdictions and the lack of information on the practice locations of waiver physicians could result in more physicians practicing in an area than are needed, as identified by HHS. Ensuring that the use of waivers for physicians is a last resort is key to ensuring that the need for a physician is real. case and forwards its recommendations to the INS Commissioner. For waiver requests made by interested U.S. government agencies or states, INS may only grant the waiver if USIA submits a favorable recommendation. While HHS is the federal agency responsible for addressing physician shortages it does not use waivers to do so. HHS endorses the philosophy that exchange visitors return home after completing their training to make their new knowledge and skills available to their home countries. As a result, HHS does not support waivers for physicians to remain in the United States to practice. Another HHS program with which physician waivers are not well-coordinated is the Community Health Center program. This means that federal agencies and states may not know of problems identified by HHS when considering requests from community health centers. For example, waivers were requested through HUD for several physicians to practice at a health center that had its HHS funding discontinued due to financial management problems. HUD officials did not know that HHS had identified problems with the health center. As a result, they could not take those problems into consideration when deciding whether to grant the waivers. agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available funding to operate its program effectively. USDA suggested that an alternative to funding the program from appropriated research funds would be to initiate a fee-for-service type application fee to offset operational costs. We concur that any entity involved in managing waiver requests for physicians should commit adequate resources for oversight and operational support to ensure that the physicians address unmet needs for physician resources. Although we did not examine financing options for managing the waivers in our review, Examine financing options for managing the waivers in our review, we did note that a few states, such as Michigan, have been requiring user fees of up to $500 per application. We also received comments on technical matters from several of the agencies, which we considered in preparing our final report. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, and Transportation, as well as the Director of the United States Information Agency. USIA has proposed regulations to make the waiver requests more consistent. Recent amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act impose additional requirements for waivers obtained through federal agencies. The new regulations, if finalized, and the 1996 amendments could address many of the coordination and compliance problems. But not all of them.violation of the policy receive additional scrutiny to ensure that the problems have been corrected. The growth in the number of waiver physicians has not gone unnoticed by federal agency officials and legislators. They have recently taken actions that could address some of the compliance problems identified. Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs told us that his office had fully reviewed the draft report and was in general agreement with the findings. HHS favored the option of delegating responsibility for the waivers to the states. The three agencies that provided formal written comments also expressed their support for the need for better coordination between the participating agencies, states, and other programs to address medical underservice. One agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available Regional Commission, and the Attorney General. managing the program to implement procedures and criteria for the selection and placement of physicians. We provided a draft copy of this report to seven agencies that are involved with waivers for physicians to practice in underserved areas. ARC, USDA, and USIA provided formal written comments (see apps. VIII, IX, and X). These comments indicate general agreement with our of the facilities that requested such waivers for Physicians. We obtained and analyzed data on requests for waivers for. physicians from USIA and the requesting federal agencies. our survey of states regarding waivers for physicians and follow-up telephone calls to state officials. Our scope did not include waiver requests from VA or requests from other agencies for physicians to conduct research. Because the agencies requesting waivers do not consistently track the practice dates of the physicians, we could not identify the number of physicians in practice at any given point in time. Instead, we used the dates that the agencies and states submitted their requests for waivers to USIA and assumed that those physicians whose waivers were requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the time. elderly, and private and group practices affiliated with both public and for-profit hospitals. To determine the number of waivers for physicians granted at the request of ARC, USDA, and HUD, we requested copies of the agencies’ databases. We used the date that the agencies sent the request to USIA in our calculations because neither USIA nor INS has a cost-effective means of identifying waiver requests by occupation. USIA and INS officials said they recommended or approved virtually all the physician waiver requests made by the interested U.S. government agencies. requirement for physicians requested by interested government agencies and states. USIA and INS officials said that they recommend and approve virtually all waiver requests. Insiders said that refusal of the waiver is extremely rare if USIA has given a favorable recommendation for the waiver. INS officials are not in a position to second-guess USIA or the interested government agency as to whether the public interest would be served if the waiver was granted. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the facility listed in agency data on December 31, 1995, or had their waivers in process to begin practicing shortly thereafter. We used the number of full-time-equivalent physicians identified by HHS as needed to remove primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in the state. We compared this number with the number who received NHSC scholarships or NHSC federal loan repayment in return for practicing in an underserved area. We obtained these data from HHS’ Health Resources and Services Physicians Practicing on January 1, 1996. from NHSC at the time of our review. As shown in table VII.1, the degree to which the identified physician shortage can be offset by the waiver physicians practicing in a state varied between the states. When combined with the NHSC physicians practicing there, the number exceeded the number of physicians needed to remove some states’ primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations. OtherStates’ identified physician needs were not met by these two physician sources. In addition to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions. placements, we cross-tabulated the agency data on waiver requests received by the agencies between 1994 and 1995 by state. We obtained the number of physicians who were NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment recipients who were practicing in each state as of December 31, 1995, from HHS’ Bureau of Primary Health Care. This is a conservative number of NHSC physicians; however, because it does not include the number-time-equivalent physicians practicing in shortage areas, which was not available by state at the time of our review. HHS administers other federal programs, such as NHSC, to address physician shortages in the United States. NHSC supplies physicians and other health professionals to underserved areas primarily by awarding scholarships to students who agree to serve in a shortage area. On December 31, 1995, 848 NHSC physicians and 685 other NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment for each year of service in the shortage area, for a total of 848 physicians. For more information on NHSC's programs, visit www.nhsc.org. a physician never practiced at the intended facility, unbeknownst to the agency processing the request. We estimate that 90 percent completed the minimum employment period required by ARC. On January 1, 1996, over one-fourth (28 percent) were still practicing at the same facility that requested the waiver. Nearly half of these (13 percent) had been there for more than 4 years. We also examined the shorter-term compliance record of all physicians practicing on January 1. 1996, after receiving waivers through federal agencies between 1994 and 1995. ARC minimum contract period at that time, which was 2 years. We used 1.75 years of practice as our measure of compliance to allow for vacation and other leave. At a 95-percent confidence level, the rate of compliance among the 1990 to 1992 requests is at least 80 percent. The percent still at the requesting facility on January 1, 1996, is at at least 19 percent. We counted those physicians who were working for the facility listed in agency data as in compliance as in 1995. Federal agencies and states have different controls to help ensure that physicians comply with waiver agreements. HUD and USDA officials said that they do not have the staff resources to monitor physician compliance. HUD officials also said that their monitoring efforts were limited by the availability of staff resources. Under existing procedures, locating a waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee of success, the authors say. The authors say that the use of waivers to address physician shortages is not authorized or funded as a program, and their agencies do not know how to effectively manage it. not have the resources available to effectively manage it as a program. In its site visits to monitor compliance, ARC’s Inspector General attributed most of the problems identified to the employers. For waivers requested through both federal agencies and states, the applicable federal laws and regulations do not specify penalties against employers that fail to comply with agency policies. ARC tries to address this shortcoming by requiring employers to sign a statement certifying that they will comply with the waiver policy, and applications from employers found to be in violation of the policy receive additional scrutiny. hospital and when USDA officials told him he could not because the hospital was not in a shortage area, the physician broke off contact with them. In the second instance, the facility reported the physician’s firing directly to INS, which revoked his nonimmigrant work status. Six of eight reviews conducted by the Inspector General from 1994 to 1995 found that contrary to agreements, conditions of agreements were not met. The facility official said that he had heard that the physician was pursuing additional graduate medical education in the United States. through (1) discussions with the ARC Inspector General and a review of reports from that office. We also reviewed case files at the requesting agencies and USIA. If a facility indicated that the physician never worked there, we contacted the facility, INS, or both to obtain information on the reason the physiciannever worked there and to confirm that a waiver had been granted. If the physician was supposed to be practicing, we made site visits to facilities where the physicians were supposed to have been practicing, and we also contacted USIA and other agency officials. provided by the federal agencies. For each physician, we asked the contact person to tell us if the physician worked or planned to work at the facility. We received responses for 39 of the 40 physicians in our 1990 to 1992 ARC sample and for for the 1990-1992 ARC sample. We also asked for the physician’s medical specialty, subspecialty, and practice setting, and the date he or she stopped working at a facility. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/cnn-healthcare-reputation-reporter-cnn/2013-01-29/index.html. changed its mind: In letters asking USDA to request waivers for three physicians, a clinic in Illinois said that the physicians were needed to help meet an urgent primary care delivery crises. Six months after one of the physicians began working there, she was terminated because the clinic had determined that it was overstaffed. She is now practicing in another city in Illinois that has an identified shortage of physicians who serve Medicaid patients. The second physician was transferred from the location on the waiver request to another location that has a shortage. A medical group asked HUD to request waivers for three physicians to work at a practice purchased from a retiring physician outside of Atlanta. When we called the practice site, we were told that only one of the three physicians was working there. The third physician was practicing only part-time at the practice sites for which the waiver was requested. He said that because there were not enough patients in that location, he spends about half his time working at the main clinic in Champaign, Illinois. The location on the waiver request to another location that is not in a federally designated shortage area. One physician never worked at the site, one physician worked a brief period and then went to practice at a prison in Michigan. One physician remained to work for the new employer after the practice was sold. INS officials said that waivers had been approved for all three physicians, including the one who was never employed there. Before we notified them, HUD officials were notified of the situation before we did, and HUD officials said they would look into the matter and get back to us in a few days. never employed there. HUD officials were unaware that the facility had been sold and that two of the physicians were not practicing there. We also found instances in which the reason for not meeting the requirements of an agreement resulted from the physician’s actions. For example, in two separate cases, physicians were fired when they refused to complete the requirement for working 40 hours a week at the requesting facility. In one instance, the fired physician notified USDA that he was going to practice at another hospital and when USDA officials told him he could not. The exchange program was authorized in 1948. The 1956 amendment provided for a waiver of the foreign residence requirement on the basis of a request from an interested U.S. government agency. In 1970, participants could no longer meet the 2-year foreign residence requirements by residing in other foreign countries but had to live in the United States for a certain period of time. The language of the House bill was modified other institutions to permit the waiver on the request of an interested government agency in the public interest. requirement before they are eligible to apply for nonimmigrant visas (H and L) There was no 2-year foreign residence requirement or waiver provision in the exchange visitor program authorized with the passage of the U.S. Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948. The act required participants to depart the United States after completing their programs. The requirement and its related waiver provision evolved through a number of legislative changes after the exchange visitors program was authorized in 1948. “the amendment would make perfectly clear ‘I am an immigrant,’” the amendment states. Under the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961, the Director of USIA establishes programs intended to promote mutual understanding. Under these exchange visitor (J-1 visa) programs, designated organizations sponsor nonimmigrant aliens’ temporary visits to the United States for the purposes of teaching, instructing or lecturing, studying, observing, conducting research, consulting, demonstrating special skills, or receiving training. After completing this program, it is expected that participants will return to their home countries and impart what they have learned and experienced to the people of their country. programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August 1995. Only these exchange visitor physicians are subject to the J-visa 2-year foreign residence requirement. Policy changes regarding waivers for exchange visitors will affect more than one-third of the international medical graduates in graduate medical education or training. Most international medical Graduates will not be affected by the changes. Does not include graduates of Canadian medical schools. Medical school type was not listed. Medical schools were not listed in this article. We obtained these data from HHS’ Health Resources and Services Administration. To estimate the number of physicians who completed graduate medical education and training in 1995 who would be subject to the 2-year foreign residence requirement, we subtracted number of exchange visitor physicians who were continuing applicants in the 1995-96 academic year. We also compared number of waivers with number of NHSC physicians practicing in underserved areas on September 30, 1995, including physicians who did not have NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment obligations. number of physicians sponsored by ECFMG in the prior academic year. The number of waiver requests for physicians to practice in underserved areas that the agencies sent to USIA in 1995 (1,374) The total number of exchange visitor physicians with J-1 visas who completed graduate medical education or training who would be required to return home without a waiver to remain in the U.S. in 1995. The total amount of visas issued to exchange visitors to the United States in that year. also reviewed case files at the requesting agencies and USIA to check for documentation, if any, of the physician’s departure from the facility or noncompliance. For physicians that did not work at or left the facilities, we tried to locate the physician through AMA data. Exchange visitors are only a portion of physicians in graduate medical education programs. As shown in table II.1, about 1 in 10 physicians in programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August. For more information, visit the American College of Physicians website. to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions to this report: Sarah F. Jaggar, Issue Area Director, Susan Lawes, Susie Anschell, Julie Rachiele, Evan Stoll, Jerry Aiken, Stan Stenersen, Lisa DeCora, Kathleen Belfi, William J. Carter-Woodbridge. Council on Graduate Medical Education. First Report of the Council, Vols. I and II. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1988. Report: Managed Health Care: Implications for the Physician Workforce and Medical Education. Institute of Medicine. The Nation’s Physician. Workforce: Options for Balancing Supply and Requirements. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Physicians Workforce. The National Academy Press, 1996. The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 334, No. 25 (1996), pp. 1679-83. The Journal of the. American Medical Association, Vol 273, No., 19 (1995), p. 1521-27. Health Care Shortage Areas: Designations Not a Useful Tool for Directing Resources to the Underserved. National Health Service Corps: Opportunities to Stretch Scarce Dollars and Improve Provider Placement. U.S. Information Agency: Inappropriate Uses of Educational and Cultural Exchange Visas. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Healthprofessions for the Twenty-First Century. San Francisco: University of California San Francisco Center for the HealthProfessions, 1995.pp. 1521-27. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past, call (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries upon completion of the education or training for which they came to the United States. U.S. officials were required to issue an annual report to the Congress on participants who had submitted affidavits. The House Committee on the Judiciary “notes the flagrant abuse of the exchange program during the past decade,” it said. It said that the bill seeks to alleviate possible ‘brain drain’ from various countries. of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The list will be available on a daily, weekly, monthly and annual basis. For more information, please visit the Washington Post's website or call (206) 456-6000. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In 1981, USIA asked the Congress to extend the limit up to 7 years for medical doctors to encourage them to study in the United States rather than in a Communist country. The House Committee on the Judiciary questioned USIA officials regarding the likelihood that physicians would be willing to return home after 7 years. The Congress increased the usual permissible duration of stay to7 years, but it imposed additional requirements. Graduate medical education or training participants were required, as a continuing reminder, to furnish annual affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries. The amendments subject physicians seeking waivers through interested U.S. government agencies to some of the same requirements as those sponsored by state agencies. For example, the amendments require such physicians to (1) agree to work for at least 3 years for the health facility named in the application, (2) work in an area designated by the Secretary of HHS as having a shortage of health care professionals, and (3) begin work within 90 days of receipt of the waiver. If the alien physician States with a J-visa or acquiring such status through May 31, 2002. obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the United States. No single agency has management responsibility for use of the waivers to address physician shortages. Because of the lack of coordination, the number of waivers processed for physicians to practice in some states has been more than the amount needed to alleviate the identified physician shortage in that state. USIA reviews the program, policy, and foreign relations aspects of the case and forwards its recommendations to the INS Commissioner. For waivers are being used, see table 1. If the alien physician is otherwise contractually obligated to return to a foreign country, that country’s government must furnish a statement to the Director of USIA that it has no objection to a waiver. If the physician fails to fulfill the contract, he or she must reside and be physically present in the country of his or her nationality or last residence for at least 2 years after departing the United States before becoming eligible to apply for an immigrant visa, for permanent residence, or for any other change of nonimmigrant status. The regulation would condition approval on the physician’s commitment to practice primary care for at least 3 years in a designated Health Professional Shortage Area or a Medically Underserved Area. In the preamble to the proposed regulation, USIA noted that with the entry of USDA and HUD into the waiver process, inconsistency in the administration of waiver requests among the different agencies has created some confusion. To prevent physicians from shopping between agencies, the foreign medical graduate would be required to practice in a shortage area. By 1995, four U.S. government agencies and 23 states were requesting waivers of J-1 visa requirements for physicians. Before 1993, the only agency requesting waivers for a number of physicians to practice in underserved areas was ARC. HUD officials have recently decided to reassess the department’s waiver policy and stopped accepting requests after August 30, 1996, to conduct a review. Health care facility officials, as well as state and federal health officials, said they would like consistency in waiver policies across federal agencies. weak controls mean there is little to deter physicians or their employers from failing to comply if they choose to break these terms. It is unclear whether agencies would devote sufficient resources to effectively monitor compliance. The use of waivers is now a ready means for acquiring physicians, some of whom are being actively marketed by the physicians themselves or placement specialists such as recruiters. The current statute and regulations do not require waivers to be used only as a last resort, the authors say.. Many health care facilities and many health care institutions.experience processing waiver requests for a small number of research scientists. for physicians who have subspecialties. Requests for waivers for physicians with J-1 visas are not coordinated effectively. No single entity is responsible for coordinating practice locations of waiver physicians. HHS, perhaps the most logical candidate for doing so, opposes the way in which the waivers are being used. Because no single entities is responsible, HHS should not be responsible for the waiver program, says Dr. David Gergen, a professor of medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, and a former director of the American College of Obstetric and Gynecology. Disagreement between HHS and other federal agencies about the role of waivers in addressing physician shortages in underserved areas needs resolution. Better coordination and management of the overall effort are needed if it is to be continued. Congress should consider requiring that the use of such waivers be managed as a program. Clarifying how theUse of waivers for these physicians fits into the overall federal strategy. The use of waivers should be considered part of a larger strategy to address medical underservice in the United States. HHS did not submit formal comments by the end of our 30-day comment period. HUD and Justice (the parent department for INS) chose not to provide formal comments. DOT has had limited involvement in waivers for physicians with J-1 visas and did not have comments on the draft report. The Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs (who also also works for HUD) raised no objections to our findings. These comments indicate general agreement with our conclusions and matters for congressional consideration. The Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997, included amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act that create greater consistency among waiver efforts. The amendments strengthen penalty provisions for federally sponsored waiver physicians by prohibiting them from obtaining permanent residence or U.S. citizenship without completing the required 3-year agreement. If they fail to complete the 3- year agreement, they must fulfill the 2-year foreign foreign. If the foreign medical graduate would have to certify that he or she is only requesting a waiver through one agency. complete the 3-year agreement, they must fulfill the 2-year foreign residence requirement. These changes (1) make the waiver conditions much more consistent, which may help to alleviate the confusion cited by agency officials. (2) help to strengthen controls with regard to penalties for waivers requested through federal agencies. While the efforts of the interagency group and enactment of the 1996 amendments should improve coordination of the waiver requests for physicians with J-1 visas, they will leave several problems unaddressed. The 1994 amendments apply only to exchange visitors who were admitted to the United States under a J-visa or acquired J-Visa status before June 1, 1996. Other amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act regarding waivers for physicians with J-1 visas were passed in the 104th Congress. The amendments were included in the Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997. They impose additional requirements for waivers requested by interested U.S. government agencies. They also extend authorization for waivers for aliens entering the U States with a J/Visa or acquiring such status through May. requirement by residing in other foreign countries but had to reside in the countries of their nationalities or their last foreign residences before coming to the United States. This requirement still applies. The 1970 act also established two additional bases for waivers: persecution because of race, religion, or political opinion and statements by the participant’s home countries that they had no objections to the waivers. These bases still apply except that the statement of no-objection waiver is no longer available to participants in graduate medical education or training. medically underserved area/population (MUA/MUP) 29% Whether other state J-1 visa waiver physicians are practicing in the area. 27% Whether physicians under National Health Service Corps (NHSC) obligations are practicing. 85% Whether the facility has tried recruiting in the past without success 0% None of the above factors J- 1 VISA WAIVERS REQUESTED BY U.S. GOVERNMENT AGENCIES 9. Which of the following activities does your state conduct for interested government agencies’ requests for J1 visa waivers for physicians in your state? (check all that apply) How many J-1 visa waivers did your state receive from employers between October 1, 1995 and March 31, 1996? (enter 0 if no applications were received during that time) 112 (total) applications please continue on next page--> ) 5. Based on your current situation, how adequate is the annual limit of 20 state J- 1 visa waivers to meet your state’s needs for physicians under this program? (check one) 6. We require periodic reports by the 6% less than adequate 0% much more than adequate 27% adequate 35% There is no longer an insufficient number of physicians and surgeons in the United States. Amendment of the Immigration and Nationality Act in 1994 established another basis for physicians to obtain waivers of the J-1 visa foreign residence requirement. Under the amendment, up to 20 waivers may be granted at the request of a statedepartment of public health or its equivalent each fiscal year. The law imposed several conditions for state-requested waivers: The alien physician must (1) demonstrate a bona fide offer of full-time employment at INS service centers. and (4) maintain a nonimmigrant status until their 3-year commitment is completed. Physicians who do not fulfill this commitment become subject to the 2-year foreign residence requirement. The U.S. General Accounting Office is conducting a review of J-1 visa waivers for physicians to practice in medically underserved communities. We are sending this questionnaire to all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. You can use the enclosed pre-addressed envelope or send it via FAX on (206) 287-4872. areas that the agencies sent to USIA in 1995 (1,374) is about 64 percent of this figure. To identify characteristics of the physicians who received waivers of the J-1 visa foreign residence requirement, we selected a random sample of 40 from 355 physicians for whom ARC requested waivers between 1990 and 1992. We also obtained comments on the use of waivers for physicians from the survey respondents. We analyzed the practice specialties and practice settings for the 150 physicians who were practicing on January 1, 1996, for the facilities listed on agency data. other NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment were practicing in underserved areas of the country. In addition to NHSC, HHS has other programs to address medical underservice. For example, HHS provides federal grant funding to community health centers that are required to accept all patients regardless of their ability to pay. Begun as an exceptions policy, the number of physicians receiving waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement for J-1 exchange visitors has grown more than tenfold in the past 5 years. whether the public interest would be served if the waiver was granted. “In summary, this Department has viewed the J-1 visa to be a means of sharing advanced medical knowledge and allowing the benefits of training to accrue to the home country.” “The Department does not view waivers as a mechanism to help resolve the problems of shortage areas. Without any overall management of the use of waivers, waiver use can be abused,” says the Department of Health and Human Services. In 1995, over 9,000 foreign physicians with J-1 visas were in the United States for graduate medical education or training. These exchange visitors constituted about one-tenth of all individuals receiving medical education. Each year a few thousand new physicians receive J- 1 visas and enter the United states. These physicians are required to return to their home country (or to their country of last legal residence) for at least 2 years after completion of training. However, they may obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the U.S. Many officials said that their facilities had turned to these physicians because they were unable to recruit U.S. physicians. This procedure, however, does not ensure that the use of waivers for physicians is the option of last resort for areas with physician shortages. In some cases it appears that other qualified physicians are available, but the facility prefers to hire the physicians with J-1 visas. For example, officials from one multispecialty clinic told us that they interviewed several applicants for a specialist physician position, including candidates who were not under J- 1 visas.

ROUGE-1: 74.29, ROUGE-2: 67.33, ROUGE-L: 25.50
BERTScore: 58.89

==============================================
==================== [2/100] ====================
Summary:
Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress Incumbents. in Full time PASPositions. FHFA Nomination Action During the 111. th Congress Incumbent in Full- time Pas Positions. MCC Nomination action During the. 111. th Congress incumbents in full-time PASpositions. OSTP Nomination Action During the 111. th Congress Incumbented in full-Time PAS Pos positions. OPM Nominationaction During the 111. the 111 th Congress OPM nominates the OPM to be the next secretary of state for the U.S. Nominations and Appointments to Independent and Other Agencies Appendix B. Nomination Action by Agency Type, 111 th Congress Appendix C. Agency Abbreviations Independent Agencies ARC—Appalachian Regional Commission BBG—Broadcasting Board of Governors CIA—Central Intelligence Agency CNCS—Corporation. Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111th Congress ARC Nominated Action During the 111 th House of Representatives. Private Investment Corporation OPM—Office of Personnel Management OSC —Office of Special Counsel PC—Peace Corps SBA—Small Business Administration SSA—Social Security Administration SSS—Selective Service System TDA—Trade Development Agency USAID—United States Agency for International Development Executive Office of the President (EOP) CEA—Council of Economic Advisers CEQ—Council on Environmental Quality OMB—Office. of Management and Budget ONDCP— Office of National Drug Control Policy OSTP—Office, Science. and Technology Policy OUSTR— office of U.S. Trade Representative Multilateral Banking Organizations AfDB—African Development Bank AsDB—Asian Development Bank EBRD—European Bank for Reconstruction and Development Development IJC—International Joint Commission, U.S. and Canada IMF—International Monetary Fund Legislative Branch Agencies AC—Architect of the Capitol GAO—Government Accountability Office GPO —Government Printing Office LC—Library of Congress. IJC is the International Joint Commission of the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. IMF is the IMF's legislative branch of the International Monetary Fund. GPO is the Government Printing Office. LC is the Library of Congress' library of records. Regional Commission BBG—Broadcasting Board of Governors CIA—Central Intelligence Agency CNCS—Corporation for National and Community Service CSOSA—Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia DRA—Delta Regional Authority EPA—Environmental Protection Agency FHFA—Federal Housing Finance Agency FMCS—Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service GSA—General Services Administration MCC—Millennium Challenge Corporation NARA—National Archives and Records Administration NASA—National Aeronautics and Space Administration NFAH—National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities NSF—National Science Foundation NBRC—Northern Border Regional Commission ODNI—Office of the Director of National Intelligence OGE —Office of Government Ethics Each nomination action table provides the average "days to confirm" in two ways: mean and median. While the mean is a more familiar measure, the median does not tend to be influenced by outliers. Presenting both numbers is a good way to get a sense of how long it will take to confirm a nominee to a position. For example, a nomination that took an extraordinarily long time might cause a significant change in the mean, but the median would be unaffected. For more information, go to the U.S. Senate website.  appendix A presents a table of all nominations and recess appointments to positions in independent and other agencies. It identifies the agency involved and the dates of nomination. The table indicates if and when a nomination was confirmed, withdrawn, or returned. The mean and median numbers of days taken to confirm a nomination are also provided. But the median would be unaffected. Presenting both numbers is a better way to look at the central tendency of the data. The median would also be unaffected but the mean would be. Congress appear in two tables for each agency, "Incumbents in Full-time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress" and "Nomination Action During the 111th Congress" As noted, some agencies had no nomination activity during this period of time. For most presidentially appointed positions requiring Senate confirmation, the pay levels fall under the Executive Schedule. As of January 2011, pay levels ranged from level I ($199,700) for Cabinet-level positions. of January 2011, ranged from level I $199,700 for Cabinet-level offices to level V ($145,700) for the lowest-ranked positions. An incumbent's name followed by "(A)" indicates an official who was, at that time, serving in an acting capacity. Vacancies are also noted in the first table. The nomination action table provides, in chronological order, information concerning each nomination. It shows the name of the nominee, position involved, date of nomination and date of confirmation. This report explains the process for filling positions to which the President makes appointments with the advice and consent of the Senate. It identifies, for the 111 th Congress, all nominations to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation in 41 organizations in the executive branch. Of these nominations, 92 were confirmed, 14 were returned to the President, and 1 was withdrawn. The length of time a given nomination may be pending in the Senate varies widely. Some nominations are confirmed within a few days, others may not be confirmed for several months.  appendix B provides a table with summary information on appointments and nominations by four agency categories. For each of these categories, the table provides the number of positions, nominations, individual nominees, confirmations, nominations returned, and nominations withdrawn. The table also provides the mean and median number of days to confirm a nomination. Appendix C provides a list of department abbreviations. Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the end of the Obama administration. For more information, visit the White House website. A profile of each agency tracks the agency's nominations, providing information on Senate activity. The profiles also identify, for each agency, positions requiring Senate confirmation, the incumbents in those positions as of the end of the 111 th Congress, and the pay levels of those officials. The Constitution (Article II, Section 2) empowers the President to nominate and, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint the principal officers of the United States. Reports are based on U.S. reports. The act does not apply to positions on multi-headed regulatory boards and commissions or to certain other specific positions which may be filled temporarily under other statutory provisions. In addition, during a presidential transition, the 210-day restriction period does not begin until either 90 days after the President assumes office, or 90 day after the vacancy occurs. During the 111 th Congress, President Barack Obama submitted to the Senate 107 nominations to full-time positions in independent agencies, agencies in the Executive Office of the President (EOP), multilateral agencies, and legislative. for each independent agency nomination confirmed in the 111 th Congress, the number of days between nomination and confirmation ("days to confirm") The mean (average) number of. days taken by the Senate to confirm a nomination to a position covered by this report was 93.1. The median number of Days to Confirm a nominee was 65.5. The agency profiles provide data on presidential nominations and appointments to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation, and Senate action on the nominations. Data on appointment actions during the 111th Congress appear in two tables for each agency. Congress has enacted provisions that restrict the pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances. Under the provisions, if the position falls vacant while the Senate is in session and the President fills it by recess appointment, the appointee may not be paid from the Treasury until the end of the following session of Congress. Because most potential appointees to full-time positions cannot serve without a salary, the President has an incentive to use his recess appointment authority in ways that allow them to be paid. The President has occasionally used the recess appointment power to circumvent the confirmation process. Similar wording was included in annual funding measures for most or all of the previous 50 years. Another recent congressional response to the President's use of recess appointments was the decision to restructure the Senate's longer recesses into a series of shorter recesses divided by pro-recesses. "No money ... shall be paid to any person for the filling of any position for which he or she has been nominated after the Senate has voted not to approve the nomination of said person," the bill says. Department of Justice interpreted law to preclude payment of appointee who is given successive recess appointments to the same position. Recess appointees whose nominations to a full term are subsequently rejected by the Senate may continue to serve until the end of their recess appointment. A provision of the FY2008 Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Act that is still in effect today may prevent them from being paid after their rejection. The provision reads, "Hereafter, no part of any appropriation contained in this or any other Act shall be paid to any person" by the Senate within 30 days before the end of the session and an individual other than the one whose nomination was rejected thereafter receives a recess appointment. A recess appointment falling under any one of these three exceptions must be followed by a nomination to the position not later than 40 days after the beginning of the next session of the Senate. For this reason, the President generally submits a new nomination for the nominee even when an old nomination is pending. These provisions have been interpreted by the Department of Justice to the tables in this report. Under Senate rules, nominations must be returned to the White House if the Senate goes on recess for more than 30 days. The Senate structured its 2010 pre-election break as a series of shorter recesses separated by pro forma sessions. The use of the practice reportedly stemmed from a lack of agreement between the Senate majority leader and the Senate minority leader regarding the disposition of pending nominations over the break. The two sides this week could not agree on which nominees to return and which to keep active. recesses into a series of shorter recesses divided by pro forma sessions. Premised on the notion that the President can be restricted from making recess appointments during a recess that is no more than three days. Beginning in November 2007, the Senate agreed to regularly scheduled pro-forma sessions during periods that would have otherwise been recesses of duration of a week or longer. The Senate did not use the pro- forma session practices during the first session of the 111 th Congress. The Senate historically has confirmed most, but not all, executive nominations. Rarely, however, has a vote to confirm a nomination failed on the Senate floor. Usually, unsuccessful nominations fail to be reported or discharged from committee. Failure of a nomination to make it out of committee has occurred for a variety of reasons, including opposition to the nomination, inadequate amount of time for consideration of the nomination and factors that may not be directly related to the merits of the nominations. The Senate rules provide that "[nominations neither confirmed nor rejected during the session at which they are made shall not be acted upon at any succeeding session without a vote" Much of the Senate confirmation process occurs at the committee level. Committee nomination activity has generally included investigation, hearing, and reporting stages. Hearings provide a public forum to discuss a nomination and any issues related to the program or agency for which the nominee would be responsible. Even where confirmation has been thought by most to be a virtual certainty, hearings have provided Senators and the nominee with opportunities to go on the record with particular views or commitments. A committee may decline to act on a nomination at any point—upon referral, after investigation, or after a hearing. In the second stage, the Senate alone determines whether or not to confirm a nomination. The Senate's scrutiny of a nomination has depended largely on the importance of the position involved, existing political circumstances, and policy implications. Two other factors have sometimes affected the examination of a nominee's personal and professional qualities: whether the President's party controlled the Senate, and the degree to which the President became involved in supporting the nomination. Much of the Senate confirmation process takes place behind closed doors in the Senate. President has cleared the candidate, the nomination is ready to be submitted to the Senate. The selection and clearance stage has often been the longest part of the appointment process. At the end of 2004, in an effort to reduce the elapsed time between a new President's inauguration and the appointment of his or her national security team, the White House began a new process for the selection of national security advisers. The process has been called the "National Security Nominee Selection and Appointment Process (NSCAP)". Congress enacted amendments to the Presidential Transition Act of 1963. These amendments encourage a President-elect to submit, for security clearance, potential nominees to high-level national security positions as soon as possible after the election. A separate provision of law, enacted as part of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, lengthens, during presidential transitions, the potential duration of a temporary appointment by 90 days. Although this provision might give some additional flexibility to an incoming President, it might also lengthen the appointment process for some positions. the appointee may not be paid from the Treasury until he or she is confirmed by the Senate. However, the salary prohibition does not apply (1) if the vacancy arose within 30 days before the end of the session of the Senate; or (2) if a nomination for the office, other than the nomination of an individual appointed during the preceding recess, was pending before the Senate for its advice and consent. The salary prohibition doesn't apply if the Senate rejects a nomination within a certain period of time. who is occupying a position requiring Senate confirmation to perform those tasks. The temporary appointment is for 210 days, but the time restriction is suspended if a first or second nomination for the position is pending. In addition, during a presidential transition, the 210-day period can be extended to a maximum of two years. The President may select any officer or employee of the subject agency who is occupies a position for which the rate of pay is equal to or greater than the minimum rates of pay at the GS-15 level. shall not be acted upon at any succeeding session without being again made to the Senate by the President. In practice, such pending nominations have been returned to the President at the end of the session or Congress. Pending nominations also may be returned automatically to the president at the beginning of a recess of more than 30 days. In the final stage, the confirmed nominee is given a commission, which bears the Great Seal of the United States and is signed by the president. The Senate rule providing for this return is often waived. and is signed by the President, and is sworn into office. The President may sign the commission at any time after confirmation, at which point the appointment becomes official. The Constitution also empowers the President to make a limited-term appointment without Senate confirmation when the Senate is in recess, either during a session (intrasession recess appointment) or between sessions. Recess appointments expire at the end of the following session of Congress. Presidents have made recess appointments in the past, but they have not been confirmed. may also be temporarily filled under the Vacancies Act. A nominee who is hired by the agency as a consultant while awaiting confirmation may serve only in an advisory capacity. Authority to act comes once there is Senate confirmation and presidential appointment, or if another method of appointment, such as a recess appointment or a temporary appointment, is utilized. For further information on these methods, see section entitled " Recess Appointments " and " Temporary Appointment " below. In the second stage, the Senate alone must approve the nominee. Congress has provided limited statutory authority for the temporary filling of vacant positions requiring Senate confirmation. Those pro-forma sessions will keep the White House's nominations alive but also block any recess appointments. Under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, an executive agency position requiring confirmation becomes vacant. It may be filled temporarily in one of three ways: (1) the first assistant to such a position may automatically assume the functions and duties of the office; (2) the President may direct an officer in any agency who is occupying a position requiring Senateirmation to perform that function. opposition party because of their positions in the Senate. Recess appointments have sometimes had political consequences, however, particularly where Senators perceived that such an appointment was an effort to circumvent their constitutional role. Some Senate-confirmed positions may also be temporarily filled under the Vacancies Act. If circumstances permit and conditions are met, the President could give the nominee a recess appointment to the position (see section entitled " Recess Appointments " below). The President would likely consider how it will fare in the confirmation process. consent of the Senate, to appoint the principal officers of the United States, as well as some subordinate officers. Three distinct stages mark the appointment process: selection and nomination, confirmation, and appointment. In the first stage, the White House selects and clears a prospective appointee before sending a formal nomination to the Senate. There are a number of steps in this stage of the process for most Senate-confirmed appointees. For more on this story, go to CNN.com/politics. steps in this stage of the process for most Senate-confirmed positions. Members of Congress and interest groups sometimes recommend candidates for specific PAS positions. In general, the White House is under no obligation to follow such recommendations. In the case of the Senate, however, it has been argued that Senators are constitutionally entitled, by virtue of the advice and advice of their colleagues, to offer their own recommendations. The White House Office of Presidential Personnel is responsible for vetting candidates for the position. The President selects a candidate for the job and the Senate confirms him or her. The President nominates an individual recommended by one or both Senators (if they are from the same party as the President) from that state. If neither Senator is from the President's party, he usually defers to the recommendations of party leaders from the state. Occasionally, the President solicits recommendations from Senators of the opposition party because of their positions in the Senate. For positions located within a state (U.S. attorney, U.s. marshal, and U. S. district judge), the President, by custom, normally nominates a person recommended by the state's Senators. Senators are constitutionally entitled, by virtue of the advice and consent clause, to provide advice to the President regarding his selection. As a practical matter, in instances where Senators perceive insufficient pre-nomination consultation has occurred, they have sometimes exercised their procedural prerogatives to delay or even effectively block consideration of a nomination. During the clearance process, the candidate prepares and submits several forms, including the "Public Financial Disclosure Report" (Standard Form (SF) 278) and the "Questionnaire for National Security Positions" (SF 86) Security Positions" (SF 86), and the White House "Personal Data Statement Questionnaire" The Office of the Counsel to the President oversees the clearance process, which often includes background investigations conducted by the FBI and Office of Government Ethics. If conflicts of interest are found during the background investigation, OGE and the agency ethics officer may work with the candidate to mitigate the conflicts. Once the nomination is ready, it can be submitted to the Senate for consideration. The Senate will vote on the nominee in the coming weeks.

ROUGE-1: 78.62, ROUGE-2: 71.01, ROUGE-L: 22.12
BERTScore: 50.07

==============================================
==================== [3/100] ====================
Summary:
does the U.S. Department of Education’s (Education) data reporting and other information-sharing support and encourage high quality TPPs? We used a variety of methods to examine all three objectives. We reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations; federal internal controls standards; and leading practices for program management. We also conducted a web-based survey of the state entities responsible for overseeing TPPs in all 50 states and the District of Columbia (see below for more information about this survey) Title II of the Higher Education Act requires states and institutions of higher education that conduct TPPs to annually report specific information. States and most colleges or universities that offer TPPs submit the required data using reporting templates developed by Education. Education contracts with a private research organization (Westat) to provide states and colleges and universities with technical assistance in collecting the required information. The agency also compiles and disseminates the information to the public in annual reports, webpages and data spreadsheets. For the statutory reporting requirements, see 20 U.S.C. §§ 1022d-1022f. We conducted our work from March 2014 to July 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit. We analyzed data collected to fulfill Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and Education’s related reports and technical assistance guidance (see below for more information about this analysis) Case study interviews were conducted to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable based for our audit objectives.case study interviews). reporting requirements that they report are not contributing to their oversight activities. Most of the TPPs and K-12 districts and several other stakeholders questioned the usefulness of some Title II data to themselves and other stakeholders. Officials from several TPPs also expressed confusion about the programs. The TPP officials said they have not seen any indication that other stakeholders, such as state and federal regulators or prospective teaching candidates, were using the Title IIData to inform decisions. None of the officials in the six K- 12 school districts we spoke with said they use the Title 2 data when comparing TPP performance or recruiting new teachers. stakeholders. State oversight entities are important potential users of the Title II data, but they reported mixed views about whether the data were useful for their oversight. In our survey, states most frequently reported spending between 21-100 staff hours completing the annual Title II state- level reports. After devoting this time to the task, 5 states said the title II data were “very useful,” 19 said they were ‘moderately useful’ and 5 said they weren’t useful. less than half the states told us that they use the goals and assurances section of the Title II reports. Education officials said they have to continue to collect the current data, due to statutory requirements. According to Education officials, the agency can require states to submit new Title II data elements. But they do not have authority to remove existing data elements that are required by statute, they said. The data provides a robust picture of the demographics of teaching candidates in each state, as well as the number of individuals who complete a program. verify whether states use the process they describe in their Title II reports to identify low-performing programs. According to Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, an agency’s management should provide reasonable assurance of compliance with applicable laws and regulations. Education also agreed with our other three recommendations, stating that the agency would: examine statutorily- defined Title II reporting requirements and make recommendations to Congress to make changes to those requirements. While it finalizes its regulations, Education also plans to work closely with select states to help ensure they comply with Title II requirements related to identifying low- performing TPPs. The current Title II data requirements may be of limited use in helping to improve the quality of TPPs. Education has not taken steps to evaluate whether any of them should be eliminated. Each state collects Title II information from colleges and universities that offer TPPs in the state and submits information about TPPs and some information about state oversight processes to Education annually. For example, they report the number and demographics of teaching candidates enrolled in and completing TPPs, and the demographics of those who complete them. and demographics of teaching candidates enrolled in and completing TPPs. As described below, states, TPPs, and other stakeholders often reported to us that, while they may use some data elements, others are not useful. This difference between the Title II information states and colleges and universities are required to report about TPPs and the information they ultimately use to make decisions is contrary to leading practices for data-driven management, we say. We conclude that measures should be selected based on their relevance and ability to inform decisions by key stakeholders. Few states reported using the data to inform state funding decisions or to provide information to school districts that are hiring teachers from TPPs. 25 states said the data were “neither useful nor not useful,” “slightly useful” or “not useful.” Less than half the states told us that they use the Title II data to help with state agency discussions about proposed TPP requirements. Nearly every state reported some cases where certain requirements may not be helpful. For example, less than half of the states said they use them to inform the approval process. Education permits states to report some Title II data in different ways to account for their differing approaches to overseeing TPPs and the differing structures of the TPPs themselves. This affects the consistency and clarity of the data that Education ultimately disseminates. States may use different definitions of alternative route TPPs when reporting information such as the number received excellent technical assistance. States and TPPs also noted remaining challenges, such as how to interpret the Title II requirements within the context of each state or TPP’s specific circumstances. Education administers several competitive grant programs that provide funding for TPP reforms. Education published a notice of proposed rulemaking, which among other things, proposed to modify the The proposed rule was available for Title II reporting requirements through February 2, 2015. Several states and TPPs with whom we spoke praised Education’s efforts to facilitate the Title II submission process, noting particularly that they have received excellent technical assistance when they have questions about the Title 2 reporting system. The largest of these competitive grants is focused specifically on comparisons across TPPs or obtain a national picture regarding TPP completers. II data in published spreadsheets and on its website does not include clarifications about potentially inconsistent data elements. Education officials told us they did not include such explanatory material in these other formats because they considered the explanations in the previous annual report to be sufficient. However, these officials also noted that the agency may consider adding such material in the future. By not providing the explanatory material, the data may be potentially misleading and make it difficult for users to compare across states or programs. In addition, it may be difficult to compare the data across states and programs. Title II reporting requirements and make recommendations to Congress to remove or revise requirements, as warranted. identify potential limitations in the Title II data and disclose such limitations in its reports, websites, and data tables. enhance information-sharing about TPP quality within Education and relevant state agencies. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of the Department of Education, and other interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. In our survey, 27 states reported taking steps to modify the process for identifying low-performing TPPs. California reported modifying its process for approving TPPs to assess alignment with new K-12 standards. No states reported identifying a TPP as low- performing during the 2013-2014 academic year. States also used modified licensing tests designed to assess individual teaching candidates’ preparation for the new K/12 standards, according to officials from the companies that develop the tests. The Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium standards are commonly used standards for TPP quality and were designed to align with the Common Core State Standards. our five case study states offered TPPs information about the standards using various approaches. Most states reported that they modified their oversight activities to verify that TPPs were aligning with new K-12 standards. 34 states reported deliberately modifying their TPP approval process to assess such alignment. Three states reported inviting TPPs to K- 12 conferences that discussed the new standards. Officials in one of those states said that this approach allowed them to foster communication and coordination amongK-12 districts and TPPs.. K-12 standards, according to officials from the companies that develop the tests. All 14 TPPs we interviewed made changes that ranged from large-scale reforms to more modest modifications. The changes ranged from increasing subject-matter knowledge, modifying coursework and adding more questions that measure teaching candidates’ ability to teach non-fiction texts. For example, one state added questions that address how to help hypothetical K- 12 students understand complex subject- matter information. The tests are used by 43 states. States are also responsible for adopting academic content standards for K-12 students. To address concerns about inadequately prepared students, all states are now using or developing academic standards that are explicitly tied to college and career preparation. In 2010, the Council of Chief State School Officers and the National Governors Association spearheaded the effort to help states develop common college- and career-ready standards. As of the beginning of the 2014-15 academic year, 44 states and the District of Columbia were using the Common Core Standards. basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To identify how states oversee TPPs, modified their practices in response to new K-12 standards. We surveyed state oversight entities from all 50 states and the District of Columbia, achieving a 100 percent response rate. The survey used self-administered, electronic questionnaires that were posted on the Internet. We sent the survey to the official responsible for submitting each state’s Higher Education Act Title II data and Department of Education information about TPPs. to evaluate TPP performance) and to reflect different types of college- and career-ready K-12 standards. As part of these case studies, we reviewed state documents and interviewed officials from the state oversight agency. In total, we interviewed 14 TPPs. We ensured that this non-generalizable sample of TPPs varied in a number of ways including whether they were located within or separate from colleges and universities. We also ensured that the TPPs represented a range of sizes and urban, suburban and rural areas. Officials from five TPPs said the new K-12 standards led them to start or expand courses on teaching techniques that are subject-matter specific. Officials from half of the TPPs acknowledged the difficulty of training new teachers in real classroom settings. Several TPPs we spoke with said that they planned to make further modifications to their programs as states continue to implement the new standards. For example, one TPP that made a number of modifications to its program recently surveyed faculty and administrators to evaluate its efforts and identify ongoing needs. Officials from 11 of 14 TPPs described changing coursework or coursework requirements to ensure that teaching candidates had sufficient subject-matter knowledge to teach to the new K-12 standards. Officials from a few TPPs stated that some academic departments were more receptive to modifying their curriculum than others, due to department priorities or other factors. For example, one TPP began offering courses that were co-taught by subject-area and TPP faculty. The three TPPs that did not make such changes were graduate-level programs or otherwise required teaching candidates to obtain a bachelor’s degree. 22 states reported using fewer sources of information for alternative route TPPs compared to traditional TPPs. States more commonly reported using information about the effectiveness of graduates teaching in public schools within their state versus information about those teaching in private schools or in other states. Some alternative routeTPPs may not include a student teaching requirement, so information about student teachers’ performance would not be relevant for making approval decisions. One of the top teacher- producing states defines some TPPs as traditional TPP’s that most states would consider alternative route. Some states reported not having a process for identifying low-performing TPPs, as required under the Higher Education Act. States are required to conduct an assessment to identify low- performing TPPs in the state and provide Education with an annual list of such programs and any programs at risk of being placed on the list. One state explained that the requirements for alternative route and traditional TPPs are different because the requirements are set by state regulations. Some alternative TPPs may be approved through other mechanisms, according to one state. Two states did not describe a process to identify low-performing programs in their most recent Title II reports. Education officials also said that Education does not verify that states are in fact implementing the procedures they describe in their reports. If states are failing to comply with the federal requirement to conduct an assessment, struggling TPPs may not receive the technical assistance they need. Potential teaching candidates or hiring school districts will have difficulty identifying strugglingTPPs. This may impact the quality of training provided to new teachers and result in their being inadequately prepared to educate children. possible that all TPPs are meeting states’ performance criteria and do not merit a low-performance designation, states are still required to conduct an assessment. Officials from two other states told us that they are developing or planning to develop a new process for identifying low- performing TPPs, but do not have a process in the interim. Education does not verify whether states use the process they describe in their report. Education officials told us they are expected to use the previous process until the new one is implemented. being inadequately prepared to educate children. The majority of states (43) reported to us that they had a process for identifying low-performing TPPs. The most common criteria they used to identify low- performing TPPs were failure to meet the state’s TPP or teaching standards and denial or conditional approval during the state approval or renewal process. As states shifted to new K-12 standards, most reported taking steps to help TPPs prepare prospective teachers to teach lessons aligned with the new standards. at risk of being placed on the list. States have flexibility in the criteria they use to identify low-performing TPPs, but are required to describe those criteria to Education as part of their annual Title II reports. Education Act requires that states provide them with technical assistance. Of the 6 states that identified low- performing TPPs in 2013 or 2014, all reported in our survey that they provided technical support and informed the TPPs of their status. Most also publicized this status and increased their monitoring of theTPPs. in our survey told us they believed their other oversight procedures are sufficient to ensure quality. For example, officials in 2 of the 7 states that reported they do not have a process to identify low-performing programs. While it is possible that all TPPs are meeting states’ performance criteria, it is not necessary to ensure that all are performing sufficiently, the report says. The report also says that the report does not suggest that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has done enough to ensure the quality of its programs. competitive grants. Education does not have mechanisms in place to promote regular, sustained information-sharing among these offices. Education formerly convened a teacher quality workgroup on a regular basis that included staff in other offices and programs. Education officials in one office that administers competitive grants related to TPP quality described discussing grant results internally, but did not systematically discuss TPP quality with staff in another office or program. The agency and its Title II contractor occasionally create custom Title II data runs for Education program offices, but there is no systematic effort to share Title IIData within the agency. a teacher quality workgroup on a regular basis that included opportunities to share information across the agency regarding issues related to TPP quality. Education officials noted that such workgroups, particularly when operating out of high-level offices in the agency, have been very helpful for systematically sharing information across offices. The teacherquality workgroup has been inactive since the office in which it was housed reorganized in the fall of 2014. This represents a missed opportunity to use relevant information to bolster the effectiveness of several Education programs. to bolster the effectiveness of several Education programs, such as Race to the Top and Supporting Effective Educator Development. Federal internal controls standards emphasize that effective information-sharing efforts are those that flow broadly across an agency in a form that is helpful for those who need it to carry out their responsibilities. Without such mechanisms to promote information- sharing, programs and offices within Education may not have access to clear and useful information about TPP quality. Furthermore, Education’s efforts to support or enhance TPP quality reach a limited number of states. Education has made few efforts to share expertise about TPP quality among its offices. Education’s approach is not consistent with federal internal control standards. Without such an approach, Education may be missing opportunities to support state efforts to enhance TPP quality. For example, states may be unaware of information about good practices for TPP quality that could assist them in their oversight. The recent shift to college- and career- ready K-12 standards further highlights the importance of such programs. TPPs serve a vital role in preparing new teachers and K- 12 students for future success. In September 2014, Education selected 24 partnerships, including TPPs and partnering school districts, to receive a combined $35 million in Teacher Quality Partnership grant funds. The grants are intended to improve teacher preparation primarily for science, technology, engineering, and math teachers. The Transition to Teaching grant program also provides grants to recruit and retain teachers in high-need schools and encourage the development and expansion of alternative route TPPs. Aside from these two grant programs, applicants for grants from the Race to the Top Fund, applicants for grants from the Race to the Top Fund, Investing in Innovation Fund, and Supporting Effective Educator Development program may also choose to develop proposals related to teacher preparation programs and activities. All states reported that they review traditional TPPs before approving them to prepare new teachers and may renew approval on a periodic basis. For example, investing in Innovation grants funded 25 projects related to TPPs out of the 143 projects the program has funded during fiscal years 2010-2014. To do this, nearly all states reported they review TPP program design and data about the program. quality reach a limited number of states. Education is missing opportunities to support states that could use relevant research. Gaps in the agency’s efforts to disseminate information result from information-sharing gaps, the authors say. The authors say the federal government needs to do more to help states improve their teacher preparation programs and prepare teachers for the classroom. They say the U.S. education system needs to focus on the quality of teachers rather than just the quantity of teachers in schools. The report is the result of a two-year, $1.5 million grant from the National Education Association. effort on collecting information that is unlikely to improve TPP quality. If Title II reports do not include important limitations on how the data should be used, policymakers and practitioners could draw incorrect conclusions based on the data. Without increasing information-sharing within the Department and with states, Education may miss opportunities to disseminate information. We provided a draft of the report to the Department of Education for review and comment. Education agreed with our four recommendations and anticipates that its final regulations will guide the final regulations. The objectives of this study were to answer the following questions: (1) How do states oversee teacher preparation programs (TPP) What are states and select TPPs doing to prepare new teachers for new K-12 standards? To what extent does the U.S. Department of Education’s (Education) data reporting and data collection play a role in this study? If you have any questions about this report, please contact me at (617) 788-0534 or EmreyArrasM@gao.gov. how states oversee teacher preparation; the steps that states and TPPs have taken in response to new K-12 standards; and, state and TPP views about Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. We conducted case studies of five states: Arizona, California, Maine, Tennessee and Virginia. We selected this non-generalizable sample of states because they represent a variety of sizes and approaches to overseeing TPPs. We reviewed select state Title II reports; Education’s reporting templates for the state reports and institutional and program reports. study states and 7 of the 14 TPPs we spoke to said that collecting this type of data is difficult. For example, state oversight offices or TPPs would need to obtain key information about TPP graduates from local districts. Officials in one of our case study states noted that it was especially challenging to obtain data on teachers who work in another state or in private schools. As shown in figure 2 above, states noted it was difficult to obtain information about teachers who worked in other states or who were private. we conducted interviews with a wide range of stakeholders including Education officials and contractors. We also conducted case studies in 5 states. In each of these states we interviewed officials from state oversight entities, officials from two or three TPPs, and officials in at least one K-12 school district. Finally, we analyzed data collected to fulfill data collection to fulfill the goals of the study. The study was published in the Journal of Education Policy and Practice, a peer-reviewed journal published by the Association of American Publishers. As of the 2014-2015 academic year, at least 10 additional states reported that they planned to begin using graduate effectiveness information or expand their current use of such information. Officials in Tennessee told us that they currently review some effectiveness data in their approval process. Officials from 3 of our 5 case study states and 7 of the 14 TPPs we spoke said they reported challenges collecting information on graduates’ effectiveness. The impetus behind adding this new data is to better align the state’s TPP quality standards with recommended requirements presented by CAEP. “Pre-service assessments” could include evaluations of candidates’ performance as student teachers. More than half of states reported that they also review certain information about graduate effectiveness when assessing TPPs for approval or renewal. States that incorporate this information reported doing so. The wording of the original survey question has been modified for brevity and to remove technical terminology. See the related e-supplement, GAO-15-599SP, for the original language and for information about the teaching candidate data that states used as part of their approval process. or renewal. States that incorporate this information reported doing so in several ways. Most commonly, 30 states reported using surveys that assessed principals’ and other district personnel’s satisfaction with recent traditional TPP graduates. Fifteen states reported assessing traditional TPPs based on other outcomes data such as the test scores (i.e., K-12 student assessment results) of public school students taught by recent TPP graduates (see fig. 2). For example, one of our case study states uses such data to help TPPs identify potential problem areas in the training they provide to teaching candidates. enrolled and these definitions may range from when a teaching candidate first takes a course to after they have completed other requirements such as a certain sequence of courses. One large online TPP defines most of its teaching candidates as enrolled in the state where the TPP is headquartered, even though they live throughout the country and most likely plan to teach in other states. The Title II report lists that state as one of the nation’s top teacher-producing states, while state officials told us that in fact the state faces teacher shortages. TPPs prepare teaching candidates to employ effective teaching techniques and gain real-world experience in the classroom. TPPs take many forms and may be operated by a variety of organizations. State oversight responsibilities related to TPPs may be held by one or more state agencies. States have discretion in how they conduct oversight of TPP quality. The structure of TPPs can vary widely, from “traditional” TPPs such as four-year undergraduate programs with student teaching requirements, to “alternative route’ TPPs. reported that they review TPP program design and data about candidates before approving them to prepare new teachers. More than half also use one or more types of information to assess graduates’ effectiveness as teachers. States also reported that they typically for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP)—for at least some traditional TPPs. These results are based on our survey of all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In some instances, the wording of the original survey question has been modified. of subject matter knowledge. States may use teams made up of peers from other TPPs, state staff, national accreditation organization staff, or a combination. 43 states reported that they consider information collected by an external TPP accreditation. organization for at least some of their programs. 41 states said they typically reviewed program design for traditional TPPs by reviewing syllabi or other course material, and interviewing TPP faculty or staff. For more information, visit the National Education Association’s Teacher Preparation Council website. who complete a program. Education officials told us they have not conducted a study to inform Congress or the agency about whether any current reporting requirements are not useful. Education has an incomplete picture of the usefulness of various data fields, the authors say. States and colleges and universities will continue submitting data a process for assessing whether any teacher preparation programs are low-performing, they say. The authors say Education should identify potential limitations in the Title II data and consistently disclose these limitations in reports, websites, and data tables. responsible for submitting each state’s Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. We reviewed state responses and followed up by e-mail or telephone with select states for additional clarification and obtained corrected information for our final survey analysis. We also published survey responses in an e-publication supplemental to this report, “Teacher Preparation Programs: Survey of State Entities that Oversee Teacher Preparation programs” (GAO-15-599SP, July, 2015). The quality of survey data can be affected by nonsampling error. Nonsampling error includes variations in how respondents interpret questions, respondents’ willingness to offer accurate responses, and data collection and processing errors. In developing the Web survey, we pretested draft versions of the instrument with state officials in four states and consulted with officials from the Department of Education to check the clarity of the questions and the flow and layout of the survey. We included steps in developing the survey, and collecting, editing, and analyzing survey data, to minimize such nonsampling errors. key contributions to this report were: Deborah Bland, Kate Blumenreich, Joanna Chan, Sarah Cornetto, Holly Dye, Kirsten Lauber, Ashley McCall, Sheila McCoy, Jennifer McDonald, John Mingus, Mimi Nguyen, and Tom James. For more on this story, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For the latest on CNN iReport, visit the site here. For other stories, visit CNN.co/soulsmart.

ROUGE-1: 73.53, ROUGE-2: 66.78, ROUGE-L: 25.71
BERTScore: 61.24

==============================================
==================== [4/100] ====================
Summary:
For example, an operating room nurse assigned to a forward surgical team in Iraq had an unexpected medical situation and was evacuated out of theater. It was critical that this personnel requirement be filled in a timely manner. Theater officials requested a replacement, but the individual identified as a replacement could not deploy for at least 30 days. Task Force Task Force recognized the high priority need for a forward medical team to have an operating rooms nurse. The team was able to fill the position in a matter of days. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade identified an operating room nurse that it could borrow from another unit in theater until the replacement arrived. After the replacement nurse arrived in theater, the nurse on loan returned to the unit the individual came from. Personnel gaps that occur in theater cannot always be prevented and when gaps do occur, theater commanders assess the risk associated with the gap and decide on an appropriate course of action. Cross-leveling in particular requires the assessment of Cross-Leveling in particularly requires the Assessment of Backfilling involves the identification and deployment of medical personnel into theater from the United States or elsewhere. Cross-leveling involves deploying medical personnel who were not originally scheduled to deploy overseas at that time. For example, a dentist assigned to a brigade combat team in southern Iraq was evacuated out of theater for medical reasons. Given the backlog of needed dental work, commanders expressed concern about losing a dentist. In response, Army Forces Command initiated an effort to identify and deploy medical personnel from the U.S. and elsewhere. Cross-leveling involves the temporary relocation of personnel from one unit in theater to another. It is often used as an interim measure to minimize risk when a gap in medical personnel coverage occurs. For example, an operating room nurse assigned to a forward unit may not be able to perform her duties. DOD officials told us that selecting and deploying an active component medical provider to backfill a position typically takes about 45 days. The Army Forces Command initiated an effort to identify another dentist not in Iraq who was eligible to deploy to fill this need. Cross-leveling can present risk to medical operations in theater, especially when conducted on a recurring basis. Army officials told us that they are willing to accept some risks in order to mitigate other risks they believe are higher. "We recognize that risk cannot be eliminated; it can only be managed," said 1st Medical Brigade commander, Lt. Gen. James C. "Jim" Ritchie. "Cross- leveling in particular requires the assessment of risk associated with the personnel gap and the gap that would be created" The 9l5th Forward Surgical Team was authorized to deploy to Iraq in September 2009 with three general surgeons. Instead, it deployed with only one surgeon for the first 90-day rotation. The Army Reserve identified a doctor to fill one of the two vacancies; however this individual could not deploy due to an inability to be credentialed as a general surgeon. As a result of the personnel gaps, Task Force Task Force is trying to retain medical personnel.medical personnel and help retain them—has presented some challenges for the Army. As a result of the personnel gaps, Task Force 1st Medical Brigade temporarily relocated medical personnel already in theater from other medical units. Army data show the magnitude of these unfilled gaps or late arrivals for the reserve components ranged from about 3 percent to 7 percent from January 2008 to July 2010. About 4 percent of mobilized troops were missing medical personnel, Army data showed. The 915th Forward Surgical Team was temporarily relocated so it could meet its mission. The team was based at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center. About 4 percent of mobilized Army reserve component 90-day medical rotators did not deploy to theater or arrive in theater on time for 2008. In 2009, that figure reached 7 percent (38 medical providers out of 519) and through the first 6 months of 2010, this figure was over 3 percent. Unfilled reserve component personnel requirements can have serious consequences depending on the needed medical specialty. Medical commanders in theater typically cross-level to fill short-term temporary personnel gaps, although medical officials in needs arose. It can take 120 to 180 days to identify, notify, and then mobilize an Army reservist to fill an unfilled requirement. The Army’s 90-day rotation policy is intended to ease the financial burden of deploying reserve medical personnel and help retain them. It can be challenging to fill the gap before the start of the next 90- day rotation. To mitigate other risks they believe are higher, the Army is taking steps to mitigate the risk of injury or death to reservists. DOD has established five levels of medical care to treat injured or sick military personnel. Each level provides progressively more intensive treatment. Level 3 facilities provide significant preventative and curative health care. Level 4 – Overseas definitive care provides the full range of preventative, curative, and preventative care for wounded soldiers and sailors. Service at the end of July 2010. Service in Iraq and Afghanistan began in 2003. Service is in Iraq, Afghanistan, and the United States. Service ends in December 2010. distances to better save lives. Splitting medical units, such as level 3 combat support hospitals and level 2 forward surgical teams, in order to locate them in more areas increases the opportunities to provide advanced emergency care quicker and could save more lives. DOD has stated that by providing advanced life-saving emergency medical care quicker, generally within 60 minutes of injury, survival rates increase significantly. In fact, the number of surgical sites has increased due to the emphasis on providing troops access to surgical care within 60 Minutes of being injured. 2 illustrates the different levels of medical care that may be provided to U.S. servicemembers who become ill or injured while in theater. Level 1 – First responder care. Care can be provided by the wounded soldiers, medics or corpsmen, or battalion aid stations. Level 2 – Forward resuscitative care. This level provides advanced emergency medical treatment as close to the point of injury as possible to attain stabilization of the patient. In addition, it can provide treatment of common acute minor illnesses. Level 4 provides the full range of preventative, curative, acute, convalescent, restorative and rehabilitative care. An example of a level 4 facility is Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany. Level 5 – U.S. definitive care. This level provides the same level of care as alevel 4 facility, but most typically is located in the continental United States. Examples include Walter Reed Army Medical. Center in Washington, D.C.; National Naval Medical Center. in Bethesda, Maryland. Not all patients progress through all five levels of care. Joint and service definitions for each level of care vary marginally. For purposes of this report, we focused primarily on level 2 and level 3 facilities and their personnel. The U.S. command structure in Iraq and Afghanistan has evolved over time. In 2009, the designation of level 2 was established. The designation was changed to level 3 in 2011. The level 2 facilities provide the most comprehensive and advanced medical care in Iraq, the report says. and the degree to which current practice of splitting medical units has filtered into medical doctrine has been limited. Army planners have adjusted medical personnel requirements for forward surgical teams to account for changes in these smaller nonstandard medical unit reconfigurations. The Army would benefit by fully updating the organization of medical units concerning their size, composition and use, as applicable, to incorporate current practice, the authors say. They note that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from the commanders, and we noted in our report the Army Medical Department Center and School has updated its forward surgical team field manual. Officials with the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade told us that they were concerned about outdated policies, guidance, doctrine, and field manuals related to the determination of medical personnel requirements. The medical brigade’s report also went on to note that personnel with these smaller combat support hospitals are spread so thinly that when personnel take leave or are evacuated out of theater due to injury, the medical brigade has to make difficult decisions on where to find needed personnel to mitigate coverage gaps. As such, they now have to continuously use what is referred to as specialized personnel documents to manage staffing rather than staff. Report, the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade—the medical unit that provided oversight over medical units in Iraq before being replaced by Task Force 807th Medical Brigade. Report: The organization for combat support hospitals, including the list of needed medical specialties, should be redesigned to reflect the actual use of combat support hospital across multiple locations. Officials with the U.S. Forces-Iraq Surgeon Office told us in a separate interview that medical doctrine, specifically that of the Army, is not to be changed. The Army has not fully incorporated these current practices into Army doctrine and organizational documents. Army could benefit from incorporating its lessons learned, where appropriate, and be better assured the current practice of splitting medical units does not lead to unnecessary staffing challenges. When medical personnel gaps unexpectedly arise in Iraq or Afghanistan, Army units are better able to achieve their goal of providing advanced emergency medical care within 60 minutes of injury to increase survival rates. The Army maintains a lessons learned program to update Army doctrine to enhance the Army’s preparedness to conduct current and future operations. 60 minutes of injury, survival rates increase significantly. Studies show that for those severely injured or wounded, 90 percent do not survive if advanced medical care is not provided within 60 minutes. Medical officials in Iraq acknowledged that Army doctrine and the organizational design of medical units were top issues. For example, in a December 2009 Mid-Tour Report, the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade—the medical unit that treats the wounded in Iraq— acknowledged that it needed to be updated to better reflect the current practice of splitting medical units. told us in a separate interview that medical doctrine, specifically the organizational design for both personnel and equipment, should be assessed and updated. These officials said that the splitting of combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams has gained acceptance over time but should be examined given how counterinsurgency doctrine is implemented in Iraq. Officials with the Surgeon Office in Iraq said that flexibility in the doctrine is critical, but that doctrine needs to reflect the realities of operations on the ground and the degree to which current practice of splitting medical teams is accepted. Army doctrine, which is the starting point for defining and planning a unit’s capabilities, has not been updated fully to reflect these changes in theater. Army theater commanders have reconfigured the composition of field hospitals and forward surgical teams by breaking them down into smaller stand-alone units. By being in more geographical areas, these critical life-saving medical units are better able to achieve their goal of providing advanced emergency medical care.areas to save lives. For example, as of December guidance could have if there were a sizeable increase in the number of DOD deployed civilians. DOD has also had to adjust the number and mix of medical personnel in those units as well. Army medical officials have been developing specialized personnel documents to staff these medical units. The process is difficult and it came about because current doctrine and organizational design were not sufficient to address the capabilities needed for splitting medical units such as combat support hospitals and area support medical companies. Although the Armymedical officials we spoke with said that they believe splitting and reconfiguring units in theater is necessary and helps to increase survival rates. As of December 2009 the Task Force 28th Combat Support Hospital in Iraq was split to be at three separate sites in Iraq. Theater medical commanders split these units because they found that the field hospital’s standard design configuration was no longer suitable for the model of care that has evolved in Iraq, which requires access to more advanced medical care. Splitting medical units, such as the U.S. Army's Medical Corps, can help save lives by providing care over a wider geographical area. their size, composition and use, as applicable, to incorporate current practices of splitting and reconfiguring deployed medical units in theater. DOD also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense and appropriate DOD organizations. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604. DOD used the emergent force management process extensively to meet requirements through requests for forces. Requests for forces are generated by combatant commanders and submitted to the Joint Staff for validation, and then to the joint and service force providers to identify potential sourcing solutions. While emergent requirements are not known in advance, requirements are prioritized according to a force allocation decision model. In sourcing requests through theEmergent process, requirements were prioritized based on the force allocation model. The emergent process was used to meet the needs of U.S. military units that were not known to be in existence in advance. to a force allocation decision model. emergent requirements are considered within the model’s general framework. Each request for forces is individually evaluated as it is received, meaning that officials focus on whether or not forces are ready and available to fill the request. As part of providing and evaluating potential solutions, the services’ force providers often conduct risk assessments to provide information on the availability and readiness of both active and reserve forces. The Global Force Management Boards for rotational requirements consider the relative priority of the request, as is done at the Global Force management boards. its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For the rotational force management process, requirements are identified 2 years in advance. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, medical. personnel and unit requirements are included in the Global Force Management Allocation Plan. The plan provides an approach for U.S. Central Command, the services, and the services’ force providers to manage the sourcing of. rotational requirements, such as the Balad Theater Hospital in Iraq or a combat support hospital in Afghanistan. facilitated through Global Force Management Boards, which are typically held on a quarterly basis. The product of these Global Force management boards is the Global Forcemanagement Allocation Plan, a document that is approved by the Secretary of Defense. The plan lays out known requirements, review and endorse sourcing recommendations and associated risk and risk mitigation options, and then to prioritize and meet the requirements as appropriate. It authorizes force allocations, and the plan is the product of a quarterly meeting of general officers from interested parties. organizations and offices we contacted, see table 1. We conducted this performance audit from August 2009 through January 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Defense (DOD) uses its Global Force Management process to meet its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For more information, visit the Defense Department’s website at: http://www.dod.mil/. DOD directive and theater guidance differ with regard to their eligibility for routine medical care. Theater guidance for Iraq and Afghanistan states that DOD civilians are eligible for emergency care but most routine care for them is subject to availability. Medical officials in Afghanistan told us that they provide routine care to U.S. federal civilians on a space-available basis, and that they would not turn away any person with injuries that presented a danger to life. The previous version of DOD Directive 1404.10 indicated civilians designated as emergency essential employees would be eligible for care at the same scope provided to military personnel. It is unclear what level of care deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. A DOD directive governing medical care for DOD deployed civilians is inconsistent with in-theater guidance. DOD relies on its own deployed civilians to carry out or support a range of essential missions. With each new mission, the need for new civilian skills has resulted in an increase in the number of deployed civilians and that these civilians are in need of medical care. In response to congressional interest, DOD reviewed the department’s existing policies for medical care and reported to Congress. any person with injuries that presented a danger to life, limb, or eyesight, regardless of the employment status of an individual. This issue has received continuing congressional interest. For example, in April 2008 the House Armed Services Committee issued a report on deploying federal civilians and addressed the medical care provided to them when they are wounded, ill, or injured while in a war zone. Furthermore, DOD’s report to Congress on deployed DOD civilians stated that the department believes it is imperative that each federal civilian understands where, when, and how they can receive medical care. The extent of routine medical care available to DOD deployed civilians is unclear due to inconsistent guidance. Theater commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan are providing quicker access to advanced emergency medical care by placing more medical units in more geographical areas to save lives. Inconsistent guidance could potentially impact the medical personnel requirements planning process if medical officials in theater are uncertain about deployed DOD civilian employees’ access to routine care. The Army official agreed that if there is an inconsistency between departmental guidance and theater guidance, it should be examined. at the same level and scope provided to military personnel. In addition, we found that the theater guidance document for care in Afghanistan provided additional guidance that is inconsistent with both the DOD directive and with guidance provided elsewhere in the document. One section of the guidance stated routine care for all civilians was to be provided subject to availability. The other section said routine care would be provided for deployed DOD civilians in accordance with a previous issuance of DOD guidance. We found that this guidance was inconsistent with the previous DOD directive. With each new mission, the need for new civilian skills have resulted in an increase in the number of deployed civilians. These civilians are not immune to the dangers associated with contingency operations. Although we did not learn of any deployed DOD civilians being turned away from receiving routine care in theater during the time of our review, officials in theater said it could be a concern. Theater medical officials would assess the impact of any increase on the planning process for determining medical personnel requirements. However, if theater officials concluded that they needed more medical personnel due to increases in numbers of DOD deployed civilians, we recognize that. the medical needs of deployed civilians are being met. DOD agreed that the Commander of U.S. Central Command should revise its guidance to clarify the level of care that deployed civilians should receive. Theater operational and medical officials determine how many and the types of medical personnel needed to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan through an ongoing assessment. DOD has continued to assess its need for medical personnel in theater based on the requirements of the mission and a variety of medical data and has made adjustments to meet specific theater needs. medical care given different potential scenarios and the associated risks. This ongoing assessment takes place in theater and allows theater officials to identify new medical personnel requirements. Further, theater operational and medical officials also consider operational limitations when developing their medical personnel requirement. These limitations include the limit on the total number of forces in theater, and shortages of and high demand for certain medical personnel. In determining the number of military medical personnel and the medical specialties needed, theater officials begin by evaluating various mission planning factors, including the mission planning factor. theater, medical officials analyze data from the Joint Theater Trauma Registry, the Joint Medical Work Station, and service and joint data on disease and non-battle injuries. Officials use this information to increase or decrease the number of medical personnel in line with demand for medical services. For example, DOD medical officials conducted an analysis to determine the need for cardiovascular specialists in Iraq and Afghanistan based on the volume of cardiovascular-related medical evacuations in theater. Officials also analyze gaps and risks in the medical care structure under different possible scenarios. medical care to the increased number of U.S. military personnel in theater, including a theater hospital and a preventative medicine unit. During the offensive in Bastion, Afghanistan, officials relocated some mental health providers in Afghanistan to Bastion for the duration of the heightened operational tempo. To further assess the need for specific types of medical specialists in a given unit and across the theater, medical officials analyze data from the Joint Theater Trauma Trauma database. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. information on the availability and readiness of both active and reserve forces. Risk assessments include violations of the services’ rotation policies regarding the required time at home for servicemembers. In addition, each of the Services maintains a list of specialties that are in high demand relative to available personnel. All of theServices identified critical care nurse, physician assistant, psychiatry, and clinical psychology as high-demand specialties. The U.S. military has a long history of hiring women and minorities. the processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within and across medical specialties. To comply with service guidelines, such as required time at home for servicemembers, to maintain a healthy inventory of medical specialists. The processes also attempt to comply with Service Guidelines, including those for critical care nurses, orthopedic surgeons, and psychiatrists. The process also attempts to distribute burden of deployed medical specialists across and across specialties (e.g., critical care Nurses, Orthopedic Surgeons, Psychiatrists) its Global Force Management process. Once the Secretary of Defense designates a service to meet a medical requirement, that service identifies and selects units and personnel to fill the requirement. Medical officials in theater continually assess the number and the types of military medical personnel they need to support ongoing contingency operations in the theater. More information on the Global Force management process and the services’ personnel filling processes can be found in appendix II. The process was designed to provide insight into the availability of U.S. military forces to deploy. physician assistant, psychiatry, and clinical psychology as high-demand specialties. The services use unique yet similar processes to identify and select medical units and personnel to fill requirements for Iraq and Afghanistan. Each service’s medical personnel processes allow for the deployment of medical personnel from fixed military treatment facilities to support contingency operations. In addition, the processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within the services to help ease the burden on the armed forces in Iraq andAfghanistan. The processes for filling requirements all result in a unit and its personnel deploying to an operational theater to carry out a mission. benefit from integrating these lessons systematically into Army doctrine and the design of medical units. Updating doctrine and organizational design of these split medical units used in theater could help to assure that these units will be resourced with the needed number and mix of medical personnel. To better understand the extent to which deployed DOD civilian employees have access to needed medical care, as appropriate, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the Combatant Commander of U.S. Central Command to clarify the level of care. response to a draft of this report, DOD generally concurred with our findings and recommendations. DOD noted that there is an unquestionable need to formally update doctrinal publications. The department also noted that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from commanders to ensure use of medical personnel meets requirements. We recognize that the army continues to captured lessons learned, input and lessons learned to ensure that medical personnel are used to the best of their ability, the report says. The report concludes with a recommendation that DOD clarify the level of care that deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. military medical personnel in Iraq and Afghanistan to support ongoing operations. We analyzed DOD and service policies and processes that govern the determination of medical personnel requirements. We compared a current DOD directive regarding medical care for DOD civilian employees and theater-level guidance regarding medical Care for U.S. federal civilians. We interviewed officials, including officials with the medical task forces and Surgeons’ offices in Iraq, Afghanistan about the current use and composition of medical units in theater. For the third objective, we reviewed the approaches used by Army theater medical commanders to meet medical Personnel requirements when gaps in needed personnel coverage occurred. GAO examined the Department of Defense’s efforts to identify and fill its military medical personnel requirements in support of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. We interviewed officials with the Joint Staff, U.S. Joint Forces Command, and the military services’ force providers. We obtained information on DOD’S Global Force Management process and how the services identify medical units and personnel to fill these requirements. We assessed the reliability of the data by interviewing the agency official responsible for collecting and summarizing the data. The theater commanding general can submit a request for forces through DOD’s Global Force Management process. Two Army sustainment brigades deployed to Afghanistan with their authorized medical personnel but did not have enough medical personnel to provide full support to their convoys and forward locations. In response, Task Force 62nd Medical Command in Afghanistan requested additional forces for these two brigades. Officials told us that DOD met this requirement by deploying 22 Air Force medics to Afghanistan. Medical officials in Iraq and Afghanistan said they must consider two operational limitations which affect how many medical personnel they formally request. Commanding generals of U.S. Forces-Iraq and United States Forces-Afghanistan are advised by a lead surgeon on medical policy and procedures. Each theater also has a medical task force that consist of professional staff members who coordinate care in theater. The theater surgeon and medical task forces command mostly Army medical facilities. For example, the Air Force operates a theater hospital in Balad, Iraq but coordinates closely with the task force medical brigade in Iraq. The positions of United States forces- Afghanistan Surgeon and the commander of the task Force medical command in Afghanistan are filled by the same individual. determine if the request for additional medical forces takes precedence over the need for other types of personnel already in theater. If so, they decide which personnel will redeploy out of theater to stay within the authorized force cap. High demand for medical personnel in certain specialties also plays a role in decisions about whether to request medical forces. For example, officials in Iraq determined that 16 additional veterinary food inspectors were needed for food safety inspections. But they did not formally initiate that request due to the current shortage of these specialists. Gaps in medical capabilities can occur when medical providers do not deploy as expected for reasons such as resignation. Medical personnel gaps can also occur when individual medical personnel need to leave the unit. According to medical officials in theater, when these gaps occur, Army commanders use two approaches to fill those gaps. The Army is using two approaches in Iraq and Afghanistan to fill medical personnel gaps, officials say. The military is also using a combination of approaches in Afghanistan and Iraq to fill gaps in medical personnel. The cap on the total number of U.S. forces allowed in Iraq and Afghanistan requires theater commanders to balance the number of medical personnel they request. For instance, officials in Afghanistan told us that when they initiate requests for additional personnel, the requesting unit is asked to offset the increase in forces on a one-to-one basis within the unit. An increase of about 800 to 1500 civilians would have to occur before they would consider revising military medical personnel requirements, an Army official said. U.S. Central Command requested additional medical personnel to provide medical care to the increased number of military personnel in Afghanistan. Officials said that this information allows them to determine the level and structure of medical care they expect to need to support missions throughout the theater of operations. For example, in planning for the increase of U.s. forces in Afghanistan beginning in early 2010, officials with the U.S.-led coalition requested extra medical personnel. For more information, go to: http://www.centralcommons.us. About 4,000 medical personnel were in Iraq and about 6,000 were in Afghanistan at the end of July 2010. The United States’ military presence in Iraq is scheduled to end no later than December 31, 2011. As of September 2010, about 104,000 U.S. military personnel were deployed in Afghanistan, according to administration estimates. Figure 1 shows the breakdown of all military medical personnel inIraq and Afghanistan by service at the start of July. The DOD has established a database of medical personnel by service.

ROUGE-1: 73.23, ROUGE-2: 65.44, ROUGE-L: 23.54
BERTScore: 54.22

==============================================
==================== [5/100] ====================
Summary:
Historically, Central Valley spring-run Chinook were found throughout the Central Valley. By the late 1940s, operation of Friant Dam caused long stretches of the San Joaquin River to dry up. Fall and late-fall Chinook salmon continue to spawn in small numbers in the SanJoaquin River tributaries such as the Mokelumne, Stanislaus, Tuolumne and Merced Rivers. These fish spawn at lower elevations and have been less affected by dam construction. Historically, Central California's San Joaquin River supported large Chinook salmon populations. Since the 1940s, much of the river's water has been diverted for agricultural uses. In 1988, a coalition of conservation and fishing groups advocating for river restoration sued the Bureau of Reclamation (hereafter referred to as Reclamation), which owns and operates the Friant Dam on the river. As a result, approximately 60 miles of the River is dry in most years, making it impossible to support Chinook Salmon populations in the upper reaches. Historical spawning runs may have exceeded 200,000 fish annually, ascending the river as far as Mammoth Pool. For several years after Friant Dam was in place, spring Chinook successfully spawned in habitat below the dam. However, the spring-run Chinook population had declined from historic levels before construction and full operation of the Friant unit of the Central Valley Project. It appears from California Department of Fish and Game records that a viable spring- run population existed well into the 1940s with returns ranging from 2,000 to 56,000. The Settlement states that if legislation is not enacted by December 31, 2006, the Settlement may become void at the election of a party. To date, no party has officially elected to void the Settlement. Title X of H.R. 146 (the 111 th Congress) contains a revised version of this legislation. Revisions address direct spending and restoration flow provisions (§§ 10004 and 10009) The parties hoped implementing legislation would be enacted prior to adjournment of the 109 th Congress. However, numerous entities who were not party to the Settlement objected to the legislative proposal. The Settlement bills were reintroduced in the 110 th Congress as H.R. 24 and S. 27. Hearings were held in both houses of Congress; however, the legislation was not enacted. Implementation of the Settlement calls for construction of numerous projects and other activities that could cost between $250 million and $1.1 billion. Federal funding for these projects and activities is sought by the parties and the federal government. No action was taken on the bills before adjournment of the 109 th Congress. Friant Division serves irrigation and water districts in the Fresno, Kern, Madera, Merced, and Tulare counties. By the late 1940s, Reclamation's operation of Friant Dam had caused long stretches of the river to dry up. Portions of the San Joaquin River upstream of its confluence with the Merced River remain mostly dry today, except during flood events. The diverted water helped develop and continues to support a diverse agricultural economy from north of Fresno to Bakersfield. Friant Dam is one of the largest federal dams of the Bureau of Reclamation's Central Valley Project (CVP) in California. The Settlement calls for new releases of water from Friant Dam to restore fisheries in the San Joaquin River and for efforts to mitigate water supply losses due to the new releases. Full implementation of the Settlement would require congressional authorization and appropriations. Title X of H.R. 146, which passed the Senate March 19, 2009, contains a SanJoaquin River Restoration Settlement party issues. The Friant Dam was built on the San Joaquin River by Reclamation in the early 1940s. The CVP is a multi-unit, multi-purpose reclamation project administered by the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) under federal law. Reclamation delivers the impounded water to two canals for irrigation and other purposes. It stores the SanJoaquin River's flow in Millerton Lake, the reservoir behind the dam, from which water for irrigation is diverted into canals. The Settlement Agreement and subsequent implementing legislation are the culmination of nearly two decades of discussion, argument, and study on whether and how to restore fisheries below Friant Dam. The most recent actions relate to a court decision on October 23, 2006. If Congress does not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement and which may have more severe consequences for some area water users and third parties. The Settlement calls for numerous actions, some of which need congressional authorization and appropriations. The San Joaquin river restoration is an effort to respond to fisheries economic and ecological damage begun 60 years ago. For the court, it is a matter of Friant Dam operations comporting with state law. For others the potential of reduced water supplies for off-stream use is a breach of promises made 60 years. ago.others who then made financial and livelihood decisions based on those policies. In the eyes of many, the restoration is a response to the damage done by the dam. Litigation resulting in the most recent Settlement can be traced to a 1988 lawsuit. During the late 1980s the Friant Division water users sought renewal of their long-term water service contracts with Reclamation. Beginning in 1988, a coalition of environmental groups and anglers led by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) challenged the contract renewals in federal court on a number of environmental grounds. In addition to claims that the process under which Reclamation had begun contract. renewals violated the National Environmental A U.S. District Court judge has since ruled that operation of Friant Dam violates state law because of its destruction of downstream fisheries. Faced with mounting legal fees, considerable uncertainty, and the possibility of dramatic cuts to water diversions, parties agreed to negotiate a settlement instead of proceeding to trial on a remedy regarding the court's ruling. Most long-term water service contractors who receive the diverted water were added to the case shortly thereafter as defendant intervenors. In September the parties reached a settlement. Delta confluence with San Francisco Bay (Bay-Delta) Hydrologically, the Friant Division Service Area extends into the Tulare basin. Agriculture in these areas is highly dependent on irrigation; much of the irrigation water is surface water. Many growers also use groundwater, conjunctively managing their surface and groundwater supplies. This conjunctive management improves seasonal and multi-year water reliability for growers. The SJV, an eight-county region extending 250 miles from Stockton in the north to Bakersfield in the south, is both rapidly growing and economically depressed. economically depressed. Yet, the 27,280 square mile SJV is home to five of the nation's ten most agriculturally productive counties. The Friant Division Service Area includes four of these counties: Fresno, Tulare, Kern, and Merced. The SJV faces significant environmental and natural resource challenges, including the court-ordered restoration of the San Joaquin River discussed in this report. The CVP is a multi-unit, multi-purpose reclamation agency. It is based in Fresno. users and third parties. A key legislative issue is how to finance Settlement implementation, specifically how to resolve congressional Pay-As-You-Go (PAYGO) issues. Other challenges are how to achieve the Settlement's dual goals of fisheries restoration and water management, and how to address concerns of stakeholders not party to the Settlement. This report provides a brief overview of the Settlement, its legal history, and the legislative context in which implementing legislation is being considered. For more information on fisheries restoration, water management and funding, see CRS Report RL34237, San Joaquin River Restoration. Settlement Agreement. San Joaquin River restoration Settlement legislation was first introduced in early December 2006 ( H.R. 6377 and S. 4084 ); however, no action was taken on the legislation. An agreement was reached to address certain third party interests; in exchange, these third parties agreed to support new legislation. Although many parties who had opposed the draft legislation in September 2006 supported the new legislation, other parties emerged that were not part of the new agreement, resulting in further opposition to Settlement legislation. Direct spending funding mechanisms included in the legislation would typically require a budgetary offset under congressional PAYGO rules. While short-term (10 year) direct spending in H.R. 146 has been reduced substantially compared with earlier versions of the legislation, the budget effects of the Legislation in its entirety are still at issue for some. An overall complication for Congress in considering San Joaquin Settlement legislation is that although the Settlement aims to end a 19-year lawsuit and is sought by the parties, it is contemplated under the Settlement. March 19, 2009, contains a San Joaquin River Restoration Settlement implementation provision. The legislation had previously been considered and passed the Senate as Title X of S. 22. Under the Settlement, increased water flows for restoring fisheries would reduce diversions of water for off-stream purposes, such as irrigation, hydropower, and municipal and industrial uses. The quantity of water used for restoration flows and the quantity by which water deliveries would be reduced are related, but the relationship would not necessarily be one-for-one. although the Settlement aims to end a 19-year lawsuit and comports with a court ruling, the Settlement would affect others outside the Friant Division Service Area. Changes embodied in H.R. 146 aim to resolve concern about the introduction of restoration flows. Another complication is the prospect that funding for the San Joaquin River Settlement may divert funds from salmon restoration projects in other river basins. Lastly, other recent events potentially limiting water exports from the Sacramento and SanJoaquin Rivers Delta confluence could significantly affect implementation of the recirculation portion of the water management goal. San Joaquin River management ties into other CVP management decisions, as well as state and local water systems. Recent court decisions regarding the health of threatened Delta Smelt have constrained water exports and may constrain future exports. The degree to which some of the water management goals identified by the CVP can be achieved is an issue. An issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement would be how the San Joaquin river is managed in the future. The CVP and State Water Project (SWP) are operating under regulations that limit the amount (and timing) of water that can be exported south out of the Bay-Delta. Claims have been litigated in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. The most recent actions relate to a court decision that Reclamation is operating the dam in violation of California state fish and game code. The implications of this decision are far reaching for California water management and for both the directly affected water users and the indirectly affected communities, landowners, and water users. These issues partially derive from constraints imposed by the pressure to react to a settlement responding to a judicial ruling, as opposed to managing or legislating on an issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement. which Reclamation had begun contract renewals violated the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and that the lack of water in the river violated the ESA. The state law that is at issue here is California Fish and Game Code § 5937. Section 5937 provides as follows:. Reclamation will act in conformity with state laws "relating to the control, appropriation, use or distribution of water used in irrigation" The plaintiffs argue that Reclamation has violated Section 8 of the Reclamation Act of 1902 (43 U.S.C. § 383) The court did not declare what amount of water was necessary to satisfy the law or declare any other type of relief. The court set a 2006 trial date to determine a proper remedy. Faced with the prospect of a court-imposed remedy, and mounting legal challenges, Reclamation decided to appeal the decision. The appeal was denied and the court ruled that Reclamation had violated the state law. The case was heard in front of the California Supreme Court in San Francisco. The decision was handed down on November 14, 2005. of the wettest years, flood water releases could provide a significant amount of the restoration flows, thereby lowering the reduction in deliveries to agricultural and municipal users. Under the Settlement, no water would be released for restoration purposes in the driest of years. In some years, restoration flows released in late winter and early spring may free up space for additional runoff in Millerton Lake, potentially minimizing reductions in deliveries later in the year—assuming Millerton lake storage is replenished. Consequently, the Settlement could reduce deliveries to Friant contractors in those years. later in the year—assuming Millerton Lake storage is replenished. How deliveries to Friant water contractors might be reduced in any given year would depend on many factors. Regardless of the specifics of how much water might be released for fisheries restoration vis-à-vis water diverted for off-stream purposes, there will be impacts to existing surface and groundwater supplies in and around the Friant Division Service Area. Although some opposition to the Settlement and its implementing legislation remains, the largest and most directly affected stakeholders are environmental, fisheries, and local economies. the majority of Friant water contractor organizations, and environmental, fisheries, and community groups) support proceeding with the Settlement Agreement. For some groups, going to trial risks considerable uncertainty and expense; others may be more willing to take such risks. Congressional authorization and appropriations are required for full implementation of the Settlement. If Congress does not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement, and which may have more severe consequences for area water users and third parties. Faced with the prospect of a court-imposed remedy, and mounting legal fees in preparation for trial, the parties began a series of settlement negotiations in late 2005. The terms of the Settlement were then vetted with selected stakeholders, finalized, and presented to Congress in September 2006. The Settlement Agreement was accepted by the District Court on October 23, 2006, and was approved by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eastern District of California on October 30, 2006. It is the only settlement of its kind in the history. with primarily Class II supplies, or in the driest of years. The future of water resource management in the Central Valley is not just conjunctive water management, but multi-year management with the financial resources to make it happen. Whether Congress addresses this issue—in California and elsewhere—given current water resource authorization and appropriations practices and a restrictive budgetary climate remains to be seen. While the issues discussed here have confronted prior Administrations and Congresses, a Settlement Agreement was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted. was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted, ultimately resulting in the difficult choices facing Congress today. This is a common dilemma for resource agencies implementing projects and programs which are based on societal and political trade-offs made decades ago. It is hard to say what is fair or just when such significant trade-off were made, causing harm to some, but providing benefit to others who then made financial and livelihood decisions based on the trade offs. The decision was ultimately made by the Supreme Court.

ROUGE-1: 82.53, ROUGE-2: 75.58, ROUGE-L: 33.87
BERTScore: 67.14

==============================================
==================== [6/100] ====================
Summary:
The Guam Integrated Military Development Plan considered both existing and former DOD land areas for potential use to accommodate realignment actions. DOD owned about 40,000 acres of land in Guam at the time of this review—approximately 29 percent of the island. Funding uncertainties, operational challenges, and community impacts may not only affect the development of the Guam master plan but also increase costs for the U.S. government. DOD’s has begun efforts to create a successful partnership and coordinate with other federal departments and agencies, the Government of Guam says. legislature had approved $228 million for planning and initial construction funds for force posture realignments, including efforts for project planning in Guam. DOD officials also expressed concern regarding the department’s ability to obtain a continuous flow of funds adequate to pay its share of the current $13 billion cost estimate for military buildup on Guam. Future DOD operations may be constrained on Guam if improvements are not made to Guam's infrastructure. Government of Japan has agreed to provide $700 million for utilities infrastructure on DOD bases in Guam, but this funding is neither intended nor is it sufficient. and officials—was initiated on March 7, 2007. According to DOD officials, the results of this environmental impact statement will influence many of the key decisions on the exact location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development on Guam. DOD has not established a comprehensive and routine process to keep Congress informed on its progress dealing with these issues and the overall status of implementing the military buildup on Guam, the letter says. In the absence of this information on how challenges will be addressed in the future, Congress is not in a position to help ensure the best application of limited federal funds. Base in Guam to see the installations and future military construction sites firsthand. We also reviewed DOD’s military construction budgets for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 and planned for future years to identify U.S. funding levels and sources planned for the military buildup in Guam. To identify challenges associated with the buildup in this planning effort, we met with the Governor, legislative leaders, the Chamber of Commerce, the Civil Military Task Force, the Guam Women’S Group, and the Office of the Delegate from Guam to the House of Representatives.  Guam provides strategic flexibility, freedom of action, and prompt global action for the Global War on Terrorism, peace and wartime engagement, and crisis response. About 29 percent of the land is controlled by DOD (see fig. 2), 52 percent is privately owned, and 19 percent is under the supervision of the Government of Guam. In 2003, the Senate Appropriations Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been properly funded. The U.S. military says Guam is an integral part of DOD’s logistical support system. 14,195 in Guam, and it is expected to increase to 39,130—an increase of 176 percent (see table 1). The population could also swell further because DOD’s estimates do not include DOD civilians, contractors, or Navy transient personnel from an aircraft carrier. The extent to which the Guam local community and foreign workers can meet this increase has yet to be determined. As a result of Guam realignment. actions, the construction demands for infrastructure will exceed the realignment actions. The current population of Guam is estimated to be 171,000, and the projected future military population could increase it by more than 15 percent. The effects of the increase in military forces, in terms of population and military infrastructure, on Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements have not been fully addressed.optimistic that the study, which will include environmental limitations, facility requirements, real estate requirements, and estimated costs, will result in the identification and development of new training areas. The active duty military personnel and dependent population is estimated at 14,195 in Guam. required to support the development on Guam. The increased demand for workers may require workforce training for the local population. Foreign workers would have to temporarily enter the United States on temporary nonagricultural workers visas, capped at 66,000 per year. DOD officials have already indicated that visa waivers might be needed in order to mitigate limitations on the number of visas allowed into the U.S. each year. Other challenges associated with an increase of foreign workers in Guam include providing support facilities and services, such as housing and medical care. support facilities and services, such as housing and medical care for these workers, as well as possible social tensions between the local population and foreign workers because of job competition. Public infrastructure. The effects of the increased demand on Guam’s roads, port capabilities, and utility services have not been fully addressed. DOD officials and the Guam Integrated Military Development Plan identified several infrastructure areas that are in need of improvements. The Government of Guam has estimated that it will cost about $2.6 billion to improve the local infrastructure to accommodate forecasted military and civilian growth on the island. transported on one of these major roads that runs through highly populated areas. The Government of Guam plans a number of projects to upgrade the capability and efficiency of Guam’s port facilities that total about $155 million with only $56 million funded at the time of our review. The utilities transmission lines are antiquated and the system is not reliable, and voltage and frequency fluctuations are common. The wastewater treatment facilities have a long history of failing and are near capacity. The solid waste landfills have a series of unresolved issues related to discharge of waste.  Guam is located in an area of the Pacific commonly referred to as Typhoon Alley, where on average 31 tropical storms develop annually. Also, earthquake risk in Guam is caused by the island’s proximity to the Mariana Trench, which leads to earthquakes throughout the region. Estimated costs to build infrastructure in Guam are based on damage from typhoons and seismic shocks, according to the Marine Corps. The U.S. Marine Corps estimates that additional costs will occur when constructing to Guam's typhoon and seismic standards. Guam is one of the more expensive locations for military construction in comparison with other locations in the United States and its territories. The construction costs for Guam are 2.64 times more expensive than the baseline average presented in the DOD Facilities Pricing Guide. The area cost factor is used by planners to adjust average historical facility costs to a specific project location. It takes into consideration the costs of construction material, labor, and equipment, along with factors such as the location of the facility and its location in the U.S. The environmental impact statement will examine potential effects from activities associated with Marine Corps units’ relocation. Examine the Navy’s plan to enhance the infrastructure, logistic capabilities, and pier/waterfront facilities to support transient nuclear aircraft carrier berthing at Naval Base Guam. The statement will also examine the potential effects of the waterfront improvements associated with the proposed changes to the Navy's base on the island of Guam. It is expected that the statement will be completed by the end of the year. potential effects of the waterfront improvements associated with the proposed transient berthing. Evaluate placing a ballistic missile defense task force (approximately 630 servicemembers and 950 family members) in Guam. DOD officials recognize that the results of this environmental assessment process may affect the development and timing of DOD’s plan for Guam. Under NEPA and the regulations for implementing NEPA established by the Council on Environmental Quality, an environmental impact statement must include a purpose and need statement, a need statement. A new carrier pier with additional capabilities will need to be constructed in order to accommodate this plan. Most of the aircraft from the aircraft carrier will also require temporary beddown at Andersen Air Force Base. The Army is also planning on basing a ballistic missile defense task force in Guam, though the size and mix of this task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. Funding requirements for the military buildup on Guam are yet not fully identified and may be difficult to meet given other priorities and existing funding constraints. The Navy is planning on periodically berthing an aircraft carrier in Guam. The support facilities needed for this ship are still being determined. According to Navy officials, a new carrier pier with a heliport will be built on the island. The exact size and mix of the Army missile defense task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still to be determined.to Guam. However, in the absence of information, it will be difficult to provide an accurate assessment of specific facility requirements to support the Guam realignment actions.  Guam is strategically located in the Pacific Ocean approximately 3,810 miles southwest of Honolulu, Hawaii. It is 1,600 miles east of Manila, the Philippines; and 1,560 miles southeast of Tokyo, Japan. Given its strategic location, Guam is an integral part of DOD’s military operations in the Asia-Pacific region. The U.S. has deployed a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier at Yokosuka Naval Base, Japan; deployment of a transportable ballistic missile defense radar system; and relocation of training activities. The failure or delay of one plan outlined in the Defense Policy Review Initiative may affect another. DOD officials expect that if the Futenma replacement facility in Okinawa is not built, the Marine Corps relocation to Guam may be delayed. The Government of Japan may encounter challenges in funding its share of the Marine corps move considering Japan’s other national priorities and its commitments associated with funding several other major realignments of U.S. forces in Japan. At the time of our review, the Japanese legislature had approved $228 million for planning and initial construction. $13 billion cost estimate includes costs to move Marine Corps forces from Okinawa to Guam. Government of Japan has agreed to contribute about $6.1 billion to develop facilities and infrastructure on Guam. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected on Guam at current estimated levels. DOD agencies, such as the Defense Logistics Agency and Defense Education Activity, that will help support the services’ influx of personnel, missions, and equipment to Guam will likely incur additional costs. The Marine Corps is still determining the specific mix of units and capabilities needed to meet mission requirements on both Guam and Okinawa. Approximately 10,000 marines plus their dependents are expected to remain on the island of Okinawa following the realignment of forces to Guam. The Marine Corps forces remaining on Okinawa will consist of Marine Air-Ground Task Force elements, such as command, ground, aviation, and combat service support, as well as a base support capability.expected to be identified and assessed during the parallel environmental analysis and the individual service and joint planning processes. for U.S. forces by relocating units to other areas, including Guam. This initiative also includes a significant reduction and reorganization of the Marine Corps posture on Okinawa, Japan. More than 10,000 marines and their dependents will remain stationed in Okinawa after this relocation. The initiatives also include the relocation of Carrier Air Wing Five from Atsugi Naval Air Facility to Iwakuni Marine Corps Air Station, Japan, and the replacement of the U.s. Marine Corps Futenma Air Station. of construction material, labor, and equipment, along with factors such as weather, climate, seismic conditions, mobilization, overhead and profit, labor availability, and labor productivity for each area. Marine Corps officials expect there will be additional facility repair costs periodically as a result of damage from typhoons and seismic shocks. Several operational challenges, such as providing appropriate mobility support and training capabilities, have not been fully addressed. For example, according to Marine Corps Forces, Pacific, officials, the Marine Corps in Guam will depend on strategic military sealift and airlift to reach destinations in Asia. The Marine Corps depends on strategic lift for its operational and training- related movement needs, including transportation of forces and equipment. For example, in a contingency operation that requires sealift, the ships may have to deploy from Sasebo, Japan, or another location to transport soldiers and equipment in Guam and then return to the area of responsibility where the contingency is taking place. According to Marine Corps officials, amphibious shipping capability and airlift capacity are key to the Corps' ability to move forces.  amphibious shipping capability and airlift capacity are needed in Guam. Existing training facilities and ranges on Guam are not sufficient to meet the training requirements of the projected Marine Corps force. The Marine Corps estimated additional costs for strategic lift operating from Guam to be nearly $88 million annually. A DOD analysis of training opportunities in Guam concluded that no ranges are suitable for the needs of the projecting Marine Corps. force because of inadequacy in size or lack of lack of training facilities on the island. It may include expanding staging facilities and systems support for both sealift and air Lift. Within DOD, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics was tasked to prepare the detailed, comprehensive master plans. PACOM coordinates East Asia and South Asia; EUCOM coordinates much of sub- Saharan Africa and Europe, as well as the Indian Ocean islands off the coast of southeast Africa. CENTCOM coordinates efforts in the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, and Central Asia. Not shown are Northern Command, not shown are Southern Command, and not shown is Northern Command. U.S. Africa Command eventually will encompass the entire continent of Africa except for Egypt, which will continue to fall. There are 13 cooperative security locations throughout Africa that historically have been identified in the EUCOM master plan. The new U.S.-led Africa Command will be based in Washington, D.C., and will be headquartered in Africa Command's new headquarters in Africa City, Nairobi. The command is expected to be operational by the end of the first quarter of 2015. Not shown are Northern Command, which coordinates activities in North America, and Southern Command. Northern and Southern Commands have significantly fewer facilities outside of the United States than the other regional commands in the Pacific, Europe, and Central Asia. There are also four functional unified combatant commands that are assigned worldwide functional responsibilities not bounded by geography. Special Operations Command, Strategic Command, Joint Forces Command, and Transportation Command are included in this list. The U.S. Central Command is based in Washington, D.C. In addition, we did not include Southern and Northern Commands in our analysis because these commands have significantly fewer facilities overseas than the other regional commands. We conducted our review from September 2006 through July 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to the contact named above, Nelsie Alcoser, Kate Lenane, Erika Prochaska, Roger Tomlinson; and Cheryl Weissman made major contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Last year, EUCOM’s master plan did not explain the potential effect of implementing base realignment and closure recommendations on the movement of troops from Germany to bases in the U.S. This year, PACOM discussed this topic as well as the progress of bilateral negotiations with Japan and challenges associated with this realignment. EUCOM and Army officials told us that any delay in the implementation of baserealignment andclosure recommendations would cause them to delay movement of Army servicemembers and their families. CENTCOM recognized that current U.S. basing may not adequately support either strategic changes in an expanding North Atlantic Treaty Organization Alliance or the requirements of a rapidly changing area of responsibility. EUCOM also explained that its transformation execution depends on host nation negotiations, political-military considerations, base realignment and closure, and fiscal limitations. CENTCOM’s master plan discussed efforts to solicit host nation contributions and the amount of coordination and support that is needed from DOD, the State Department, and Congress. paid by the Japanese government. EUCOM provided information on North Atlantic Treaty Organization contributions and discussed a burden-sharing arrangement with the Government of Norway. CENTCOM also provided host nation estimates and explained that its efforts to attain host nation funding were ongoing. This year, all of the commands described the effects of other defense activities on implementation of their master plans. Last year, only PACOM’s plan gave some indication of how its implementation could be affected by another activity—the potential decrease in traditional Japanese construction funding that would help Japan offset its Defense Policy Review. master plan stated that the United States signed individual agreements with the governments of Romania and of Bulgaria in 2005 and 2006. EUCOM also provided additional details, such as the mission, planned capabilities, equipment and aircraft, and population. Furthermore, EUCOM provided a status of ongoing transformation realignments in its area of responsibility, including listing the return of facilities to host nations and changes to its basing categories. The master plans also described recent efforts to proceed with formal negotiations with the Governments of Poland. government has received approximately $592 million since 1989 in residual value and payment-in-kind compensation from property returns in EUCOM’s area of responsibility. EUCOM continues to aggressively seek compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. As EUCOM continue to return facilities in Germany, Italy, and Iceland, this figure may increase. Accordingly, we continue to believe that residual value should be addressed in the master plans. The master plan did not describe the challenges the command faces in addressing training limitations for the Seventh Air Force in South. The plan discussed the challenge of ongoing operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. CENTCOM’s plan identified how future basing and infrastructure will be defined by ongoing contingencies and global defense posture. The plan also reflected land return actions in Kuwait and Uzbekistan and changes to base category designations, such as consolidation of a cooperative security location into a forward operating site, both of which support surge capability for ground force support. All of the commands addressed the extent of their environmental challenges in this year's overseas master plans. of Africa except for Egypt, which will continue to fall under CENTCOM’s area of responsibility. Discussions are ongoing on the possible headquarters location and what kinds of military forces would be assigned to the command. This year, the changes identified in the plans provided useful information on evolving costs and facility requirements in overseas basing. In addition, the commands continue to focus first on the mission and then on the infrastructure requirements needed to support the mission. For example, in CENTCOM's master plan, the descriptions of each forward operating site focus on mission, then on requirements. forces from Seoul and other locations. Last year, CENTCOM did not report any environmental issues. This year, EUCOM identified areas for cleanup, groundwater investigation, and monitoring. CENTCOM’s master plan identified funding requirements for a wastewater treatment plant and a water treatment and distribution system at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan, in hopes of avoiding potential environmental problems. The extent to which there were no environmental issues last year in the command's area of responsibility has not been determined. The amount of contamination at one site did not present an unacceptable risk to human health or the mission. such as precise facility requirements and costs, time frames for an end state, base categories, host nation funding levels, and effects of other defense activities. For example, CENTCOM provided information on supplemental appropriations for facilities and projects at Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan. This year, all of the commands categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating categories. All of the regional commands identified their precise facility requirement and costs for fiscal year 2008 and for fiscal years 2009 through 2013, and reported estimated facility sustainment costs. focus first on the mission and then on requirements by providing the type of mission the site has, the unit that it could host, and its role in the region. All of the commands provide similar information for their main operating bases, forward operating sites, and cooperative security locations. Even with the department’s effort to update the plans, there are still some areas that need to be addressed, such as the need to strengthen capabilities for rapid and flexible response in the central Asian states, the report says. categorized their installations into applicable base categories of main operating base, forward operating site, and cooperative security location. The commands also supplemented the information on base categories with detailed data on the installations’ capabilities, overall mission, population, and types of equipment and facilities located at each site. For example, CENTCOM and EUCOM also identified adjustments to the base categories, such as redesignating a main operating Base as a forward operating Site or consolidating two cooperative security locations into one.EUCOM also provided specific details on the capabilities of each base. security locations into one. EUCOM also provided specific details on sites no longer considered cooperative security locations in Bulgaria, Romania, and Poland. Sites with no operational importance and a commercial facility readily available for military use that did not require U.S. investment or presence. End state date. This year, all of the commands identified a common strategic end state date of 2013, which identifies the last fiscal year of the construction time frame. It provides users a more complete and clearer basis for tracking progress in meeting the command infrastructure objectives. The PACOM master plan did not point out that the Seventh Air Force in South Korea may be unable to maintain combat capability in the long term. For decades, the Government of South Korea has attempted to relocate Force’s air-to-surface training requirements. As a result, the Air Force has been using ranges in Japan and Alaska to meet its training requirements, which results in additional transportation costs to the U.S. government. In May 2007, officials said that some progress had been made in addressing Air Force”s training challenges. The Koon-Ni range had served as the primary air-to-ground range for the Seventh Air Force. The Government of South Korea closed the range in August 2005. There is an agreement with the Government ofSouth Korea to train at other ranges, according to senior Air Force and USFK officials. But the other ranges do not provide electronic scoring capabilities necessary to meet the Air Force’s training requirements, officials say. The U.S. Air Force says there is difficultly in scheduling. Department agrees validated training requirements that are affected by force posture transformation plans should be addressed in overseas master plans. Nonprogrammed and nonvalidated training limitations experienced by service components were not appropriate for inclusion in the overseas commands’ risk assessment. U.S. Forces Japan provided information on training limitations in its area of responsibility, while the Pentagon did not respond to a request for comment on the issue. The Pentagon said it is not aware of any nonprogrammed or non validate training limitations. and the effects of airspace access restrictions in Japan on C-130 training. In addition, noise and land use sensitivities and maneuver area limitations in Okinawa require U.S. forces to deploy to other Pacific Rim locations to supplement their training, which results in additional transportation requirements and costs. The plan also discussed efforts by U.s. Forces Japan and the Government of Japan to engage in bilateral discussions to address training shortfalls and explore solutions. We have previously recommended that overseas regional commands address residual value issues and that PACOM explain how it plans to address existing training. Corps force, because of inadequacy in size or lack of availability. The services are in the process of conducting a training study that includes Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific, officials stated that live fire artillery training, amphibious landings, and tracked vehicle operations will be challenging. Still, they are optimistic that the study, which will include environmental limitations, facility, facility and other factors, will be successful. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Japan anticipates the Government of Japan will continue to decrease these funds on the basis that in addition to this program and other forms of host nation support (i.e., utilities and Japanese labor force) Potential Government of Japanese financial constraints may result in U.S. facilities in Japan requiring more financial support. In addition, USFK provided details on current realignment efforts, including the Government. of South Korea’s approval of the Land Partnership Plan and Yongsan Relocation. Plan.  PACOM did not identify specific host nation funding from the Defense Policy Review Initiative. The Government of Japan has not made an official, public estimate of the costs for several major realignments within Japan. EUCOM provided information on North Korea, including the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan. The command did identify the need for U.S. military construction funds to support realignment costs not paid by the Japanese government. It did not provide specific funding for the Guam relocation.  PACOM’s master plan updated information on the results of the Defense Policy Review Initiative. U.S. Forces Japan anticipates the Government of Japan will continue to decrease funds for the Japanese facilities improvement program. The replacement of the Marine Corps Air Station Futenma in hopes that it will lessen the effect of military aviation operations on the local citizens of Japan. For example, this year: PACOM.may increase or decrease U.s.-funded costs for future infrastructure changes. In addition, PACOM identified decreasing funds for. the Japanese Facilities improvement program, historically the source of major construction on U.N. bases in Japan. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected to be direct contributions. The remaining $3.3 billion will consist of investment incentives for family housing and on-base infrastructure, such as utilities, which over time could be recouped by Japan in the form of rent or service charges. For example, the Government of Japan will finance construction of family housing units in Guam, but these construction costs will be reimbursed by payments from the servicemembers’ housing allowance. In September 2001, DOD issued its Quadrennial Defense Review Report, which addressed, among other issues, reorienting the U.S. military global posture. The report called for developing a permanent basing system that provides greater flexibility for U.s. forces in critical areas of the world. It also called for providing temporary access to facilities in foreign countries that enable U.N. forces to train and operate in the absence of a permanent base. The Pentagon has been reexamining overseas basing requirements to allow for greater military flexibility. enable U.S. forces to train and operate in the absence of permanent ranges and bases. The integrated global presence and basing strategy is the culmination of various DOD studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study. The initiative is intended to close bases no longer needed to meet Cold War threats, as well as bring home many U.s. forces while stationing more flexible, deployable capabilities in strategic locations around the world. In August 2004, President Bush announced what has been described as the most comprehensive restructuring of military forces overseas since the end of the Korean War. studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study, the overseas presence study, and the U.S. global posture study. In 2004 the United States and Japan began a series of sustained security consultations aimed at strengthening the U-S.-Japan security alliance. DOD’s Defense Policy Review Initiative established a framework for the future of U.s. force structure in Japan designed to create the conditions to reduce the burden on local Japanese communities and create a continuing presence for U.N. forces. PACOM’s plan did not address training limitations in South Korea and Japan. OSD recognized that further changes will result as it continues to implement the global defense plans. This year”s master plans incorporated key changes associated with the continuing evolution of U.S. overseas basing strategies and requirements. There is not a requirement for them to do so. However without such explanations and linkage, it was difficult to determine the extent to which the master plans were coordinated and synchronized with other defense plans and activities. will result as it continues to implement the global defense posture decisions. PACOM’s master plan discussed the progress of dynamic realignment initiatives, which will relocate military personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. For example, DOD’S efforts to establish missile defense in Eastern Europe, and the creation of U.S. Africa Command were discussed. The department reported that as the overseas political and military environment and strategic landscape further evolve,global defense posture plans will continue to mature to address new priorities. DOD forecasted changes for next year’s master plans involving the development of a new command responsible for Africa. PACOM is expected to be established by September 30, 2008. U.S. involvement in Africa is shared among three combatant commands. The President announced in February 2007 that the U.s. military will establish a new, separate Africa Command to enhance security cooperation, extend humanitarian assistance, and build partnership capacity on the African continent. At the time of our review, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon was still chairman of PACOM. approval of the Land Partnership Plan and Yongsan Relocation Plan and efforts to coordinate the transfer of U.S.-vacated bases. The plans also discussed USFK’s efforts to work with South Korea to complete the transition of wartime operational control from the United States to South Korea in the future. EUCOM's master plan identified specific information on efforts to close or return installations, such as Naval Air Station Keflavik, Iceland; Naval Support Activity La Maddalena, Italy; selected sites in Germany, Belgium, and Turkey. In 2005, none of the commands identified environmental remediation and restoration issues. This year, PACOM provided information on remediation actions taken by USFK before returning installations to South Korea. Last year, USFK also discussed its efforts to coordinate with the Government of South Korea on remediated U.S. bases. Officials expect these efforts will accelerate the return of vacated facilities and areas and the relocation of U.s. forces from Seoul and other locations. In 2005, no issues were identified; this year, EUCOM identified issues. personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. In addition, PACOM described the importance of relocating 8,000 marines and their dependents from Okinawa to Guam. The U.S. and Japanese governments had established an interim agreement in October 2005 involving the realignment of U.s. forces in Japan. This year PACOM updated this information by indicating that final implementation documents were approved in May 2006. It is important to retain a forward Marine Corps command and control capability to ensure a balanced, flexible contingency response capacity within the Asia-Pacific region. contingency response capacity within the Asia-Pacific region. With respect to South Korea, PACOM provided information updating the status of the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan. As a part of DOD’s efforts to establish a U.S. presence in Eastern Europe through a network of forward operating sites and cooperative security locations, EUCOM’S master plan stated that the United States signed individual agreements with the European Union in 2006. The United States also signed individual agreement with the Czech Republic in 2007. We met with officials from OSD and each of the following commands and agencies: U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM), U. s. Army Pacific, U.s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific. We also met with the commander of Naval Forces Korea and the head of Naval Facilities Engineering Command-Pacific, Japan. We were also briefed on the status of Forces Korea, the Status of Forces Agreement Office, and other issues affecting the military in the region. For more information on OSD, go to: www.osd.org. that PACOM explain how it plans to address existing training limitations in our prior reports. We believe that identifying these issues would make Congress aware of potential challenges to obtaining residual value and to training U.S. forces in South Korea. Even though our prior recommendations have not been fully addressed, we continue to believe that they have merit and that Congress would benefit from disclosure of this information. In July 2006, the Senate report accompanying the fiscal year 2007 military construction appropriation bill directed DOD to provide a master plan on the military buildup in Guam. U.S. Forces Japan provided information on training limitations, while USFK omitted this information from the overseas master plan. This inconsistency led to our recommendation that Congress require such reporting, and we continue to believe that this information is necessary to provide a complete picture of the potential effects on infrastructure and funding requirements in South Korea. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that the Secretary of Defense report periodically to all the defense committees on the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam, the Deputy under secretary of Defense responded that the Guam master plan is scheduled. the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam. identify the exact size and makeup of the forces to be moved to Guam and the associated infrastructure required. address the various challenges associated with the military buildup. In comments on a draft of this report, the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Installations and Environment responded that congressional action is not necessary. We are sending copies to the Secretaries of Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and the Director, Office of Management and Budget. Copies will be made available to others upon request. GAO is not recommending executive action. Congress should consider requiring the Secretary of Defense to ensure that future overseas master plans address the extent to which the regional commands are seeking residual value compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. Future PACOM plans should address existing training limitations in its area of responsibility and the potential effects of those limitations on infrastructure and funding requirements, GAO says. To help ensure the best application of limited federal funds and the leveraging of all available options for supporting the military buildup on Guam until DOD prepares a master plan, Congress should require DOD to report periodically to all the defense committees. Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides information on projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for the Guam realignments. Additional time is needed for DOD to address several challenges before JGPO can develop a Guam master plan. The exact size and makeup of the forces to move to Guam and the housing, operational, quality of life, and services support infrastructure required are not yet fully known and are expected to be identified and assessed during the parallel environmental a master plan on the military buildup in Guam. Senate report directed DOD to submit Guam master plan by December 2006. Master plan cannot be completed until environmental impact statement is completed. Congress may not see the master plan for another 2 years. GAO will review DOD’s master planning effort for Guam as part of its annual review of DOD”s overseas master plans. The Guam masterPlan is scheduled to be completed in 2008, at which time a copy will be provided to congressional defense committees. It should be noted that DOD did not submit the plan for several reasons that we discuss in this report. may not see the master plan for another 2 years at least. DOD faces a variety of funding challenges, operational challenges, and community impacts that may both affect the development and timing of the Guam master plan and increase costs for the U.S. government. Congress could be enhanced by periodically receiving an update on the planning efforts in Guam, the authors say. The authors did not evaluate concerns raised by the officials, but they reviewed relevant federal laws and discussed them with DOD officials. They also analyzed available reports, documents, international agreements, and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing activities in Guam. The Senate Appropriations Committee noted the ambitiousness of the military construction program and the need for a well-developed master plan. In July 2006, the committee recommended deferral of two military construction projects at Andersen Air Force Base that were included in the President’s budget request until such time as they can be incorporated into a master plan for Guam. The committee also asked the military to provide the congressional defense committees with a report each year giving an assessment of the plans for the U.S. military presence on Guam. issues; population levels; and facility requirements and funding levels for Hawaii, Guam, U.S. territories, and other insular areas in the Pacific. Congress and other users did not have the best data available to facilitate their annual review and oversight. In 2004, before DOD issued its initial overseas master plans, Congress had no detailed information on individual construction projects and the anticipated strategic end state of the command’s overseas basing infrastructure. Congress also had no consistent data on which to track progress and changes from year to year and between commands. In August 2006, OSD directed the Navy to establish JGPO to facilitate, manage, and execute requirements associated with the rebasing of Marine Corps assets from Okinawa to Guam. Initial implementation details for the movement of U.S. Marines to Guam and associated military construction projects took place under the leadership of PACOM.and Transportation Command. The office’s responsibilities include integration of operational support requirements, development, program, and budget synchronization; oversight of the construction; and coordination of government and business activities. coordinated planning efforts among the DOD components and other stakeholders to consolidate, optimize, and integrate the existing DOD infrastructure capabilities on Guam. The office is expected to work closely with the Government of Japan and the local Guam government, other federal agencies, and Congress in order to manage this comprehensive effort and to develop a master plan. JGPO falls under the direct oversight of the Department of the Interior, which had formed a federal interagency task force to address issues relating to commerce, transportation, environment, and other areas. and other areas. In 2006, we reported that the master plans did not always explain how their implementation could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. In our prior work, we found that while DOD’s master plans generally exceeded the reporting requirements established by Congress, opportunities existed for the plans to provide more complete, clear, and consistent information and to present a more definitive picture of future requirements. JGPO falls under the direct oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Installations and Environment. basing strategies and requirements. To see firsthand the condition of facilities and status of selected construction projects, we visited and toured facilities at Camp Schwab, Camp Kinser, Camp Foster, Torii Station, Camp Zama, Yokosuka Naval Base, and Yokota Air Base, Japan. We visited Naval Base Guam and Andersen Air Force Base in Guam to see the installations and future military installations. We also met with officials from U.S. Pacific Fleet; U.s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific; and Pacific Air Forces. established a comprehensive and routine process to keep Congress informed on its progress in dealing with these issues. In July 2006, PACOM issued its Guam development plan—a notional document describing the future development of the military services. While the Guam Integrated Military Development Plan provides the best available information on the projected military population, units, and infrastructure that may be needed for future Guam realignments, DOD officials told us that their planning effort was still in its initial phases with many key decisions and challenges yet to be addressed. notional document describing the future development of the military services on Guam over the next decade and beyond. The plan is based upon a notional force structure that was used to generate land and facility requirements for basing, operations, logistics, training, and quality of life involving the Marine Corps, Army, Air Force, Navy, and Special Operations Forces. DOD officials told us that the plan was not a master plan because it did not include specific information on facility requirements, associated costs, and a timeline for specific actions. Marine Corps officials are assessing the type, size, and number of units that will relocate to Guam. This determination will define the training and facility requirements, such as barracks, family housing, schools, and other infrastructure. A JGPO official said that the office was initiating a master plan that will reflect the building of flexible infrastructure that could accommodate any type of military units that may relocate. However, in the absence of information on the type of units, the master plan is not complete. impact statement. The results of the environmental statement could take up 3 years to complete. The Navy issued a public notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement on March 7, 2007. Examine the potential location, size, and makeup of the military infrastructure development. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. impact statement must include a purpose and need statement, a description of all reasonable project alternatives and their associated environmental impacts. Further, accurate scientific analysis, expert agency comments, and public scrutiny are essential to implementing NEPA. For example, federal agencies such as DOD are required to ensure the professional integrity, including scientific integrity, of the discussions and analyses in the environmental impact statement. It is also essential to ensure that the environmental impacts of the proposed action and each alternative are accurate and balanced. It also is essential to protect the environment of the area to be affected. Federal agencies such as DOD are required to obtain the comments of any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law or certain special expertise. Until an agency issues a final environmental impact statement and record of decision, it generally may not take any action concerning the proposal that would either have an adverse environmental impact or limit the project's ability to do its job. The agency is also required to seek comments from appropriate state and local agencies, Native American tribes, and any agency that requested that it receive such statements. In 2005, we reported that without more complete, clear, and consistent reporting, Congress lacked the complete picture it needed to evaluate the annual military construction funding request. This year, the plans provided a much more comprehensive description of challenges and the potential effects on implementation. All of the regional commands describe to varying degrees the status of recent negotiations and agreements with host nations in their fiscal year 2008 master plans. In our review, we explained how these challenges could have an effect on infrastructure and funding requirements. In 2005, we found that none of the commands fully explained the status of or challenges to finalizing host nation agreements. These agreements depend largely on the political environment and economic conditions in host nations. They can affect the extent of host nation support—access to facilities or funding—to U.S. forces. The resulting agreements may increase or decrease U.s.-funded costs for future infrastructure changes. In their fiscal year 2008 master plans, the commands briefly explain the status. of negotiations with host nations to provide more complete and clearer plans.  PACOM identified host nation funding for its bilateral agreements in South Korea. Host nation funding levels were reported at the project level and aggregate level for fiscal years 2009 through 2013. This provided users a better basis to determine the extent to which U.S. funding is needed for facility requirements. For more information on PACOM, visit: www.pcmom.org/pacom- infrastructure-improvement-report. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Master plans do not address the issue of residual value. U.S. government has received approximately $592 million since 1989 in residual. DOD officials believe that residual value cannot be readily predicted and therefore should not be assumed in the master plans. However, since these issues vary by host nation and may not be clear to all users of the plans, we continue to believe that OSD should require commands, at a minimum, to explain the issues with obtaining residual value in each host nation.. which commands are seeking residual value compensation. DOD already provides status reports on its residual value negotiations to the Committees on Appropriations and Armed Services, the report says. "These reports do not provide users of the master plans the kind of information needed to address their concerns about the status of residualvalue negotiations," the report adds. "Our recommendation is to require DOD to provide more information to the master plan users about the implications for U.S. funding," it adds. The report also recommends that DOD provide more details about the negotiations with foreign military installations. value negotiations or the implications for U.S. funding. We continue to believe that the Secretary of Defense should require commands to explain the issues with obtaining residual value from each host nation. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that future PACOM plans address training limitations in its area of responsibility, the Deputy Chief of Staff of the Defense Staff said, "We believe that this is the right thing to do" He added, "Our recommendation to Congress is grounded in the fact that residual value issues vary by host nation and the implications of U.N. funding also vary accordingly" Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been updated to reflect the new realities of the post-Cold War world. Committee has also expressed concern about the use of military construction budget authority for projects at bases that may soon be obsolete because of changes being considered in overseas presence and basing. In Senate Report 108-82, the Senate Appropriations Committee directed DOD to prepare detailed, comprehensive master plans for the changing infrastructure requirements for U.S. military facilities in each of its overseas regional commands. military construction appropriation bill also directed the department to prepare comprehensive master plans with yearly updates through fiscal year 2009. The first report was due with the fiscal year 2005 military construction budget submission and is to be updated each succeeding year to reflect changes to the plans. The Senate report also directed GAO to monitor the comprehensive master plan being developed and implemented for the overseas regional commands and to provide the congressional defense committees with the results of such monitoring. The bill was passed by the Senate on a vote of 50-0. The military construction appropriation request for fiscal year 2008 included approximately $21.3 billion for military construction and family housing. As of fiscal year 2006, DOD had 3,731 installations, with 766 installations located overseas. In recent years, DOD has been undergoing a transformation to develop a defense strategy and force structure capable of meeting changing global threats. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. hopes of avoiding potential environmental problems. The extent to which the commands provide information involving environmental activities provides the users of the plans with the ability to compare and comprehend how costs have varied and how these costs may affect planned U.S. funding levels. The fiscal year 2008 overseas master plans have been updated to reflect our prior recommendations for improving the plans, though they do not address the issue of residual value as we recommended in 2004. To improve the overseasMaster plans and address our recommendations from last year, OSD provided additional guidance on October 12, 2006. year, OSD provided additional guidance on October 12, 2006, to the regional commands in preparing this year’s plans. As a result, the fiscal year 2008 master plans identify how implementation of the plans could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. For example, PACOM’S force structure plans are linked to the military buildup on Guam. CENTCOM's increased troop strength and facilities in Iraq and Afghanistan is linked to ongoing operations. In addition, the commands generally provided more detailed information on a variety of key areas, such as precise facility requirements and costs. The evolution of U.S. overseas defense basing strategies and requirements continues. The changes occurring after this year’s plans were submitted to Congress will have to be reflected in next year's plans. In order to identify improvements to the overseas master plan, we compared and contrasted the fiscal year 2007 and 2008 plans. We assessed the quantity and quality of one plan's responses for each of the data elements, including details on base categories, host nation funding levels, facility requirements and costs. regional commands’ area of responsibility, reflect changes. The plans generally incorporate key changes associated with the continuing evolution of U.S. overseas basing strategies. This year’s plans provide information to respond to most of our prior recommendations. But they do not address residual value—that is, the value that the plans still hold for the U.N. military and the world at large. The U.K. and Australia are among the countries that have adopted the plans. In 2004, before DOD issued its initial overseas master plans, we reported that various factors, such as residual property value, environmental remediation, could affect the funding of U.S. infrastructure overseas. At that time, we recommended that the overseas regional commands address these and other factors in the development of their plans. The fiscal year 2008 master plans provide infrastructure requirements at military facilities in each of the Overseas Regional Commands’ area of responsibility. They reflect changes—to include recent decisions. European Command, U.S. Army Europe, and Special Operations Command. In general, we discussed the reporting requirements contained in OSD’s guidance, host nation agreements and funding levels. We also analyzed available reports, documents, policies, directives, international agreements, guidance, and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing changes in overseas defense basing strategies and requirements. To see firsthand the condition of the bases, go to www.cnn.com/cnndefense. facility requirements and costs, environmental remediation issues, and other issues affecting the implementation of the plans. We compared them to equivalent responses in other plans; formed conclusions as to the completeness, clarity, and consistency of the latest plan’s responses. We also discussed with DOD officials our observations and recommendations, specific reporting requirements, and whether improvements in the guidance and reporting were needed. We interviewed cognizant officials from DOD about the various changes and challenges that were identified within the Plans. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4523. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The GAO staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. to determine the extent to which the fiscal year 2008 overseas master plans have changed since last year.

ROUGE-1: 82.97, ROUGE-2: 74.80, ROUGE-L: 23.52
BERTScore: 59.47

==============================================
==================== [7/100] ====================
Summary:
banks in the first two states have had a relatively greater share of CRE-related nonperforming loans. The latter two states a relatively smaller share of such loans (as measured by the percentage of CRE loans past due or in nonaccrual). We also wanted to include states from different regions of the country. We reviewed SNL data reliability and determined that it was sufficient for the purposes of selecting states for our sample. We further refined the sample and arrived at our four states in relation to these measures and total assets in CRE loan categories.  CRE loans in which the primary source of repayment is not the property itself are called owner-occupied loans. In ADC loans, also called construction and land development (CLD) loans, generally are considered to be the riskiest class of CRE. ADC loans can include properties (such as housing developments or retail space in a shopping mall) that are built before having firm commitments from buyers or lessees. In recent years, this type of loan also has tended to have a much higher loss.  CRE encompasses many different property types that present different risks. Table 4 describes the key CRE property types. CRE loans in which loan also has a much higher loss volatility than loans secured by properties such as multifamily housing and other nonfarm, nonresidential commercial properties. Banks report on four broad categories of CRE in their quarterly call reports: CLD, CRE, CRE-related loans and CRE-non- CRE loans, which include loans to finance CRE that are not secured by CRE, and loans for multifamily property. properties, as well as properties such as hotels, churches, hospitals, schools, and charitable organizations. This category includes offices, retail, and warehouse space. Loans to finance CRE, construction, and land development (not secured by CRE). Interagency guidance issued in 2006 on concentrations in CRE and sound risk-management practices define CRE loans within these categories to include those in which repayment is dependent on the cash flow generated from the real estate itself. When evaluating concentrations inCRE, examiners are instructed not to include owner-occupied properties in which the income or value of the property is not the primary source of repayment. $1.7 trillion in CRE mortgages will mature between 2011 and 2015, with about half of that held at banks. Trepp estimates that approximately 60 percent of CRE debt maturing in 2011 is “underwater’ Due to price declines and stricter bank underwriting standards, those mortgages will be difficult to refinance. To understand how the condition of the CRE market has affected community banks, we analyzed data on CRE loan volume by maturity schedule and underlying collateral value provided by Trepp, a commercial mortgage analysis firm. We analyzed monthly data from Moody’s/REAL Commercial Property Price Index from January 2002 through December 2010. We assessed their reliability for the purposes of providing a picture of the trends in CRE prices. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining price trends. To determine when CRE loans would be repaid, we looked at when the CRE market was at its peak. We also looked at the implications for community banks of CRE loans being repaid at the end of the cycle. Small businesses that are looking to refinance a loan against a property that has lost a significant amount of market value may have to put up more equity. Alternatively, such borrowers might default on the loan, or the bank could work with the borrower to restructure the loan and avoid default. Trepp LLC, a commercial mortgage analysis firm, offers advice on how to get the most out of a loan. For more information, visit www.trepp.com or go to www.mortgageonline.com. 2010, overall CRE market values were down more than 42 percent from their peak in 2007. By January 2011, the delinquency rate on loans included in CMBS was at a record high, above 9 percent. After peaking in 2007, the CMBS market came to a complete halt by the end of 2008. High-value properties in markets such as New York, Washington, San Francisco, and Boston have performed well more recently. But low rental rates and high vacancies indicate that demand for office, retail, multifamily housing, and warehouse space remains relatively weak. The recent downturn in the CRE markets can be seen in the market values for commercial property and the condition of the commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) market. Market values for all major commercial property types have declined significantly. As of December 2010, overall CRE market values were down more than 42%. The weakness in the ADC sector during this crisis was primarily due to residential housing construction, and that weakness affected the performance of other areas of CRE. For example, failed residential housing developments will affect the ability of nearby strip malls to attract and generate rental income from tenants. of the property is not the primary source of repayment. CRE is prone to volatility and cyclical behavior, as illustrated in the current CRE market downturn. This volatility is attributed to characteristics such as information-gathering difficulties, infrequent transactions, high transaction costs, rigid and constrained supply, long construction times and a two-fold reliance on external finance. Additionally, CRE is by nature diverse and localized. For example, shopping centers are one type of CRE, but even within this category there are other types. copies of this report to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, OCC, and other interested parties. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact A. Nicole Clowers at (202) 512-8678 or clowersa@gao,gov. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VI. To assess the condition of the commercial real estate (CRE) market and the implications for GAO. Opinion Survey have suggested that new CRE borrowers have faced tighter credit conditions. Banks tightening their underwriting standards in response to the downturn. Trend of tighter credit standards suggests that borrowers who previously were considered creditworthy might not meet banks’ higher standards. The regulators have been aware for some time of the risk-management challenges related to growing CRE banks. The January 2011 survey found that 10.6 percent of respondents reported easing credit standards over the previous 3 months, compared to 10.5 percent who reported tightening them. toughness and its impact on bank lending. The data provided what the authors call modest support for all three hypotheses that: (1) toughness increased during the credit crunch from 1989 through 1992, (2) it declined during the boom from 1993 through 1998, and (3) differences in toughness affected bank lending, they say. During the creditCrunch they studied, the data show no more than 1 percent additional loans receiving classification or worsening of classification status. The authors also reviewed the economic significance of changes in regulatory “toughnesses” negatively affected by losses in their CRE portfolios. Those trying to improve their capital ratios or ALLL to guard against potential losses may need to reduce lending to maintain an adequate capital-to-assets ratio on their balance sheets. A study found that banks with high CRE concentrations before the recent financial crisis made loans to other sectors of the economy during this crisis at a “significantly slower rate” than banks that did not have high CRE exposure. In addition, the researchers found that the higher the bank’s CRE concentration prior to the crisis, the more its non-CRE lending slowed during the crisis. The authors cite the possibility that high-CRE banks may have failed at a greater rate than banks without that level of CRE exposure. Bankers did not state that regulatory policies were the cause of the CRE downturn, but many noted that examiner actions were exacerbating it. A few stated banks needed to be given time to work through their troubled assets so they could continue to lend and support the economy. That said, a few bankers noted that CRE loan demand from creditworthy banks was still high. a few bankers noted that CRE loan demand from creditworthy borrowers was down significantly, and this was inhibiting loan growth. In an analysis of the credit crunch from 1989 to 1992, researchers found modest support for the hypothesis that increased regulatory ‘toughness’ occurred and that this affected bank lending. To obtain information on how examiner practices may affect lending, we interviewed bankers, examiners, and regulatory officials. We also interviewed officials from ABA, the Conference of ABA and the American Bankers Association.  decline in CRE values has contributed to more noncurrent CRE loans, charge-offs, and bank failures. Nearly a third of community banks are exposing three times their total capital to risks related to their CRE loans. declining property prices increase the proportion of nonperforming loans, lead to a deterioration in banks’ balance sheets, and weaken banks' capital bases. The average from 2000 through 2010 is 1.94 percent; the data show that the volume of noncurrentCRE loans has begun to level off (see fig. 3). The increased exposure of community banks to CRE loans has been pronounced over the last 10–15 years. While CRE collateral backed about 30 percent of total loans and leases at community banks in 2000, a decade later that rate increased to more than 43 percent. Concentrations have been less pronounced at larger banks, which tend to rely less heavily on CRE lending. Increased exposure to CRE has made community banks vulnerable to the decline of this market.. Nearly 30 percent have concentrations of CRE to total capital above 300 percent, the concentration threshold established in the 2006 interagency guidance. We calculated average CRE concentration rates at community banks from 1996 through 2010. We conducted similar analyses for commercial banks with assets more than $1 billion. We assessed the reliability of the call report data by reviewing the controls in place to help ensure its accuracy and by relying on past GAO reviews of these data. We determined that they were sufficiently reliable for the time being.time.time of this report. We are happy to make clear that this report was not based on the results of a recent GAO review. Charge-offs and expected losses that may arise from increases in noncurrent CRE loans have put stress on banks’ capital and ALLL. In 2009 and 2010, 102 of 106 of the MLRs issued by the IGs of the banking regulators cited high CRE concentrations. 92 of 106 specifically cited ADC loans in particular as a contributing factor in bank failures. In the 106 MLRs, 76 of the banks reviewed were community banks. The average charge off rate of CRE loans at community banks was 0.09 percent from 2000 through 2007. We reviewed all 106 of the material loss reviews (MLR) issued by the offices of the inspectors general of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Federal Reserve), FDIC, and U.S. Department of the Treasury. We determined that they were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining trends in CRE loan concentrations and performance at community banks. The report provided additional information on the effect of the CRE market downturn on community banks, we found. In the report, we also looked at the impact of the financial crisis on the community banking sector. In reviewing the MLRs, we noted which ones cited concentrations in either overall CRE or acquisition, development, and construction loans (ADC) as a factor in the bank’s failure. We also interviewed officials at the Conference of State Bank Regulators on the findings of their independent review of the MLR. Additional reports provided background and information on the overall condition of CRE markets and their impact on community banks. The reports we reviewed were culled from research and literature reviews from academic journals and the Congressional Research Service. declines could reduce overall small business lending by community banks. Because CRE can be used as collateral for small business loans, diminished CRE values also can negatively affect credit availability to small businesses. Conversely, increases in collateral values lower the premium on external financing—improving credit availability for borrowers, boosting demand for real estate assets, and driving demand for mortgages and other loans. The U.S. Federal Reserve is expected to announce its next round of economic stimulus later this year. The Fed is also likely to announce a reduction in the number of mortgage-backed securities it will issue. Falling property prices can generate a cycle of declining CRE values. Falling CRE prices decrease the value of collateral held by banks. The problem of CRE loan refinancing may exacerbate the negative CRE trends and limit lending to small businesses. CRE loans usually are written for 3–10 years, with a 20–30 year amortization. The Bank for International Settlements notes that falling CRE prices can give rise to significant losses by banks and ultimately contract the supply of credit. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. guidance is important to avoid unduly hampering credit provision throughout the economy. CRE portfolios continue to have a significant effect on community bank balance sheets as loan delinquencies and charge-offs remain historically high. Community banks continue to seek ways to work with their borrowers and shore up capital to remain solvent. But the current economic environment and the expectation that refinancing of CRE loans will bring a new round of market stress suggest many community banks may face these challenges for some time. The availability of credit to small businesses could be constrained. Although CRE markets nationally have experienced a downturn, some regions have experienced more distress than others. Community banks increasingly have moved toward providing CRE loans more than other kinds of loan products. During the last decade, large banks and other financial institutions increased their market share for consumer consumer loans.and warehouse space remains relatively weak. For example, the CRE markets in the South, Midwest, and West have experienced greater stress and deterioration than the East. These areas have also experienced more bank failures, according to FDIC data. increase in capital requirements or the allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) can affect a bank’s ability to lend. Figure 6 illustrates relationships between loan losses, bank balance sheets, and capital requirements under certain assumptions. If the bank decides to—or is required to—meet a 10 percent capital ratio after adding to its ALLL to cover estimated future losses, it would need to raise capital by seeking it from the bank's owners or from investors. The bank cannot raise additional capital because it is in poor financial condition. Regulators in the U.S. and abroad have been attempting to address the procyclical effects of their actions. Regulators may not adequately discourage overly risky behavior during economic upswings or may inhibit bank lending during downturns. If regulators increase capital requirements at the same time that losses from an economic downturn decrease banks’ capital, banks may be less able to lend while they seek to rapidly raise additional capital. This can exacerbate downswings in credit cycles. Consistent and balanced application of policy guidance in strong and weak economic times is important. holding more capital against each loan means less equity is available to return to shareholders or back new loans. Empirical literature generally supports this basic understanding of the impact of bank capital requirements on lending. Banks with capital bases that have been negatively affected by losses in their CRE portfolios—or those trying to make up for losses in other areas—may not be able to lend as much as banks with higher capital bases. The “capital crunch hypothesis” suggests that institutions with lower capital ratios had slower loan growth (or loans shrank more rapidly) to satisfy capital requirements.  FDIC cited a study by the Bank for International Settlements that concluded the social benefits of higher bank capital requirements outweigh the large reductions in economic activity from a banking collapse. As our report notes, additional capital provides an important cushion against losses, though this comes at a cost. From our review of the literature, there is disagreement on the magnitude of such costs on lending. We added information to the report to clarify this issue, which includes information on the study cited by FDIC. We are sending copies of this report to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, OCC, raise additional capital because it is in poor financial condition, or chooses not to because the cost of capital is prohibitive. Reducing assets is often referred to as “shrinking the balance sheet” However, banks in better financial condition may be able to respond differently in the face of loan losses. They may be can continue lending without raising additional capital or can rely on their stronger financial position. It could also reduce its assets (perhaps by selling assets such as other real estate owned) to decrease liabilities or by paying off borrowings. Federal banking regulators use a number of tools to achieve these goals. Capital provides an important cushion against losses for banks. Examinations and ratings serve to evaluate a bank’s overall risk exposure and its returns on equity to shareholders. When regulators require banks to hold capital above regulatory minimums, these requirements may result from an enforcement action through an agreement between the regulator and the bank. However, requiring banks to holding more capital may reduce the availability of bank credit and reduce returns on Equity to Shareholders. The discussions have been seeking to address the procyclical effects of capital requirements. In December 2010, the Basel Committee released the framework for Basel III. It includes increased and higher-quality capital requirements, enhanced risk coverage, the establishment of a leverage ratio as a “backstop” to the risk-based requirement. It also includes steps to encourage the “build up” of capital that can be used to absorb losses during “periods of stress” and the introduction of two global liquidity standards. The Basel Committee has developed standards that will be implemented gradually so that banks make the shift to higher capital and liquidity standards. Federal bank regulators also have acknowledged the importance of addressing procyclicality in regulatory requirements and have made efforts in this regard. For example, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve has stated the importance. of regulators acknowledging the significance of pro cyclicality and he has noted that both the Basel. Committee and the Financial Stability Forum have noted that. both theBasel Committee and. the Financial stability Forum have acknowledged this. both the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Forum have worked to address this as it relates to capital requirements. In addition, FASB has issued accounting guidance aimed at changes to mark-to-market accounting for assessing asset values in inactive markets. More recently, in May 2010, FasB released a proposed Accounting Standards Update, which encompassed proposals on the impairment of financial assets and suggested implementing a more forward-looking impairment model. Based on exposure draft comments, in January 2011 F ASB proposed with the International Accounting Standards Board a common solution on how to account for the impairment. As of December 31, 2010, there were 6,364 community banks (commercial banks with total assets of $1 billion or less) This represents about 92 percent of all commercial banks, although only about 10 percent of commercial bank assets nationwide. Banks in the U.S. are supervised by one of the following three federal regulators: FDIC, Federal Reserve or OCC. The Federal Reserve supervises commercial banks that are state-chartered and members of the Federal Reserve System. OCC supervises federally chartered national banks. The purpose of federal banking supervision is to help ensure that banks throughout the financial system are operating in a safe and sound manner. Financial regulation more broadly has sought to achieve four goals: to ensure adequate consumer protections, ensure the integrity and fairness of markets, monitor the safety and soundness of institutions, and act to ensure the stability of the overall financial system. Table 1 summarizes the regulators’ oversight responsibilities for community banks. Banks are required to comply with banking laws and regulations in the provision of financial services. before the financial crisis began but did not always take forceful actions to address them. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission report notes areas in which regulators could have been more proactive in using regulatory tools to address certain risks in the financial system. A number of nonmanagement regulatory staff in the field offices we visited acknowledged they could have better followed up on outstanding issues. In response to lessons learned, regulatory officials stated that they have been following up more often on matters requiring attention (MRA) and refocusing their supervisory efforts. their supervisory efforts. OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division issued an MRA Reference Guide that provides examiners with OCC policy guidance. FDIC in June 2009 also implemented its “Forward Looking Supervision’ program. The program focuses on helping ensure that CAMELS ratings reflect consideration of bank management practices without relying solely on a bank’S financial condition. The goal is to ensure that appropriate capital is maintained; and that the bank is well-capitalized. learned from the financial crisis, including findings from the agencies’ IGs. The IGs of the banking regulators completed 106 MLRs in 2009 and 2010 for banks that failed during the recent financial crisis. FDIC determined based on the MLRs that earlier supervisory action was needed to address banks with high risk profiles or weak risk-management practices. We also found in past work that regulators identified a number of weaknesses in institutions’ risk- management systems before the crisis began but did not always take action. Bank officials tend to first approach the examination team. Bank officials also can contact the ombudsman offices at the regulators to seek confidential assistance. In addition to these avenues, banks formally can appeal regulatory decisions. Interviews with officials from 43 banks in different parts of the country identified multiple concerns with examiner treatment of CRE loans and related issues. Many bank officials raised concerns about the time and expense of pursuing formal appeals. In raising issues because of potential repercussions from regulatory officials, other bank officials stated that they do contact regulatory officials when warranted. To determine how the banking regulators responded to trends in the CRE market, we interviewed regulatory and bank officials and reviewed reports of examination (ROE) from a sample of banks. We also spoke with and reviewed speeches and public comments from officials at FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of selecting a sample, based on prior use of these data and interviews with agency officials. We further refined the sample so that we would have a breadth of banks for interviews and ROE reviews. contacting banks to interview. We simultaneously began requesting ROEs and some related workpapers from the federal banking regulators. The resulting sample from this process is outlined below, broken down by regulator (table 5), state (table 6), and CAMELS ratings (table 7) OCC- supervised banks represent the greatest number of banks in our sample, in part because a number of the examinations in our Sample for the OCC were conducted by OCC examiners. We excluded ROEs led by the state banking regulator (because they share examination responsibilities with state examiners) from our sample. The regulators’ examination drafting and review process is iterative, with multiple levels of internal review. According to regulatory staff, this design helps ensure consistent application of guidance and treatment of banks. The process and the staff involved vary slightly for each regulator and based on a bank’s CAMELS rating. For all examinations, a team of examiners will conduct on-site work, led by an examiner-in-charge (EIC). Other staff and management also discuss findings with the examination team and review the examination report. Case managers review draft ROEs for consistency and adequate support of findings for a portfolio of banks. The analyst function at OCC serves a similar role: reviewing many ROEs, although not assigned to a specific portfolio. While case managers and senior management generally do not review loan classification details, they Review loan classification writeups inROEs for accuracy and support for CAMELS ratings in a broad range of ROEs. According to Federal Reserve officials, case managers hold discussions with the examination.team and review the examination report. additional capital or can rely on their stronger financial position to secure new capital. Kay Kuhlman, Assistant Director, and Robert Lee, Analyst-in-Charge, managed this review. Emily Biskup and Jason Wildhagen also led portions of the research and made significant contributions throughout the report. Anna Maria Ortiz and Rudy Chatlos provided methodological assistance related to our nonprobability sample. Bill Cordrey, Jay Thomas, and Gary Chupka provided accounting assistance. Paul Thompson provided legal assistance. accounting assistance. Paul Thompson provided legal assistance. Marc Molino developed the report’s graphics. Barbara Roesmann provided editorial assistance. Jan Bauer, Kimberly Cutright, Andrea Dawson, Nathan Gottfried, Elizabeth Jimenez, Angela Messenger, Lauren Nunnally, Michael Pahr, Ellen Ramachandran, Maria Soriano, Winnie Tsen, Gavin Ugale, and Carrie Watkins held various roles in verifying our findings. The report was written with the help of a team of experts. We reviewed and summarized academic studies that included analysis of various factors on bank lending. We also discussed with Federal Reserve staff whether other similar studies existed. With assistance from a research librarian, we conducted searches of research databases and report sources. We sought and reviewed studies cited by the American Bankers Association (ABA) and the Social Science Search (SSS) database. We concluded that the study's findings were consistent with those of other studies on the impact of bank lending on the economy. studies cited by the American Bankers Association (ABA) and the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) All studies included published papers released between 1991 and 2010. Based on our selection criteria, we determined that six studies were sufficient for our purposes. Nonetheless, the research conducted in this area is not exhaustive and focuses primarily on what occurred during the previous economic downturn of the late 1980s and early 1990s. We analyzed the methodologies underlying these studies and determined that they were the most relevant to our study. affiliated with 43 community banks in a number of states. Most of the bank officials with whom we spoke were located in California, Georgia, and Texas. We initiated contact with 62 banks drawn from this sample and interviewed all of the 21 bank officials who responded to us. We gained additional bank views by supplementing this sample. We interviewed officials from 22 additional banks that either testified before Congress on the issue of CRE, were identified to us through bank associations, or had learned of our work and wanted to talk. or had learned of our work and wanted to talk to us. We interviewed more than 230 regulatory field staff. We do not provide specific numbers in the body of the report to avoid overstating the precision of the results from the nonprobability sample we used to select bank interviewees. We use the term “a few” to refer to 3–10 of 43 banks making the statement; “some’ to referring to 11–25 of 43 Banks making a statement. for interviews and ROE reviews, based on the state in which they were located, their CAMELS composite rating, and their regulator. We wanted to increase the likelihood that banks we sampled were relevant to our study; therefore, we selected banks with elevated CRE and ADC concentrations and those that had a recent bank examination. From that subset, we placed banks into four “pools” with the goal of speaking with officials from, and reviewing ROEs for, a breadth of community banks. with good CAMELS composite ratings and high CRE concentrations. Pool 2 consisted of banks that generally were in good condition but also had ADC concentrations. The Pool 3 banks were intended to represent banks that were struggling and that had a higher number of loans classified as loss at the most recent examination. These had a CAMELS rating of 3, an overall CRE concentration of 300 percent or greater, and a proportion of loans that classified loss to total assets in the 75th percentile and above. This “loss ratio” was calculated by taking within our sample. This “loss ratio” was calculated by taking the total assets classified loss for the most recent examination and dividing them by total assets. Pool 4 consisted of banks with CAMELS composite ratings of 4 or 5, a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE in the 75th percentile or greater for the banks in our sample, and a loss ratio of 75%. Once we selected these pools, we began contacting banks to interview. We simultaneously began requesting ROEs and ROEs from the banks. At each full-scope examination, examiners review the bank’s risk exposure on a number of components using what is known as the CAMELS rating system. The component rating and the composite ratings are scored on a scale of 1 (best) to 5 (worst) Regulatory actions typically correspond to the composite CAMELS ratings, with the actions generally increasing in severity as the ratings become worse. The composite is not an average of the component ratings, but rather a combination of them. Changes in CAMEL ratings were not found to have a “consistent” impact on future lending behavior. When there was an impact, the data show that it was minimal. During the 1985–1993 credit crunch, the authors found some evidence that changes in CAMel ratings had a significant impact on loan growth for commercial and industrial loans but a smaller effect on consumer loans and real estate loans. The authors found minimal evidence that adjustments in CAM EL ratings had any systematic effect on loan grow during what they define as an economic recovery period (1994– 2004) a loan workout, how best to conduct global cash flow analysis, and when new appraisals are needed. A few others felt that some form of general regulatory reprieve was needed for community banks to work through the downturn. Bank officials also stated that their experience with increased supervisory scrutiny was being reflected in CAMELS ratings and additional capital requirements. For example, many bank officials thought the management component rating was more critically assessed now, and heavily driven by asset quality and other component ratings. Some bank officials added that they were being rated on deterioration in their assets. Banks may respond ‘asymmetrically’ to changes in CAMEL ratings. These studies suggest examiners’ actions can affect lending, albeit minimally. However, research suggests that regulators were more stringent during the past credit crunch, even holding financial conditions constant. Therefore, regulators should be aware of how their actions can Affect broader credit markets, and help ensure that their actions help ensure the health of the economy. The study was published in the Journal of the International Bankers’ Association. In the current economic downturn examiners have been focusing more closely on analysis and documentation of borrowers’ and guarantors’ global cash flows. The purpose of such analysis is to determine whether they have sufficient income and liquid assets to support loan payments. In some cases, such analysis shows that a borrower is unable to pay the loan, even if the borrower is currently paying. The renewed focus on global cash flow analysis led many bank officials to conclude that examiners were classifying loans based on collateral value or because the bank lacked updated financial statements. The San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank implemented a “look back’ process in June 2010. The move was in response to criticism that examiners were being too harsh and curtailing credit. Of 11 CRE loan downgrades reviewed in the third and fourth quarter of 2010, nine were downgraded to “adequate’ or “not adequate” The process resulted in internal clarifications of the appraisal review process, ALLL assessment guidance, examiner training sessions on the use of interest reserves and TDRs. loan downgrades reviewed in the third and fourth quarter of 2010, this official stated that 2 should not have been downgraded. In these two cases, the loan downgrades were reviewed and changed before the ROEs were finalized and were consistent with the bank’s internal loan ratings. According to this official, the findings from this quality process will be used to improve the quality of the bank's loans. The bank has not commented on this report. It is not known if this report will be made public. review a sample of banks’ internal ratings of loans to determine the adequacy of credit risk administration and identify loans that show undue risk. As part of this review, examiners determine which loans are considered “pass,” with no concerns noted, as well as those that are special mentioned or “classified” There are three classification categories used by the federal banking regulators: substandard, doubtful, and loss (see table 3). These loan classifications, and the internal ratings that banks produce for all, are used in the review. classifications, and the internal ratings that banks produce for all of their loans, are incorporated into how each bank calculates its allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) If additional loans are classified substandard or doubtful, this information is included in a bank’s updated ALLL estimates. The end result of an on-site examination is an ROE that includes the CAMELS ratings and other findings on the bank's condition, which is called a ROE. It is an estimate made according to accounting guidance of incurred losses on loans and leases. Bank officials say examiners have been more critical of recent appraisals. Classifications are a major concern for banks because they can result in reduced earnings. For example, an examiner may determine that a bank should place a classified loan on nonaccrual, which means the bank cannot accrue the interest income as earnings. While some bankers put loans on non Accrual themselves, a few have classified the loans themselves, according to the report. The report was based on interviews with bank officials. Bank officials say examiners have been asking bankers to place more loans on nonaccrual. Classifications also can reduce earnings because they factor into ALLL. As more loans are classified, more is generally reserved in ALLL to anticipate future losses from nonperforming loans. In our interviews with bank officials, some stated that examiners had been requiring additional ALLL and criticizing the ALLL methodology. In addition, a few bankers noted that some bankers had put loans on Nonaccruals themselves. In October 2009, after the start of the financial crisis and the widespread deterioration in CRE loan performance, regulators issued interagency guidance on CRE loan workouts. Officials told us that the guidance was not intended as forbearance, but to encourage prudent loan workout. An internal review by OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division came to a similar conclusion and noted that examiners have become more consistent in their CRE loan treatment through internal discussions, training, and policy communication efforts. A few bank officials with whom we spoke provided specific suggestions on how to improve policy guidance. 97 percent of respondents stated that the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance has been helpful. Nearly 88 percent of banks stated that no specific guidance was inhibiting them from working with troubled borrowers. Just over three-quarters of them raised concerns about accounting-related guidance and reporting of TDRs. Almost half of the ROEs in our sample that raise concerns related to CRE are banks that failed to report problem loans as Troubled Borrower Derivatives (TDRs) in 2009, the study found. The 2009 guidance was similar to that issued in 1991 and 1993. It includes updates for changes in accounting and information on risk management. Examiners told us that the examples have been helpful in understanding how to apply the guidance. The examples provide scenarios for different CRE loan classification outcomes and whether loans should be considered troubled debt restructurings (TDR), among other issues. The guidance is expected to go into effect on July 1, 2009. It is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2009/09/08/cnnmoney/guidance/top-stories. Examiners told us that the examples have helped to resolve differences of opinion with bankers on how to treat certain CRE- related loans. Such processes reflect federal internal control obtaining input from banks. The regulators’ examination drafting and review process is iterative, with the ROE review process being a key part of the process. The federal government standards for internal control state that managers should have controls in place to compare actual performance to planned or expected results over time throughout the organization and analyze significant differences. case managers and senior management hold discussions with the examination teams as examination findings are being finalized. These roles help ensure consistent application of guidance among various examiners. Regulators also have internal reviews and quality assurance processes to help promote consistency. For the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance, Federal Reserve and FDIC visited field offices, and all regulators hosted conference calls with examiners to better ensure that the field examiners were implementing it as intended. Some field offices also included these CRE topics in their own training and team meetings. We interviewed more than 230 regulatory field staff at FDIC, throughout the Federal Reserve System, and at OCC. The interviews were conducted at headquarters offices in Washington, D.C., and by telephone, video teleconference, and in person at district, regional, and field offices in California, Colorado, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas. We sought to determine if there were different views or practices related to CRE-specific guidance and training provided on the guidance, CAMELS ratings, capital requirements, and liquidity issues. concentrations and wholesale funding sources; (3) appropriate capital is maintained; and (4) examiners follow up on progress related to MRAs and enforcement actions. Based on our analysis of a nonprobability sample of 55 ROEs, examiners’ findings were generally consistent with policy guidance, with some exceptions. Examiners made statements in ROEs related to the quality of banks’ loan workouts that were consistent with the 2009 guidance on CRE loan workouts. In our sample, most ROEs raise concerns about CRE concentrations and how they are managed. if there were different views or practices related to CRE loan treatment among regulatory roles or between those in headquarters and the field offices. The staff with whom we spoke in field locations included field examiners, their supervisors, case managers, analysts (at OCC), and senior management. Of the field staff we interviewed, about 200 were directly involved in drafting or reviewing ROEs, and about 50 of the 200 were in senior management positions. We analyzed 55 ROEs based on our nonprobability sample of banks in California, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas. All OCC districts instituted a real-time review process in which experienced staff reviewed the accuracy of CRE loan classifications. Regulators also use surveys to gather information on how to improve the examination process. For example, the regulators issued an interagency survey for examinations conducted between May 31 and July 9, 2010. According to an FDIC analysis of the resulting data, more than 97 percent of respondents stated that the 2009 CRE loan was a good deal for the bank. The OCC’s central district reported that 95 percent of examiners’ ratings decisions on CRE loans, and 99 percent of their accrual decisions were determined to be accurate. with examiner treatment of CRE loans and related issues. Many bank officials’ overarching concern was that examiners have been applying guidance more stringently than before the financial crisis. Some bank officials we interviewed expressed concerns with examiner- required loan classifications. While more bank officials than not noted that examiner’s actions have been consistent with the letter of the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance, a few said examiners were not always complying with the spirit of the guidance. The banks should allow the banks time to work with borrowers until the current CRE downturn passes, they said. related to CRE loan treatment and interagency statements on lending. We also assessed regulatory efforts to address CRE-related concerns. To understand banks’ concerns about examiners’ treatment of their CRE loans, we interviewed bank and regulatory officials and analyzed ROEs. We spoke with community bank officials affiliated with 43 community banks in a number of states. We observed examiner training at FFIEC provided to commissioned examiners, to include a week-long training on CRE and a day-longTraining on regulatory updates related to policy guidance on CRE loans. Some examiners were including owner-occupied CRE and some were using the wrong type of capital for the calculation, which inflated the concentration levels. A few bankers stated that examiners told them they exceeded the 300 percent concentration threshold for CRE, based on these faulty calculations. A number of examiners admitted that during strong economic times they could have been more assertive in asking banks to implement risk-management changes related to CRE concentrations. When asked whether limits on CRE concentrations should be considered, some examiners did not think that limits were the answer. more details about risk- management practices and examples of when to reduce CRE concentrations would help both examiners and bankers better understand how to assess and manage such concentrations. incorporating CRE-specific analyses into the scope of internal and quality assurance reviews will help ensure consistent application of the guidance and produce clearly articulated support in examination reports for requiring reduced concentrations. In this way, regulatory management can better ensure that examination practices related to CRE concentrations and risks will be carried out consistently from examiner to examiner and across regulators. Bank officials are concerned that examiners have been misapplying the 2006 guidance. A few bankers noted that some examiners want ALLL increased based on their peers’ ALLL rather than the bank’s individual situation. The 2006 guidance states that the CRE and ADC concentration levels are not limits, but some bank officials have been interpreting them that way. Some examiners were including owner-occupied CRE and owner- occupied ADC in their calculations of CRE concentration levels, bank officials said. concentrations. Some ROEs appear to include owner-occupied CRE as part of the CRE concentration calculation. The effect of calculating these concentrations differently can be to increase the total CRE concentration number. This increases the scrutiny placed on the banks’ risk- management systems, the authors say. It could send an unclear message to bank officials about why they need to reduce CRE concentrations if overall they are complying with the guidance, they say. The FDIC clarified to its examiners in April 2010 how to calculate CRE concentrations. Other regulators have not done so. during the prior 36 months, and (3) 100 percent of CLD (or ADC) loans to total capital. In determining the concentration ratio, owner-occupied CRE is removed. The guidance also states that the concentration numbers are not limits, but rather indicate when banks will receive closer scrutiny of risk-management systems and capital adequacy. Such thresholds are not intended to be a “safe harbor”—that is, banks with lower concentrations may still receive scrutiny of their CRE loans in examinations. Bank officials could be unclear on what the trigger is for compliance with CRE risk-management requirements. The ROE requires a bank with a CRE concentration of about 600 percent of tier 1 capital to address a matter requiring immediate attention to improve stress testing for its CRE portfolio. However, the ROE states that the bank was in compliance with the 2006 CRE guidance—which requires robust stress testing when banks reach certain levels of CRE. The bank must reduce its CRE concentrations, but also states that it is complying with the2006 CRE guidance. In 7 instances (of 44), the ROE includes statements that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations. The basis for this requirement was unclear or appeared inconsistent with the 2006 CRE concentration guidance. The enforcement actions for these banks did not require reduced CRE concentrations and emphasized improvements to risk management. Differences in message between an ROE and an enforcement action could be confusing to bank boards and management as they seek to comply with regulatory requirements for risk management related to CRE concentrations, the authors say. They say bank officials could misunderstand whether they should focus on improving their risk-management systems or just reduce their total CRE concentration numbers. application of examiner guidance and our review of ROEs identified some inconsistencies. Monitoring and revising existing controls, such as guidance, is a key component of a strong internal control system. Regulators require banks to maintain certain minimum capital requirements to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system. However, increases in capital requirements can raise the cost of providing loans, which would lead to higher interest rates for borrowers, tighter credit terms, or reduced lending. While capital provides an important cushion against losses for banks, there is to account for the impairment of financial assets and presented the document for public comment. Efforts such as these seek to address procyclicality concerns related to capital and accounting requirements. The potential pro cyclical effects of examiners’ application of policy guidance is something regulators consider in their supervision of banks, according to regulatory officials. The recent financial crisis underscored how important it is for regulators to evenly apply guidance during strong economic periods, although this was not always the case, as previously noted. examiners’ actions were accurate or well-supported, some inaccuracies and inconsistencies were evident. Regulators have mixed views about the adequacy of the 2006 guidance. Revising or supplementing the guidance to provide more details about risk- management practices and examples of when to use it, the authors say. They say lessons learned from the recent financial crisis and CRE market downturn could be used to reassess the guidance’s adequacy. The authors say the guidance should be updated to reflect lessons learned in the financial crisis. Regulators have been incorporating lessons CRE guidance, among other issues. Since the financial crisis, the shift in examination focus and differences in the application of the CRE concentration guidance has contributed to concerns among community banks about regulatory stringency. Some bankers remain concerned that regulators have become more stringent in reviewing CRE loans since the crisis, which could be explained partly by regulators re-emphasizing fundamentals and addressing lessons learned from the crisis. While we and the regulators generally found examiners’ actions were accurate or well-supported, some inaccuracies and inconsistencies were found. The reports concluded that the guidance could have clarified expectations for how examiners should review banks’ compliance with CRE-related risk-management practices. In particular, the reviews found that examination workpapers sometimes lacked sufficient documentation to determine if the examiner adequately assessed compliance with the guidance, particularly related to CRE portfolio-level stress testing. Washington staff also coordinated separate reviews related to implementation of the 2006 guidance, which resulted in internal clarifications of the appraisal process, the reports said. The reports were published by the Federal Reserve. Some bank officials with whom we spoke stated that examiners have been more aggressive about requiring additional capital. Some bankers thought the additional scrutiny was appropriate, but should not necessarily be focused on all banks. Discussions about the procyclicality of regulation have been a central feature of recent deliberations on revised capital requirements among U.S. banking regulators and the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision. Examiners exercise significant judgment during examinations, and different perceptions about the 2006 guidance among regulators could send mixed signals to examiners. banker stated that if examiners had been applying the guidance stringently before the crisis that perhaps the banks could have avoided some of the current problems. A few bank officials stated that the regulators should focus on the community banks that caused the problems, rather than subjecting all community banks to such strict scrutiny. Regulators have been incorporating into their regulatory processes a number of lessons learned from the financial crisis, including findings from the agencies’ report on the crisis. The report was published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Regulators are aware of the potential effects of their actions in exacerbating the credit cycle. Consistent treatment also will make clear to banks what regulatory expectations are for managing CRE concentration risks, says the report. If such requirements are too stringent, they can unduly limit lending. Such limits on lending can have widespread effects on the economy, as acknowledged in Basel Committee for Banking Supervision discussions on capital requirements. Although isolating the problem is difficult, the report says, consistent treatment will make it easier to manage CRE risks. Regulators began to address CRE concerns before the financial crisis. OCC has been reviewing whether particular capital requirements should be set for banks that have higher CRE concentrations. The Federal Reserve stated that it intends to work with its counterparts at the OCC and FDIC to develop and implement enhancements to CRE concentrations guidance. The OCC noted that community banks’ increased CRE concentrations exposes them to CRE market declines, which may require more explicit regulatory expectations for the robustness of risk- management systems, stress testing, capital planning and capital levels. re-issue or supplement interagency CRE concentration guidance to provide greater clarity and more examples to help banks comply with CRE concentration and risk-management requirements. After issuing revised or supplemental guidance, incorporate steps in existing review and quality assurance processes, as appropriate, to better ensure that the revised guidance is implemented consistently and that examiners clearly indicate within bank examination reports the basis for requiring a bank risk management. FDIC also cited a study by the Bank for America that could contribute to interagency action on CRE guidance. draft guidance elicited considerable feedback from bank representatives. Many stated it would curtail their CRE lending, impose arbitrary limits on CRE concentrations. The regulators revised the guidance based on the feedback received. In 7 instances, ROE regulators uncovered instances of inconsistency in the treatment of CRE loans and application of the 2006 CRE guidance, the report says. The findings include concerns on the bank’s need to update or enhance internal policies on CRE concentration limits and CRE underwriting acceptable to the bank, it says. The recent severe cycle of credit upswings followed by the downturn serves as a useful reminder of the supervisory balance needed to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system. To improve supervision of CRE-related risks, we recommend that the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Board of Governors, and the Comptroller of the Currency: Enhance and either re-issue or supplement interagency CRE concentration guidance—based on agreed-upon standards.for Banking Supervision discussions on capital requirements. a number of the examinations in our sample for the Federal Reserve and FDIC were led by the state regulator and were out of the scope of our review. We randomly removed some OCC-led bank examinations for which we had a sufficient number of cases: banks rated 2 in Texas. For FDIC, we reviewed reports conducted by FDIC’s Internal Control and Review Section for the Atlanta, Dallas, New York, and San Francisco regions. We reviewed reports from all four of its districts related to the quality assurance process that focused on reviewing the classifications of CRE loans. inconsistencies or other needed improvements related to examiner treatment of CRE loans. For certain FDIC regions, reviews found that examiners could have better documented findings on CRE concentrations or could have provided earlier or harsher criticism of CRE concentrations. Certain districts of the Federal Reserve System reviewed implementation of the 2006 CRE concentration guidance and found instances of inconsistency. The Federal Reserve welcomed our recommendations to improve CRE concentrations guidance to help banks and examiners comply with it, and to ensure consistent implementation of such guidance. Senior officials and field examiners have differing views on whether the 2006 CRE guidance is sufficient in addressing CRE concentration risks. Two of the FDIC ROEs in our sample that use only tier 1 capital in the calculation were issued after the April 2010 clarification. Some thought that a focus on additional capital would be sensible given the severe capital shortfalls some banks with CRE concentrations faced during the financial crisis. In written comments, FDIC stated that it has already supplemented the 2006CRE concentrations and risk-management guidance.

ROUGE-1: 75.25, ROUGE-2: 68.39, ROUGE-L: 23.97
BERTScore: 53.67

==============================================
==================== [8/100] ====================
Summary:
next year under a Putin presidency. He projected that Putin would not reverse the course of U.S.-Russian relations, but they might be more "challenging" since Putin has an "instinctive distrust ofU.S. intentions" Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress. Among these concerns, many Members have condemned Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008, the death of lawyer Sergey Magnitskiy after being detained and tortured in a Russian prison in 2009. detained and tortured in a Russian prison in 2009, and the re-sentencing of businessman/oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy in 2010 to several more years in prison. Recent legislation includes the Senate and House versions of the Magnitskiy Rule of Law bills, which would impose a visa ban and an asset freeze on human rights abusers. The National Defense Authorization Act of 2012 ( P.L. 112-81 ), signed into law on December 31, 2011, that calls for a plan to provide defensive weaponry to Georgia. budget for FY2013 submitted to Congress in February 2012 requests $52 million for Russia. Some observers have suggested that since Putin has condemned such aid as interference in Russia's internal affairs, he may tighten restrictions on such aid for non-governmental organizations. Ongoing congressional concerns about democratization, human rights, and trade will continue and may have been heightened by the Russian election outcome. During his trip to Russia, President Obama also met with Russian President Vladimir Putin to discuss the state of the Russian economy. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus stressed that the growth of U.S. trade and investment would be facilitated by further democratization. Russia's legislature will give approval for the ratification of WTO accession by mid-2012. Congress may consider whether to grant Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) to Russia and to lift the applicability of the so-called Jackson-Vanik provisions of the Trade Act of 1974 to Russia (concerning emigration) Russia's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) is expected to be approved by the end of 2012. of the Trade Act of 1974 to Russia (concerning emigration from the former Soviet Union) Russia's human rights and democratization record may well be part of the debate. On March 5, 2012, Representative David Dreier, chairman of the House Democracy Partnership, congratulated Putin on his election victory, but objected to Putin's election night victory speech. Dreier stated that the United States was not seeking to dictate to Russia, but suggested that the U.S., "a country that has had a 223-year history of democracy" a good choice as prime minister. He stated that the United States wanted a "strong, vibrant, and growing Russia," and good U.S.-Russia relations. He said that Putin was a good choice because he had a good relationship with the U.N. Security Council. He added that Putin had a great deal of respect for the United Nations and its mission in the Middle East, including the role of the UN Security Council as an arbiter of international law. He also said that he wanted a strong, vibrant Russia. Putin is expected to attend the Group of 8 (G-8) industrialized nations meeting at Camp David, Maryland, on May 19-20, just before a NATO summit meeting. Some observers have warned that if European missile defense issues remain contentious at the time of this NATO Summit, Putin may deliver a harsh anti-U.S. speech. The Administration has suggested that Obama and Putin may hold a summit on the sidelines of the G-8 meeting. The two "agreed that the successful reset in relations should be built upon during the coming years," Obama said. Russian media reported in early March that a lack of progress on missile defense made it unlikely that a NATO-Russia Council meeting would be held in Chicago. A mostly positive assessment of near-term U.S.-Russia relations was given by Director of National Intelligence James Clapper in testimony to Congress in late January. Clapper suggested that there would be "more continuity than change" in Russian domestic and foreign policy over the next year under a Putin presidency. He projected that Putin would not attend the NATO Summit. proposal that also was endorsed by Putin on March 5. It remains to be seen whether the impetus to create and strengthen civil society organizations will be sustained, particularly if a new Putin administration cracks down on such efforts. The U.S. "looks forward to working with the President-elect after ... he is sworn in," the State Department said the day after the election. The statement pointed to the results of the preliminary report of the OSCE in stating that the "election had a clear winner with an absolute majority" an absolute majority," but also urged the Russian government to address shortcomings mentioned in the report. The statement hailed the large number of Russian citizens who turned out to monitor the election, held rallies, and otherwise "express[ed] their views peacefully" On March 9, 2012, President Obama telephoned President-elect Putin to congratulate him on his electoral victory, and stated that he looked forward to meeting him at Camp David, Maryland, in May 2012 (see below). Other Western nations have also praised the intentions of the government to improve the political system. Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress. The Obama Administration has been critical of the apparently flawed Russian presidential election. Some in Congress also have criticized the conduct of the election, but have endorsed continued engagement, while others have called for stepping back and reevaluating the Administration's engagement policy. Congress may consider the implications of another Putin presidency, lagging lagging behind the U.S. in some areas of economic growth, such as the energy sector and the economy. The European Union's High Representative Catherine Ashton on March 5 "took note" of Putin's "clear victory" Ashton praised the significant level of civic engagement in the election. She urged Russian authorities to address shortcomings mentioned in the OSCE report. She stated that the "EU looks forward to working with the incoming Russian President" to implement pledges of economic and political reforms. The Administration has pointed to successes of the U.S.-Russia "reset" of relations as including approval by Russia in 2009. occupied areas of Georgia, to which Moscow thus far has failed to respond. In early 2011, Russia abstained on a UNSC resolution calling for a "no-fly zone" to protect civilians in Libya. Almost immediately Russia denounced NATO actions in Libya as aimed at "regime change" Russia has used the same rationale in vetoing UNSC resolutions on Syria. Secretary Clinton termed the February Russian response to the U.S.-Russia reset as "disappointing," but not surprising. UNSC resolutions on Syria. Secretary Clinton termed the February Russian veto "despicable" Russia is a major arms supplier to Syria and has a Mediterranean naval docking facility at Tartus (although it is seldom used). Although the Putin-Medvedev "tandem" defended the veto, it faced Russian domestic as well as international criticism. On February 24, Putin rejected an argument that U.S.-Russia relations were "cooling off," stating that "I don't think we are seeing a cooling.... "reset" of relations as including approval by Russia in 2009 for the land and air transit of military supplies to support U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan. It is possible that the anti-Americanism exhibited by Putin during the campaign could put a strain on future cooperation under the "reset," particularly if the opposition protests continue in Russia. The U.N. Security Council (UNSC) resolution in 2010 tightening sanctions on Iran, as well as the signing of the START Treaty and the work to gain Russia's invitation to join World Trade Organization. stating that "I don't think we are seeing a cooling.... We have a constant dialogue" In an interview with Western media on March 1, Putin praised the U.S.-Russia reset as "useful" Putin also stated that he had warm relations with President Obama, whom he viewed as desiring good U.K.-U.S. relations. During President Obama's March 9, 2012, telephone call with Putin, the two discussed the START Treaty and WTO accession. Commission have continued in recent weeks. Russian officials have stated that cooperation on the transit of supplies to support U.S. and NATO operations in Afghanistan will not be linked to other issues. Russia continues to support this transit because it helps stanch terrorist threats aimed at Russia emanating from Afghanistan. But differences have remained or emerged in recent months. The United States, for example, continues to call for Russia to withdraw its troops from occupied areas of Georgia, to which Moscow thus far has not responded. U.S. Ambassador Michael McFaul was accused on state-owned television of providing orders and money to some opposition politicians. McFaul has reported that he has had fruitful meetings with Russian officials since this criticism. One positive sign is that various meetings of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission have continued in recent weeks, writes CNN's John Defterios. Defterio: If the opposition protests continue in Russia into the summer and are met by a government crackdown and continuing anti-American statements, the situation could get worse. Some observers have speculated that Putin may not follow through on his announced plans to nominate Medvedev as his prime minister. Most observers, however, believe that Medvede will be confirmed as prime minister, at least in the short term. Some observers suggest that a Prime Minister Medvedeva would have substantial authority as a former president, so that the "tandem" would continue to operate. According to this view, Putin would be unlikely to fire Prime MinisterMedvedev. However, prime ministers have been replaced by Putin (and former President Yeltsin) when the economy has been poor. Medvedev announced several democratization initiatives in his state of the federation speech on December 22 that he stated were partly spurred by the protests. One proposal was to restore gubernatorial elections, which Putin had abolished in 2004. Putin voiced qualms about this initiative, requesting that he be asked to withdraw it from the legislature. Putin has stated that Medvedev as prime minister would continue to carry out initiatives he launched as president.by Putin (and former President Yeltsin) when the economy has declined. Former Russian President Vladimir Putin served two elected terms from 2000 to 2008. He was required to step down due to a constitutional limit to two successive terms. He endorsed his then-First Deputy Prime Minister Dmitriy Medvedev as his choice to be the next president. Medvede was elected by a wide margin in March 2008, and upon taking office nominated Putin to be his prime minister. The U.S. Congress may consider the implications of another Putin presidency, lagging democratization, and human rights abuses in Russia. In September 2011, Prime Minister Putin and President Medvedev announced that they would exchange places so that Putin could re-assume the presidency. This announcement created a great deal of resentment among many Russians who felt that a backroom deal had been foisted on them. The resentment was mostly low-key at first, but signs included polls showing growing dissatisfaction with Putin and Medvede. The trigger for wider open discontent was a series of corruption scandals involving Putin's government and the media. Putin voiced qualms about this initiative, requesting that he retain control over who may run in such elections, and the draft bill reportedly contains such a provision. Another vague proposal by Medvedev was to increase the openness of legislative elections, which some observers had hoped would include the restoration of constituency races. The bill submitted to the Duma, however, called for altering electoral procedures so that voters in 225 new districts would select a party list with identifiable local candidates. Golos researchers have termed these two bills what they have termed "two bills" Dreier endorsed an idea that Putin not run again after his third term in office, call a new Duma election, and hold free and fair gubernatorial elections. He also praised Medvedev's request for an examination of the sentence against Khodorkovskiy. He suggested that former Russian Finance Minister Alexey Kudrin might make a good choice as prime minister. He stated that the.that has had a 223-year history of democracy, could provide a little bit of advice to a country that is just now entering its third decade of democracy. Golos researchers have termed these two bills disappointing "propaganda" exercises. Another bill may prove more reformist, however, by greatly reducing the registration requirements for new parties. On March 5, Medvedev directed the prosecutor general to review businessman/oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy's conviction and that of 30 other prisoners. He also ordered the Prosecutor General to examine the mid-2011 denial of party registration to the Party.identifiable local candidates. The bill may permit many currently unrepresented interests to participate in political life. A December 2011 election to Russia's legislature, the Duma, was widely viewed by many Russians as not free and fair. Demonstrations against the election began even before the polls closed. Over the next few weeks, several protests of up to 100,000 or more people were held in Moscow and many other cities. These protesters demanded that a new Duma election be held, but also called for a scheduled March 4, 2012, presidential election to be held. and Medvedev. Putin, Gennadiy Zyuganov, Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, and Sergey Mironov were nominated by parties with seats in the Duma. Four of the five candidates were able to register for the March 4, 2012, presidential election. President Medvedev introduced some legislation that he claimed would enhance democratization in Russia in the future. According to the election rules, other candidates were not allowed to run for office. The election is scheduled for March 4 and is expected to be free and fair. Putin and other observers have pointed to this growing middle class as major participants in the protests that began after the Duma election. A major question is whether a Putin presidency can implement substantial economic and democratic reforms. Some critics have argued that Putin is not attuned to making such reforms, and that he will face rising civil discontent during his third term in office. Most observers discount such a scenario, but argue that Russian political and economic institutions and civil society will face substantial strains to adapt to the long-term demands of a modern global economy. initiatives, according to many observers. Besides these efforts, Putin boosted or promised large increases in military and government pay, pensions, and student stipends. These benefits may have made many voters very receptive to his argument that they should elect him in order to preserve their benefits. A major aspect of the shift in tactics by the Putin campaign involved blaming the United States and the West for the protests. This anti-Americanism aimed to define the election as a patriotic vote for Putin. After Secretary Clinton voiced criticism of the Duma election in early December 2011, Putin accused her of "giving up" Putin declared victory two hours after the polls closed and after about one-third of polling precincts had reported that he had received a sufficient vote for a first-round win. He and Medvedev hosted a large pre-planned outdoor victory rally and concert in Moscow. Putin proclaimed that the voters had rebuffed attempts to "break up the state and usurp power.... We proved that no one can impose on us.... We have won in open and honest battle." Even before the last polling places in Russia had closed, which ostensibly is illegal. We have won in open and honest battle, CEC head Vladimir Churov says. He declares that the election was the most "open, fair, transparent and decent presidential campaign" in the world. Zhirinovskiy and Mironov immediately congratulated Putin for what they termed an honest win. Zyuganov and Prokhorov alleged that electoral irregularities meant that the vote was not free and fair. All but ZyugAnov met with Putin on March 5, where a discussion of each candidate's campaign was held. elections and lost badly. Zyuganov and Zhirinovskiy had run several times. While he was speaker of the Federation Council (the upper legislative chamber), Mironov ran in the 2004 presidential election, where he praised Putin's policies. Prokhorov announced his candidacy just two days after a large opposition demonstration on December 10, 2011, raising speculation that he was urged to run by the government. According to polling, substantial percentages of prospective voters viewed all these candidates in a negative light and would never vote for. Putin won 63.6% of 71.8 million votes cast, somewhat less than the 71.3% he had received in his last presidential election in 2004. Some of Mironov's expected supporters instead may have voted for Prokhorov, reducing his result below that gained by his A Just Russia Party in the Duma election. Moscow was the only major city where Putin failed to get over 50% of the vote, even though there may have been a concerted effort to inflate Putin's result. candidates in a negative light and would never vote for them. These negative views greatly hampered the effectiveness of these candidates' campaign efforts. Many voters may well have voted for Putin as the "lesser evil," according to some observers. Besides permitting protests "for free elections" as well as opposition presidential candidate meetings, the Medvedev-Putin government launched efforts to appeal to wavering if not disgruntled voters. The government also offered opposition figures jobs, including by offering opposition leaders jobs. revitalized opposition political parties. Udaltsov, who represents the "left wing" nationalists among the protesters, has disagreed. Business interests appeared to welcome Prokhorov's third-place showing and his indication that he would continue a role in politics by forming a party. The proposal also was endorsed by Putin on March 5, and has been endorsed by Mironov and other opposition leaders. It would allow A Just Russia Party to join with the Communist Party to form a new social democratic coalition. and many were disqualified on technical grounds by the Central Electoral Commission (CEC), and only three managed to submit signatures. Two out of the three—regional governor Dmitriy Mezentsev and opposition Yabloko Party head Grigoriy Yavlinskiy—were disqualified by the CEC on the grounds that over 5% of their signatures were invalid. The signatures of the third prospective candidate, businessman Mikhail Prokhorov, were deemed valid and he was placed on the ballot. seats in the Duma. According to the election rules, other prospective candidates from minor parties not represented in the. Duma or self-nominated individuals were required to gather 2 million signatures of support. Many analysts have viewed these and many other requirements imposed on prospective minor party and independent candidates as too restrictive and as limiting political participation. Of the 17 individuals who initially announced they would run for the presidency, some dropped out and many were disqualified on technical grounds by the Central Election Commission. not disperse after the time for the rally had elapsed, police forcibly intervened. At a protest rally in St. Petersburg, reportedly 300 people were detained. Small protest rallies reportedly numbering up to several hundred people occurred in several other cities of Russia. A "for free elections" protest rally was held in Moscow on March 10, attended by 10,000-25,000 people. After the rally some protesters attempted a march and were temporarily detained, including Sergey Udaltsov, who represents the "left wing" The initial protests after Putin's election by those who view the electoral process as tainted appeared smaller in size and number than after the Duma election. Authorities approved a protest rally in Pushkin Square in central Moscow on March 5, along with Putin victory rallies elsewhere in the city. Some youth activists involved in the victory rallies reportedly stated that they were ready to fight against "provocations" by the protesters. After some of the protesters allegedly did not disperse after the time for the rally had elapsed, if not disgruntled voters, including by offering opposition figures jobs and by making some changes in government postings. Russia's ambassador to NATO, the nationalist Dmitriy Rogozin, was elevated to deputy prime minister in a seeming effort to attract the nationalist vote. Also, the Putin campaign orchestrated large-scale rallies, the most prominent of which was a pro-Putin demonstration on February 4 in Moscow aimed at rivaling the attendance at a "for free elections" rally, and a campaign rally in the Luzhniki stadium in Moscow. The government claimed that over 130,000 supporters attended the rally, although the stadium's capacity is about 84,000. At this final campaign rally of the Putin campaign, some individuals reportedly had arrived by bus or train after trips lasting more than 24 hours. In addition to these pro-Putin events, a wave of television shows was launched extolling Putin's rule. At the same time, authorities moved to harass and suppress independent vote monitoring groups, the Internet, and certain "old media" election in early December 2011, Putin accused her of "giving orders" for the launch of protests. Rogozin even asserted that Secretary Clinton and former Secretary Madeleine Albright wanted to destroy Russia in order to take over Siberia's mineral resources. At the campaign rally at the Luzhniki stadium on February 23, Putin urged voters "not to look abroad ... and not betray their motherland" This anti-American theme also was prominent in a number of supposedly non-partisan talk shows and "documentaries" The most sensational was an announcement in late February that Ukrainian police had uncovered a plot by Chechen terrorists to assassinate Putin after the election. Other sensational accusations included those by Putin that oppositionist politicians planned to kill one of their own in order to blame the death on him. Another was that oppositionists planned to stuff ballots marked with Putin's name into ballot boxes to declare that the election was illegitimate. The privately owned REN TV showed a program warning that if Putin won the election, the opposition would kill him. owned REN TV showed a program warning that if Putin was not elected, Russia would descend into civil war and destruction within a few months at the hands of the opposition. In an attempt to convince the public that the election would be free and fair, Prime Minister Putin announced in mid-December 2011 that two webcams would be placed in each of about 94,500 polling places. Most of these were installed. Individuals who pre-registered were permitted to view the voting and vote-counting on-line (the latter after a delay until all polls were closed). A number of supposedly non-partisan talk shows and "documentaries" aired on state-owned or controlled television. Several major Russian polling organizations are owned by the government or receive government contracts. Some critics have argued that VTsIOM's polls were an announcement of what results the government planned for on election day. The government pointed to the polls as evidence that the results were valid and not due to ballot-box stuffing, according to the government's own report on the election. In particular, the prominent All-Russian Center for the Study of Public Opinion (known by its Russian acronym, VT'sIOM), is state- owned. were valid and not due to ballot-box stuffing, according to these critics. They point to Putin's award of the Order for Services to the Fatherland to VTsIOM after the 2007-2008 election cycle as evidence of this collusion. On February 27, the last permitted day to release polling results, VT'sIOM estimated that Putin would garner nearly 59% of the vote, so that a second round of voting would not be necessary. During the last few days before the election, the Putin government and campaign made several accusations that opposition politicians and other enemies of Putin were enemies. The independent Golos (Voice) monitoring group reported the heavy use of "carousel voting," in which buses carried groups that voted at several polling places. Golos also reported the use of absentee ballots in government offices, institutions, and businesses that were gathered up and checked by supervisors to make sure that the employees had voted for Putin. The group concluded in its preliminary report on the election that although there appeared to be somewhat fewer irregularities than during the Duma election, the presidential election was not free and fair. Duma election, the presidential election was not free and fair. At a press conference, Golos also stated that its ballot count had given Putin just over 50% of the vote, giving him a win in the first round. Russian physicist Sergey Shpilkin estimated that Putin may actually have received about 58% ofThe official result inflated by ballot box stuffing, by inflating the voter turnout and allocating these votes to Putin, and by other means. In their preliminary report, the 262 monitors led by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) concluded that the election wasn't free or fair. Thousands of irregularities reported by independent Russian activists. Video of individuals allegedly admitting that they had been paid to vote repeatedly. "hundreds" of buses parked in Moscow that allegedly had carried Putin's supporters into the city to inflate the voting results there for Putin. The performance of the webcams was uneven. Many were not focused on the ballot boxes or views were blocked, according to reports. The vote count in Chechnya continued its tradition of reporting a high turnout (99.6%) and vote ( 99.8%) for Vladimir Putin. The OSCE reported that the government did not hinder demonstrators calling for fair elections. The government permitted many monitors at polling places, and installed webcams in most polling places. On election day, the OSCE monitors assessed voting positively overall in the over 1,000 polling places they visited. But witnessed irregularities in vote-counting in nearly one-third of the 98 polling stations visited and in about 15% of 72 higher-level territorial electoral commissions. Putin (and outgoing President Medvedev) face rising dissatisfaction by many Russians with what are viewed as poor election results. OSCE monitors say they did not view the election as free and fair. The report says Prime Minister Putin received an advantage in media coverage. It also raised concerns that precinct polling place chairpersons generally appeared to belong to the ruling United Russia Party or were from the ruling party. The election was held on March 18, 2014. It was the first presidential election in Russia since 1998. The result was a victory for Vladimir Putin, who was re-elected for a second term as prime minister. independent vote monitoring groups, the Internet, and certain "old media" newspapers and broadcasters that the opposition relied on. Putin refused to participate in televised debates with the other candidates, but appeared extensively on television in the guise of carrying out his duties as prime minister. From mid-January through late February, he published seven long articles in major newspapers. These "election manifesto" articles covered such policy issues as ethnicity, the economy, democracy, socioeconomic problems, national security, and foreign policy. In the first overview article, Putin boasted that during his rule, he helped "deliver Russia from the blind alley of civil war" Putin warned against creating a contentious electoral environment of "buffoons" He called for retaining a strong federal government if gubernatorial elections are reinstated. He also called for greater efforts to combat corruption, which he claimed had strengthened when young greedy people had moved into the civil service. In general, the articles appeared to be a reiteration of existing policies and sentiments, rather than a forum for launching new initiatives, according to many observers. Besides these efforts, Putin boosted education, although he admitted that civil society recently had demanded more political participation. he helped "deliver Russia from the blind alley of civil war," he writes. In the democracy article, he argues that there was no democracy in Russia in the 1990s, only "anarchy and oligarchy" He defined this democracy in terms of the rights of Russians to employment, free healthcare, and education, although he admitted that civil society recently had demanded more. He says he helped "break the back of terrorism, restore the country's territorial integrity and constitutional order, and spark economic revival" Russian sociologists say about one-quarter of the population belongs to the middle class. This portion could grow to one-third by the end of the decade, they estimate. These individuals, including many business owners and private-sector employees, want a government that is not corrupt and follows the rule of law, these sociologist report.face rising dissatisfaction by many Russians with what are viewed as tainted elections, corruption, and other political and human rights problems.. Putin and other observers have pointed to this growing middle class as one of the reasons for Russia's economic growth.

ROUGE-1: 89.03, ROUGE-2: 79.79, ROUGE-L: 26.64
BERTScore: 60.13

==============================================
==================== [9/100] ====================
Summary:
According to NMFS funding and budget requests, the Northwest Center needs at least $8.9 million to complete ongoing and planned improvements. The actual cost of implementing remaining improvements to Pacific groundfish stock assessments may be even higher. The Northwest Center did not receive its full funding request, in part, because NMFS did not get all the funding it had requested. NMFS allocated $3.6 million (58 for all marine stock assessments), resulting in a $2.6million shortfall in the Center's request. Northwest Center has implemented some recommendations aimed at improving stock assessments. Northwest Center officials said they try to meet the training and professional development needs of their scientific staff. To date they have focused on developing external training programs, such as the University of Washington graduate program, to help staff prepare for stock assessments and related activities. The improvement plan also recommended that NMFS provide additional training to ensure that qualified NMFS staff are available now and in the future to conduct stock assessments, related activities and other activities. The $8.9 million needed to implement remaining recommended improvements is probably understated, officials say. The Northwest Center’s budget requests for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 are preliminary requests submitted before the Northwest Center received its fiscal year 2003 funding. NMFS’ science centers, including the Northwest Centre, primarily make and justify their funding requests in response to how much money Congress appropriates. After Congress passes NMFS' budget, NMFS asks its science centers to reassess and detail how much new money each needs. the quantity of the data increases, the assessments become more reliable because the data cover a longer period of time. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing improvements in data quantity, such as more frequent surveys. A better sense of trends and variability allow for improved short-term predictions of the status of the species, the center says. The center's goal is to provide a better understanding of the variability inherent in the population distribution and abundance, officials say. It's also trying to improve the quality of data, including more frequent and randomly selected surveys. 13 full-time staff are needed to expand high-priority data collection efforts. The lack of quality data was identified in the improvement plan as an impediment to reliable stock assessments. For example, when equipment on different survey vessels are not calibrated, the data are not comparable, and trends may not be accurately determined. The Northwest Center is continuing its efforts to calibrate survey vessel. The plan calls for recruitment surveys to be coastwide and conducted twice a year. It also calls for surveys in untrawlable habitat. Northwest Center has assigned data stewards to each data set used in its assessments. Data stewards are responsible for helping assessors compile relevant data and for conducting quality assurance and quality control checks on the data. The Northwest Center plans to conduct a review of the data used in the assessments to ensure that it is accurate and reliable. The data stewards will also be responsible for carrying out quality control and quality assurance checks on all data sets used in assessments. For more information about the data stewards, visit northwestcenter.org. The Pacific Council’s goal is to have long-range plans for managing groundfish fisheries. Since 1995, the Northwest Center has had lead responsibility for conducting stock assessments on Pacific groundfish. The Northwest Center conducts ecosystem research as part of its Science for Ecosystem-based Management groundfish stock assessments. NMFS is now updating its plan and cost estimates for improving Pacific ground fish stock assessments and will release an updated groundfish research plan in late 2004. The updated plan will estimate how much money will be spent on the project. Center held public meetings in several communities along the Pacific coast to discuss implementation of the Observer Program. The Northwest Center now participates in NMFS’ National Sea Grant program to augment a Northwest Center-supported graduate study program at the University of Washington that trains stock assessment scientists. The Sea grant program provides fellowships for students interested in marine research, such as stock assessment methodology and marine resource economics. The northwest center plans to employ two Sea Grant students during the summer of 2004. While the Northwest Center will continue to work with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, it will no longer participate in the National SeaGrant program. to more clearly differentiate between NMFS as a whole and NMFS’ Northwest Center in particular. We made similar changes, as appropriate, throughout the report. We revised the report to include the year and scope of the task force review. The report also included the date and citation of the National Marine Fisheries Service’s task force on groundfish stock assessments. It was updated to include that the Northwest Center is responsible for coordinating groundfish Stock Assessments (GSA). The report was also updated to indicate that the GSA was responsible for the “bottom” trawl survey, rather than the ‘top’ trawl. Efforts continue to communicate strategies needed to improve stock assessments. Northwest Center staff meet with constituents, such as representatives from state agencies and the fishing industry, to discuss groundfish management issues. In addition, the Northwest Center organized a series of public meetings to discuss new initiatives that affect the stock assessment program. Along the southern California coast. Previous surveys ended at Morro Bay, California. The Northwest Center held public meetings in several communities along the Pacific. For more information, visit northwestcenter.org.  NMFS has six regional science centers, which are responsible for generating the scientific information necessary for the conservation, management, and use of each region's marine resources. The six fishery science centers and their areas of responsibility are as follows: Alaska Center, covering the coastal oceans off Alaska and parts of the west coast of the United States. Northeast Center,covering waters along the Northeast Continental Shelf from the U.S. to Japan. Western Pacific Council, covering waters off Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and uninhabited U.s. territories in the Western Pacific. Center, covering waters along the Northeast Continental Shelf from the Gulf of Maine to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. Northwest Center, covering the northeast Pacific Ocean, primarily waters off the coasts of California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Pacific Islands Center,. covering the central and western Pacific Ocean; Southwest Center, primarily covering waters off. the coast of California and areas throughout the Pacific and Antarctic Oceans. Southeast Center. covering the continental southeastern United States as well as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The Magnuson-Stevens Act, as amended by the Sustainable Fisheries Act, also established national standards. The Magnuson-Stevens Fisheries Conservation and Management Act granted responsibility for managing marine resources to the Secretary of Commerce. NMFS is part of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The act also established eight regional fishery management councils, each responsible for making recommendations about managing fisheries in federal waters. The eight councils include the Caribbean Council, covering waters off the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The councils are made up of fishing industry participants and state and federal fishery managers. off the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Gulf of Mexico Council, covering waters off Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and the west coast of Florida. Mid-Atlantic Council,covering waters off New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. New England Council,covered waters off Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. North Pacific Council, covered waters off Alaska. South Atlantic Council, cover waters off North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and east coast ofFlorida. Western Pacific Council covering waters of Hawaii, American Samoa, and Washington.  NMFS determined that darkblotched rockfish was overfished in 2000, when the last full stock assessment was conducted. Yelloweye rockfish almost exclusively inhabit rocky areas from northern Baja, Mexico to the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. The reliability of NMFS’ stock assessments is questionable for the Pacific hake and four rockfish species we reviewed, although they were based on the best information available at the time the assessments were conducted. Four of the assessments did not have enough data. Pacific hake, also called Pacific whiting, is generally found off the west coast of North America. It is one of many species of hake distributed in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Fishing of Pacific hake primarily takes place off the coasts of northern California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Fishermen use mid-water trawls and generally fish over the ocean bottom at depths of 100 to 500 meters. The species is also known as bocaccio rockfish, canary rockfish and darkblotched rockfish. Bocaccio rockfish generally inhabit waters off the coast of northern Baja, Mexico to Alaska. Pacific hake was declared overfished in 2002 because of low biomass. By 2004, the biomass was estimated at between 2.7 and 4.2 million metric tons. Bocaccios are commercially fished using trawls, hook-and-line and gillnets.. Adult bocaccIO commonly live over rocky areas or open areas of the ocean. They are commonly sold at market as “red snapper’ commonly live over rocky areas or open areas of the ocean’s floor to about 320 meters. Bocaccio were formally declared to be “overfished’ in 1999. The 2003 stock assessment estimated the bocaccIO biomass at 7,133 metric tons. Canary rockfish inhabit the northeastern Pacific Ocean, from northern Baja, Mexico to the western Gulf of Alaska. Adult canary rockfish are primarily found along the continental shelf, from 46 to 457 meters deep.  NMFS declared canary rockfish as overfished in 2000. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the canary Rockfish biomass at 6,197 metric tons. Darkblotched rockfish are found in the waters from Santa Catalina Island, California to the Bering Sea on soft bottom areas at about 29 to 549 meters deep. Commercial fishery concentrations are located off the coasts of California and Oregon. The species are caught primarily by commercial trawls and contribute to both commercial and recreational fishing.  NMFS reported in 2003 that 77 percent of the survey area was trawlable and 23 percent was untrawlable. Bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched live in both the trawlables and untrawlables habitats. NMFS does not have a standard for stock assessments because the surveys were conducted only in trawlability waters. As a result, some rockfish populations may be understated while others may be overstated, NMFS says. The fifth groundfish species, Pacific hake, lives primarily in mid-water habitat, so the concerns about the lack of NMFS data in rocky, untrawling habitats are not applicable. report to include the date and citation of the National Research Council report. The NMFS data used in the bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments were limited because NMFS conducted its surveys in trawlable waters only. For this reason, we did not revise the report. NOAA commented that highly standardized protocols are used for collecting non-NMFS data (fishery dependent data) for rockfish. We revised the report to more explicitly distinguish the five species related to our report from other overfished Pacific groundfish. Four of the five assessments did not use NMFS survey data or the NMFS data used covered only a portion of the species’ habitats. Yelloweye live almost exclusively in the rocky habitat that NMFS trawl surveys cannot cover. Bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments were limited in scope because the surveys were conducted only in trawlable waters. The yelloweye assessment was based solely on non-NMFS data. Back into the ocean. Back to the page you came from. the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For this reason, we did not change the report. NOAA commented that bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments all obtain adequate abundance trend information from the NMFS bottom trawl surveys. The National Research Council found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance because such surveys use an unbiased statistical design, control sampling locations, and provide for for these reasons. and methodology section of the report to clearly identify the species and activities covered by the review. The statement does not address untrawlable habitat. NMFS “generally uses” NMFS’s staff or contracts with outside experts. The report was revised to more clearly differentiate between NMFS as a whole and the study as a group. The publication date was changed to show the publication date, and we revised the report accordingly. We revised the. report to show that NMFS has not collected enough ecosystem data and that the. frequency and range of recruitment surveys are limited. 26. The footnote placement is repositioned in report. 27. We revised the report to include assessment “improvements.” 28. The example we provided is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all ecosystem research conducted on the west coast. Instead, it illustrates the type of work done by the Northwest Center. 29. We added footnote 16 to clarify the actions taken by the Southwest Center. 30. We did not intend to provide a comprehensiveList of all actions conducted to improve data quantity coast wide. the west coast. Instead, it illustrates the type of work the Northwest Center is conducting and the opportunities for improving ecosystem research. For this reason, we did not change the report. annotations for projects that do not separate out groundfish funds occur only in items that are annotated as Southwest Center projects. After reviewing the report we believe no change is required because of subject-verb agreement. We added clarifying language. We believe that table 2 notes “a” and “b” in our report already adequately address this issue. change the report. We believe that our report has addressed this issue. By referring to the West Coast Groundfish Research Plan by its complete title, we adequately distinguish between the two reports. We changed “health’ to “stock abundance’ and the footnote placement is repositioned in report. The footnote placement and citation are in accordance with GAO guidelines. For this reason, we did not change the report and believe the report adequately addresses the issue of Pacific hake in mid-water. ecosystem research as part of its Science for Ecosystem-based Management Initiative. Understanding the complex ecological relationships between fish and the environment within which they exist provides a better understanding of the effects of the ecosystem on the groundfish fisheries. Only a limited amount of the data is collected and used in stock assessments. For example, ecosystem data are collected during shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys as time and resources allow. However, this information is not widely incorporated into stock assessments and is therefore not widely used. For the five species we reviewed, only the boccacio assessment used ecosystem data. According to Northwest Center officials, the collection of ecosystem data is limited. The implementation of comprehensive ecosystem research and data collection programs is contingent upon the funding of a dedicated research vessel for the west coast, the authors say. For more information, visit the Northwest Center's website or go to www.northwestcenter.org. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Data sources include fishing logbooks, dockside samples, and onboard observations. Life history includes the age and sex composition of the stock. Recruitment research includes data on the abundance of juvenile and larval fish. Data on the ocean ecosystem, such as water temperature or salinity, is also collected. The data can be used to forecast the size of a stock in the future, among other things. The information can also be used in the design of new fishing equipment and fishing gear. its efforts on implementing improvements in data quantity, such as more frequent acoustic, and shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys. Increased the frequency of the Pacific hake acoustic survey from triennially to biennially. Beginning in 2003, the survey was restructured into a single, integrated survey with Northwest Center and Canadian officials jointly planning all survey elements. Officials from the Northwest Centre and Canada now jointly conduct all of the acoustic surveys. The Northwest Center is based in Seattle, Washington, but has offices around the world. frequency of the groundfish shelf and slope bottom trawl survey from triennially to annually. Working collaboratively with the fishing industry has afforded fishermen the opportunity to become stakeholders in the data collection process. The surveys are now coastwide from Cape Flattery, Washington to the Mexican border, adding over 300 more miles along the southern California coast. Previous surveys ended at Morro, California, and are now extending to San Diego and Long Beach, California. The survey is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Northwest Center officials said they are to receive a dedicated research vessel sometime during calendar years 2008 or 2009, at the earliest. Better recruitment information for Pacific groundfish is also needed because such information provides an early predictor of fish abundance, especially for species such as hake, where there is a great variation in recruitment. Current recruitment surveys are limited because existing funds support only yearly surveys in selected areas. To achieve the best early predictions of stock status, recruitment surveys need to be carried out regularly. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list contains links to the full-text document files, which can be downloaded at no cost. contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mails alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The General Accounting Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The agency examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The reliability of the five assessments is questionable. Without reliable assessments, fishery managers may reach erroneous conclusions and take actions that could adversely affect the fishing industry economically. Establish a standard approach that requires that non-NMFS data used in stock assessments be evaluated for its reliability. Require that stock assessment reports clearly present the uncertainties in the assessments, such as the margin of error associated with species biomass estimates. Develop a comprehensive plan that integrates the NMFS stock assessment improvement plan with other NMFS plans. GAO: We reviewed key laws and agency reports and interviewed officials from NMFS. We did not review the stock assessments of any of the other west coast Pacific groundfish species. To determine the estimated costs associated with NMFS’ planned and ongoing improvements, we reviewed relevant budget requests and funding documents for fiscal years 2001 through 2005 and interviewed National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration officials. We added clarifying language to the scope and methodology section of the report to clearly identify the costs of implementing the improvements. laws and agency reports and interviewed officials from NMFS, including officials from the Northwest Fisheries Science Center. We reviewed the controls over stock assessment data, the types of fish population surveys used, and recent Pacific groundfish stock assessment studies. We did not simulate NMFS’ stock assessment models nor evaluate the mathematical and statistical methodologies used in the models for Pacific hake, bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye. To identify the relevant recommendations to improve stock assessments that NMFS has implemented and has not implemented, we reviewed agency reports. on the ocean ecosystem, such as water temperature or salinity, plankton composition, or ocean currents. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-3841 or Keith Oleson at (415) 904-2218. We reviewed National Marine Fisheries Service stock assessments for five species of Pacific groundfish: Pacific hake (Pacific whiting) and four types of rockfish. amended by the Sustainable Fisheries Act, also established national standards for fishery conservation and management. These standards deal with preventing overfishing, using scientific information, using fishery resources efficiently, minimizing bycatch, and minimizing administrative costs. The regional councils use these standards to develop appropriate plans for conserving and managing fisheries under their jurisdiction. The Pacific Council’s goal is to protect, restore, and promote the long-term health and stability of the fishery. In 1982, the Pacific Fishery Management Council (Pacific Council) released its initial Fisherymanagement Plan for groundfish. and headquarters are ongoing, and NOAA is committed to these actions. NOAA also provided technical comments that we incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 7 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of thisReport to the Secretary of Commerce and the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service. We will also provide copies to others upon request. In addition, we have provided detailed responses to your questions. it could be misconstrued to infer that the assessments are unreliable for use in managing the west coast groundfish fishery. For this reason, we did not change the report. We changed “survivability” to “sustainability’ and added fishery “resources” for clarification. NOAA also commented that the five assessments GAO reviewed all passed scientific review and are serving as the basis for management of the west Coast groundfish Fishery. GAO does not adequately convey the different degrees of precision associated with the stock assessments, NOAA said. plans to ensure that stock assessment improvement actions and budget requests are coordinated. We provided the Department of Commerce with a draft of this report for review and comment. We received a written response from the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere that included comments from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). NOAA generally agreed with the report’s accuracy and concurred with the reports recommendations. However, NOAA said it was concerned about the report's conclusion that the reliability of stock assessments is questionable. actions that could adversely affect the fishing industry economically or affect the recovery and sustainability of the fishery resources. Without a comprehensive, integrated improvement plan, funding requests and planned actions to improve the stock assessments may not be coordinated, jeopardizing successful and timely implementation of assessment improvements. Continue efforts to collect more types of data, such as data obtained from surveys in rocky, untrawlable waters, recruitment surveys, and reviewed all passed scientific review and are serving as the basis for formal status determination and fishery management. Stock assessments are a key tool for managing fisheries. They provide estimates of the species population, which NMFS uses to set harvest limits. The more types of information used in the assessments, the greater the accuracy and quality of the data, the more reliable the assessment results. However, the Pacific Ocean has a large number of fish stocks that are overfished and need to be re-assessed to avoid overfishing. The Pacific Ocean is a large population of fish that needs to be reassessed to ensure sustainability. Stock assessments are the biological evaluation of the status of fish stocks. Stock assessments provide official estimates in key areas, such as the size of the stock population. They form the scientific basis used by regional councils to determine biologically sustainable harvests and guide the monitoring and rebuilding of overfished and threatened stocks. For example, regional councils use stock assessments and other indicators of biological productivity to determine biological productivity of fish in a region. The bocaccio assessment was carried out by the.Center, which conducted the boc Acccio assessment.  NMFS does not have a standard process for evaluating whether the non-NMFS data used in its stock assessments are reliable. Some assessors reviewed the quality of the raw non- NMFS data, while others did not. Assessors who reviewed for data quality found mistakes that they believed made some of the data unusable or that could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 21. We revised the punctuation accordingly. 22. making decisions about setting harvest levels and developing plans to rebuild overfished stocks. language to the report to address NOAA’s concern. Without these stock assessments, NMFS and fishery managers would have very limited information on which to base fishery management decisions. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to continue collecting more types of data for groundfish assessments where reliable data are now lacking. NOAA said that the reliability of stock assessments will be improved if NMFS survey efforts are expanded and additional NMFS fishery data are collected. NMFS said, through its west coast fishery science centers, it participates on interagency data committees. non- NMFS data found mistakes that either made some of the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. NOAA commented that it is more pertinent to focus on the degree of standardization of the survey data than the source. We believe the Pacific hake biomass estimates are questionable because the assessment used non-NMFS data that NMFS did not check or subject to standard data reliability testing. NMFS generally refers to its data as fishery-independent data and to non-NHFS data as Fishery-dependent data. A 2002 National Research Council report found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance. Northwest Center officials raised concerns about basing assessments solely on non-NMFS data such as commercial and recreational catch data. Catch data do not provide the species’ relative or absolute biomass, according to NMFS officials.catch data do an unbiased statistical design, control sampling locations, and provide for quality assurance. NMFS data were unavailable for the yelloweye assessment.  stock assessors use NMFS-collected data, such as stock surveys conducted on NOAA vessels or contracted commercial fishing vessels. Data sources include fishing logbooks, dockside samples, and onboard observations, will help ensure the reliability of non-NMFS data. Plans to update the stock assessment model to provide uncertainty ranges for the 2005 stock assessments. A 2002 National Research Council report report on fish stocks in the U.S. was the first of its kind. The report was published by the National Institute of Fisheries and Wildlife Services. such as commercial and recreational catch data. Catch data do not provide the species’ relative or absolute biomass, according to NMFS officials. For example, catch data alone is insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling the ocean but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish. fishing restrictions, such as a total allowable catch, can limit the amount of fish being caught. catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons, including imprecise accounting for dead fish tossed back into the ocean. that could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For example, the assessor for the 2002 yelloweye stock assessment found numerous errors in the recreational catch data. According to another stock assessor, commercial catch data frequently have inconsistencies. California, Oregon, and Washington require fishermen to enter catch and location information into logbooks, but logbooks are often incomplete and inaccurate. While the stock assessment review review is ongoing, we are happy to share our findings with the public in the form of a blog post. The October 2001 stock assessment improvement plan identified three scenarios (tiers) to consider when analyzing the resources needed to improve stock assessments. The three tiers of assessment improvements are as follows: Tier 1—improve stock assessments using existing data without initiating new data collection programs. Tier 2—conduct baseline monitoring of species, which in most cases requires sampling the species at least every 1 to 3 years. Tier 3—implement “next generation” stock assessments by explicitly incorporating ecosystem considerations, such as multispecies interactions. programs, such as the University of Washington graduate program, to develop stock assessment scientists for the future. A comprehensive plan would allow NMFS to better integrate and coordinate program initiatives for improving stock assessments. For example, the acquisition plan identifies the need for fishery research vessels to satisfy NMFS’ data collection needs. Although the improvement plan includes the number of staff that would participate in data collection surveys, it does not contain the capital and operating costs of the research vessels. Similarly, the staffing requirements for augmenting the social sciences capabilities of NMFS are represented in the sciences plan and not in the stock improvement plan. to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data collected. Communication to educate constituents about NMFS’ strategies for improving stock assessments. Training to augment existing programs that support graduate students interested in stock assessment science. Planning to combine the improvement plan with its complementary plans. The improvement plan states that as the quantity of the data increases, the assessments become more accurate and reliable. The plan also states that the quality of the stock assessment data will improve as the data is collected more frequently and accurately. stock abundance and hence for setting allowable harvests of the fish. With such wide variations, it is important to provide uncertainty ranges, otherwise management may make inappropriate decisions. NMFS has taken some steps recommended in the Marine Fisheries Stock Assessment Improvement Plan to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data. The Pacific hake assessor used a mathematical model (AD Model Builder) that could compute uncertainty ranges and included these ranges in thePacific hake assessment report. The NMFS expects to use the updated model for all 2005 stock assessments. of uncertainty be included in future assessments because it is difficult to determine the reliability of the stock assessment without them. We believe that estimates based on samples should have a range of uncertainty to show the amount of variability in the estimates. However, the bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye assessments did not present a measure of uncertainty associated with the biomass estimates. It is difficult for regional councils and NMFS to know how much confidence they can have in relying on the estimates for determining stock abundance. data alone are insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling the ocean, but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish. Catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons, such as imprecise accounting for dead fish tossed back into the ocean. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 40. NOAA commented that the doubling of estimated bocaccio biomass in 2003 was due to factors that would not be addressed in this report. questionable because (1) four of the assessments did not have at least one NMFS-collected data source of sufficient scope and accuracy; (2) NMFS lacked a standard process for assessing the reliability of non-NMFS data used in all five assessments; and (3) the stock assessment reports did not adequately identify the uncertainty of the biomass estimates. The Northwest Center plans to conduct a data quality workshop in July 2004 to formally establish the roles and responsibilities of the data stewards, with the intent of standardizing the data evaluation process. on interagency data committees, to develop quality assurance protocols and to assess the quality of non-NMFS data. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to clearly present the uncertainties in the stock assessments. While the methods used and the completeness of the uncertainty characterization varied from assessment to assessment, NOAA said it is desirable to have both a quantitative analysis of model uncertainty and an evaluation of the consequences of alternative model scenario. NOAA said that while much remains to be done, long-term planning efforts and coordination among field and headquarters are ongoing. was due to factors that would not be addressed in a standard statistical analysis. An assessment without an uncertainty range does not quantify and communicate any of the uncertainty. For this reason, we did not change the report. In addition to the person named above, Leo G. Acosta, Kristine N. Braaten, Allen T. Chan, David Dornisch, Alan Kasdan, Robert Marek, Cynthia C. Norris, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, and Tama R. Weinberg made key contributions to this report.

ROUGE-1: 74.32, ROUGE-2: 66.15, ROUGE-L: 26.21
BERTScore: 49.15

==============================================
==================== [10/100] ====================
Summary:
Cognizant federal agency (CFA) is responsible for establishing forward pricing rates, final indirect cost rates, and administering cost accounting standards for all contracts in a business unit. CFA is the agency with the largest dollar amount of negotiated contracts, including options, with the contractor. The Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government provide the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control and for identifying and addressing areas at greatest risk of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. These standards provide that—to that the contractor exceeds at its own risk. officials said that they did not have a process to identify the contractors, including CMS contractors, for which HHS would be the CFA. Without a list that is periodically updated for the contractors’ portfolio of federal government contracting activity, HHS and its components do not know the contractors for which CFA oversight is needed. The confusion over roles and responsibilities increases the risk that CFA responsibilities are not being timely performed. Without effective coordination, contractors may not receive the necessary oversight and the government may not be positioned to protect itself from the risk of improper payments or waste. As of July 2009, neither HHS nor CMS had developed such policies and procedures or a mechanism to track the CMS contractors for which additional oversight is needed. Roles and responsibilities for the performance of CFA duties were not clear among HHS and its components, including CMS. HHS officials said that they did not have a process to developed policies and criteria that provide clear procedures for staff to follow during the pre-award stage. While FAR and HHSAR provide regulations agencies must follow, it is up to agency management to develop agency-specific policies and other guidance that implement those regulations. The deficiencies identified in this report, especially those associated with FAR requirements unique to specific contract types, further highlight the need for additional guidance for contracting officers. Roles and responsibilities for implementation of CFA responsibilities not clearly defined. Revise the Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy and Improvements policy to require all relevant errors be corrected and their resolution documented. Develop and implement policies and procedures for tracking contract audit requests, monitoring the results of contract audits and evaluations, and resolving the audit findings. OAGM established a Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy Improvements (V&V) The V&V plan contained several actions, including a secondary review of data entered into DCIS for every 50th contract action. The plan lacks key elements and controls to ensure that the resolution of potential errors is properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. As of July 22, 2009, CMS management had not taken substantial actions to address our prior recommendations. For example, OAGM could not determine if all errors identified during the file reviews were properly resolved and the appropriate adjustments to DCIS were made. CMS did not have quality assurance activities, such as formal data entry reviews or database training, over the data contained in the DCIS database. In December 2007, OAGM established a Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy. For example, CMS entered codes for “potato farming” and “tortilla manufacturing” in the industry code field for two contract actions. The data analysis on the population of fiscal year 2008 contract actions identified that certain required fields such as contract type and competition were not in DCIS. were maintained by OAGM, regardless of location, were considered during our review. CMS’s current procedures regarding the accuracy of data entered into the Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) do not include procedures that would ensure that the resolution of potential errors are properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. We further found that O AGM was not fully implementing its contract information system. The steps CMS described that it plans to take will be important for ensuring that contract office staff have the information needed readily available. tested are key to effective administration of the contract in that the lack of implementation would significantly increase the risk of improper payments or waste. To test internal control procedures over contract actions, we selected a stratified random sample of 102 contract actions totaling $140.7 million in fiscal year 2008 obligations. We stratified the contract actions by type of action, namely contract awards and contract modifications, recorded in CMS’s PRISM database from October 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. Each contract action was either a through September 30, 2008. Each contract action was either a new contract award or modification to an existing contract. With this probability sample, each contract action in the sample frame had a non- zero probability of being included and that probability could be computed from any contract action. Results from this statistical sample were projected to the population of contract actions made from October 1, 2007, through September 30,. 2008. See table 2 for the results of the statistical sample and the results from the analysis of each stratum. such as contract number, vendor name, and amount obligated. PRISM is used to develop contract documents and for internal reporting and acquisition planning. The Enhanced Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) is an HHS database that is used for department-level acquisition management and to satisfy external reporting requirements. DCIS collects and forwards information to the Federal Procurement Data System Next Generation (FPDS-NG), which is a publicly available database of governmentwide acquisition information. Likewise, FPDS- NG feeds into www.usaspending.gov, a Web site created in response to the federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006. risk of improper payments or waste. inaccurate or incomplete data hinder CMS’s ability to mitigate through additional policies or enhanced oversight any high-risk areas. The errors in DCIS, including the unrecorded actions, also impact governmentwide reporting. Since HHS submits DCIS data to the FDPS-NG, which in turn feeds into OMB's publicly available database at www.usaspending.gov, the errors can have a significant impact on the government's ability to monitor spending.  acquisition data errors are due in part to a lack of sufficient quality assurance activities over the data entered into the acquisition databases. Without accurate data, CMS program managers do not have adequate information to identify and monitor areas that pose a high risk of improper payments or waste. Moreover, inaccurate or incomplete data can also pose a risk to the agency's internal control and operational responsibilities, the report says. The report was published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) at the request of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. contractor’s progress, including the surveillance and assessment of performance and compliance with project objectives. According to OAGM invoice review policy, project officers review certain invoice elements, such as labor and direct costs, and are required to certify whether the invoice is approved for payment by signing a Payments and Progress Certification Form. CMS utilizes two different databases of acquisition information for a variety of internal and external reporting on its acquisition activities. The PRISM database contains basic information such as contract number, vendor name, and amount obligated. a result of being a logical follow-on to a previous contract. The award type field in PRISM did not capture consistent information. Combining these options into one data field prevents CMS from determining the total number of each award type and each contract type. OAGM officials told us that the data entered into PRISM are not subjected to the same scrutiny as other data entered in the government's database. The data entered are not subject to the usual review by the Office of Government Ethics. We estimate that for at least 34.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, PRISM contained at least one error in the selected critical fields we reviewed. DCIS contained errors in current contract value and ultimate contract value fields, as well as the extent of competition, contract type, and award type fields. Further, 11 sample items, or approximately 10 percent of the sample, were not in DCIS. Our high-level data analysis on the data feeds into OMB’s publicly available database at www.usaspending.gov. Contracts Information System (DCIS) and PRISM by (1) performing electronic testing of required data elements, and (2) interviewing both CMS and HHS officials on quality assurance activities performed on the databases. We determined that only basic contract information maintained in the PRISM database, such as vendor name and obligation amount, was reliable for purposes of this report. The historical obligation amounts presented in the background section of the report come primarily from CMS’s PRISM. In addition, we used a statistically random sample selected to test the application of controls. MMA required CMS to transition its Medicare claims processing contracts, which generally did not follow the FAR, to the FAR environment. CMS projected that the transition, referred to as Medicare contracting reform, would produce administrative cost savings due to the effects of competition and contract consolidation. As of September 1, 2009, 19 contracts have been awarded to Medicare Administrative Contractors, totaling about $1 billion in obligations to date. The transition would subject millions of dollars of CMS acquisitions to the rules, standards, and requirements for the award, administration. CMS reported total obligations for CMS contracts in fiscal year 2008 were $3.6 billion. This amount includes obligations against contracts that process Medicare claims. Obligations for other- than-claims processing activities, such as the 1-800 Medicare help line, are also included in the total. Since 1998, obligations to fiscal intermediaries, carriers, and Medicare Administrative Contractors have decreased approximately 16 percent. The $3 million obligated in 2008 represents a 71 percent increase since 1998, when $2.1 billion was obligated. Obligations for other- than-claims processing activities have increased 466 percent. These trends may be explained in part by recent changes to the Medicare program. The movement of functions, such as the help line, data centers, and certain financial management activities, from the fiscal intermediaries and carriers to specialized contractors is part of the change. These specialized contractors are categorized below as other-than-Claims processing contractors. They include beneficiary contact center contractors and enterprise data center contractors, among others. of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and interested congressional committees. Copies will also be available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9095. of this magnitude. Audits and inquiries into the issues we identified in our report should be made as soon as possible. We acknowledge that the time frames for implementing the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 added schedule pressures for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) At the same time, the compressed time frames and resulting contracting practices added risk to the contracting process. Many of the findings in the November 2007 report were a result of the 2003 Act. background section of the report come primarily from CMS’s PRISM database. We received written comments on October 2, 2009, and have summarized those comments in the Agency Comments and Our Evaluation section of this report. Our response to certain specific CMS comments appears in the GAO Comments section of appendix III. We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings. system reviews and invoice reviews help to reduce the risk of improper payments or waste before they occur. A control activity can be preventive, detective, or both based on when the control occurs in the contract life cycle. We found pervasive deficiencies in internal control over contracting and payments to contractors. The internal control deficiencies occurred throughout the contracting process, that is both pre- and post-award. It is more effective and efficient to prevent improper payments to prevent waste and improper payments in the first place. and Policy at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) We selected 11 internal controls over contracting and payments to contractors to test for this report. The controls we tested are key to effective administration of the contract in HHS. We selected controls to test based on our review of GAO’s standards for internal control, the Federal Acquisition Regulation requirements, and agency policies and procedures. We also took into consideration prior audit findings and the contract types most frequently awarded in the HHS program. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that enforce management’s directives. The standards further provide that information should be recorded and communicated to management and oversight officials in a form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their responsibilities. An entity should have internal control monitoring activities in place to assess the quality of performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved. Control activities include both preventive and detective controls. Preventive controls—such as invoice review prior to time of audit. preventive and detective controls. Preventive controls are controls designed to prevent errors, improper payments, or waste. Detective controls are designed to identify errors or improper payments after the payment is made. A sound system of internal control contains a balance of both preventive and Detective controls that is appropriate for the agency’s operations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement. An entity’s management should establish and maintain an environment that sets a positive and supportive attitude towards control and conscientious management. A positive control environment provides discipline and structure as well as a climate supportive of quality internal control, and includes an assessment of the risks the agency faces from both external and internal sources. Control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that enforce the agency's objectives. The standards provide that—to be effective—an entity's management should. establish both a supportive overall control environment and specific control activities directed at carrying out its objectives. At least 84.3 percent of FAR-based contract actions made by CMS in fiscal year 2008 contained at least one instance in which a key control was not adequately implemented. Not only was the number of internal control deficiencies widespread, but also many contract actions had more than one deficiency. The high percentage of deficiencies indicates a serious failure of control procedures, thereby creating a heightened risk of making improper payments or waste.discussed later. We determined a control to be “key” based on our review of the standards for internal control as well as the FAR, HHSAR, and agency policies. agency policies and whether inadequate implementation would significantly increase the risk of improper payments or waste. See appendix I for additional details on the controls we tested and the statistical sample results. We project the results of our statistical sample conservatively by reporting the lower bound of our two-sided, 95 percent confidence interval. The control deficiencies we found were primarily caused by a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures that would help ensure that applicable FAR requirements, agency policies, and other control objectives were met. We also took into consideration prior audit findings and the contract types CMS most frequently used. over contract management activities. CMS stated its belief that “virtually all’ 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. See table 2 for specific details related to contract actions selected in the sample. Table 3 provides further details on the control procedures we tested, the criteria or source for the procedure, and detailed results. We assessed the reliability of CMS’s two acquisition databases, Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) and PRISM. We also obtained information from agency officials regarding contract closeout, cognizant federal agency responsibilities, audit funding, and staff resources. used correctly, the CRB can be an effective tool for risk-based quality assurance and for reviewing the internal controls throughout the contract award and administration process. CMS’s control environment is characterized by the lack of strategic overall control environment, and ultimately increases risk in the contracting process. Although CMS has generally reliable information on basic attributes of each contract action, such as vendor name and obligation amount, CMS lacks reliable management information on other key aspects of its FAR-based contracting operations. The number of certain contract types awarded, the extent of competition achieved, and total contract value. had not taken substantial actions to address our prior recommendations to improve internal control in the contracting process. Only two of GAO’s nine 2007 recommendations had been fully addressed. The seven substantially unresolved recommendations represent a lack of action on the part of CMS management to resolve key control deficiencies. Policies and criteria for pre-award contract activities have not been developed. In its comments, CMS expressed concerns about the scope and timing of our work with respect to our November 2007 recommendations and disagreed with our assessment of the status of 5 of the 7 recommendations. both pre- and post-award, and increase the risk of improper payments or waste. These deficiencies were due in part to a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives were met. Careful and prompt consideration of audit results, including tracking and pursuing findings, helps to reduce the risk, the authors say. It is imperative that CMS take immediate action to address its serious contract-level control deficiencies, they say, and take action on their previous recommendations to improve. CMS’s control environment is characterized by the lack of strategic planning to identify necessary staffing and funding. CMS management has made limited progress in substantively addressing most of the broad-based recommendations from our 2007 report. We found that many of our findings in this review could be, at least in part, attributed to CMS management’S lack of attention given to resolving the control deficiencies. We are reiterating our previous recommendations to (1) develop policies for pre-award contracting activities, (2)Develop policies to help ensure CFA responsibilities are performed, and (3) prepare guidelines on what should be done. an entity to effectively manage contracts and payments to contractors. OAGM management has not analyzed its contract management workforce and related funding needs through a comprehensive, strategic acquisition workforce plan. Such a plan is critical to help manage the increasing acquisition workload and meet its contracting oversight needs. We reported in November 2007 that staff resources allocated to contract oversight had not kept pace with the increase in CMS contract awards. A similar trend continued into 2008. While the obligated amount of contract awards has increased, the number of contractors has not. the contractor submitted one invoice for the entire amount of the contract. CMS increases its risk of making improper payments when it does not properly review and approve invoices prior to payment. OAGM also did not perform required audits and reviews of CMS purchase cards to identify fraud or waste. As of July 15, 2009, OAGm’s purchase card program had issued 123 cards with 20 percent having monthly spending limits of up to $1,000. The agency did not conduct any audits or reviews because of the authorized spending limits. purchase card program by annually auditing cardholder transactions using such methods as statistical and nonstatistical sampling, data mining, and spot checks. We spoke with an OFM official who stated that OFM does not review purchase card transactions for fraud or inappropriate use, but instead pays the purchase card invoice based on the authorizing official’s approval. OAGM did not perform the oversight activities because the supervisor viewed those activities as the responsibility of the Office of Financial Management (OFM) 123 cards with 20 percent having monthly spending limits of at least $50,000. Eight card holders had monthly spending limit of $100,000, the highest spending limit authorized by CMS. Without sufficient oversight of the purchase card program, CMS does not have assurance that only allowable transactions are procured through purchase cards. The purchase card coordinator, which at CMS is within OAGM, is required to conduct surveillance of the program by annually auditing cardholder transactions using such such such cards. The obligated amount of contract awards has increased 71 percent since 1998. OAGM staffing resources have increased 26 percent. CMS has not yet determined the amount of total FTEs needed for the fiscal year and beyond. The documents did not contain information on CMS’s current FTE level, skill mix, or analysis of any skill gaps. Without this information, O AGM has limited insight into appropriate staffing levels for the year. The number of full time equivalents (FTE) has also increased by 26 percent in the past decade. At CMS, OAGM manages contracting activities and is responsible for, among other things, developing policy and procedures for use by acquisition staff. Multiple key players work together to monitor different aspects of contractor performance. All but one of the key roles described below are managed centrally in O AGM. The last, project officers, are assigned from CMS program offices.. Contracting officers are responsible for ensuring performance of all necessary actions for effective contracting, overseeing contractor compliance with the terms of the contract, and safeguarding the interests of the government. OAGM has limited insight into appropriate solutions, such as the use of contractor support staff. Using contractors for contract administrative functions may increase the risk of unauthorized personal services contracts. According to its staff and management, OAGM is challenged to meet the various audit requirements necessary to ensure adequate oversight of contracts that pose more risk to the government. The use of contractors has in recent years become commonplace in the federal government. It is prohibited by FAR to use contractors for inherently governmental functions, both of which are prohibited. were properly reviewed by both the project officer and contracting officer or specialist. To strengthen the control environment, we recommend that OAGM management: Develop and implement a comprehensive strategic acquisition workforce plan. The plan should include, at a minimum, elements such as performance goals, time frames, implementation actions, and resource requirements, and address issues such as O AGM workload, full time equivalents needed, and a workforce skills analysis, as well as an estimate of the amount of resources OAGm needs to fulfill audit and other FAR requirements. CMS’s OAGM established the Contract Review Board (CRB) reviews as a key control procedure. Of the 22 contracts selected to be reviewed by the CRB in 2008, only 7 were actually reviewed. Also, the contracting officer for the contract action being reviewed is neither required to reach consensus on the resolution of issues identified nor to document the justification for not resolving CRB issues. CMS confirmed that only contracts nominated by division directors are reviewed. If used correctly, theCRB can be an effective tool for CMS. circumstances under which negotiation memorandums should be used and the content of such, and any required secondary reviews. Specify Contract Review Board review documentation to include, at a minimum, documentation of the number of contracts reviewed each year. Require Division Directors to periodically assess, document, and report to senior management on the results of their review of whether the contract files contain documentation that invoices were properly reviewed by both the project officer and contracting. The requirements are in light of HHSAR requirements and current OAGM practice. CMS also stated that a reasonable amount of time had not yet elapsed since the issuance of our November 2007 report to allow for corrective actions to have taken place. A significant number of our current report findings, including weaknesses in the control environment, were based on observations and interviews with OAGM officials and reviews of related documentation such as policies and strategic plans. Our current review was completed in September 2009, nearly 2 years after the release of our report in November 2007. While CMS also said that the contract actions we reviewed took place in fiscal year 2008, it said that they took place during fiscal year 2007. and recommendations related to CMS’s control environment are based on conditions that continued to exist in September 2009. CMS disagreed with our determination that their actions to address five of the seven prior recommendations were not sufficient. Preventive controls, such as policies and criteria for pre-award activities and a sound invoice review process prior to payment, are the first line of defense in reducing the risk of improper payments or waste. We continue to believe that the limited actions OAGM management has taken, and in some cases, management's inaction, fall short. valid sample of contract files involved the lack of documentation that the controls were performed. Lack of documentation reduces management’s ability to ascertain whether these important controls were appropriately implemented and therefore is a serious internal control deficiency. Setting an appropriate control environment, especially “tone at the top,” is key to ensuring that staff take all appropriate steps to mitigate risk and protect tax dollars from fraud, waste, and abuse. CMS also stated that a reasonable amount of time had been spent on the project. We further found that OAGM was not fully implementing its policy because it reviewed every 88th action, rather than every 50th as provided for in the plan. However, we are encouraged by the recent initiatives described in CMS’s comments, such as the scorecard, and the commitment to review current policies and procedures. Staff members who made key contributions to this report include Marcia Carlsen and Phil McIntyre (Assistant Directors), Sharon Byrd, Richard Cambosos, Abe Dymond, Patrick Frey, Jason Kelly, John Lopez. implementing those requirements and to tailor the policies to address the specific operational environment. Agency-specific policy may include guidance on applicable approval levels, time frames, agency forms, and routing processes. The HHSAR does not specifically address all of the pre-award contract activities that we identified as needing improvement. It does not delineate the roles and responsibilities of the different staff involved in the contracting process. The deficiencies identified in this report, especially those associated with. the contract process, need to be addressed. We conducted our audit work in Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, Maryland from July 2008 through September 2009. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) reported that the policy and criteria for pre-award contracting activities are already established in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Health & Human Services Acquisition Regulation. There was no action taken on this issue. Report: To determine the extent to which the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented effective internal control procedures over contract actions, we focused on contracts that were generally subjected to the Federal Acquisition Regulation. We interviewed senior management of CMS’s Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM), contracting officers and specialists, and cost/price team members. Major contributors to this report are acknowledged in appendix IV.and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Services Acquisition Regulation (HHSAR), (b) that existing policies would be reviewed and changes would be made as appropriate, and (c) certain pre-award activities, such as the need for adequate accounting systems for cost reimbursement contracts. CMS has not developed policies and criteria that provide clear procedures for staff. The Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM) did conduct internal training on various pre-AWard activity topics, but the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. actions we reviewed took place in fiscal year 2008. For example, CMS’s Acquisition Policy 02-03, which identifies level of approvals required by agency officials based on the estimated dollar value for acquisitions awarded through other than full and open competition, was implemented in April 2008. We applied these approval levels only to the awards and modifications in our sample that were made after the policy was implemented. Furthermore, our observations and recommendations related to CMS's control environment are based on CMS's own data. in the November 2007 report were a result of the increased risk together with inadequate compensating controls to mitigate risk. Virtual Acquisition Office is an off-the-shelf acquisition software that provides Web links to acquisition regulation and templates to aid in completion of common acquisition activities. It does not represent the agency- specific policies and criteria we recommended that CMS implement for pre-award activities. As such, CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. Agency-specific policies provide guidance on CMS develop policies for certain pre-award contract activities, such as analysis to justify the contract type selected. No new policies or guidance were developed, because in CMS’s view, policies and criteria are already established in the FAR and HHSAR. While the FAR provides requirements for federal acquisitions, it is up to the agencies to develop and provide their contracting workforce with specific policies and day-to-day procedures that guide them in implementing those requirements, the agency says. The agency says it will tailor the policies to address the specific needs of its contracting workforce. deficiencies and take action on our previous recommendations to improve contract-level and overall environment controls. CMS will continue to place billions of taxpayer dollars at risk of fraud, or otherwise improper contract payments. We make the following nine recommendations to the Administrator of CMS to develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives are met. Document compliance with FAR requirements for different contract types. At a minimum, enhance current documentation, such as the contract checklist, to ensure the contract file documents authorizations for letter contracts. The contract file document checklist employed by CMS at the time of our review identified key documents that may be included in a contract file. This checklist is usually completed by either the contract specialist or contracting officer. It did not reflect certain requirements in which we found CMS to be deficient, such as ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of a cost reimbursement contract. We are encouraged that CMS is taking additional actions to address these issues and other deficiencies in its contract file system. The cost reimbursement rate increased by 5.46 percent. the purchase card invoice based on the authorizing official’s approval. During the tests of control procedures, we observed that the contract files did not always contain all required documentation to support the contract actions we reviewed. Standards for internal control call for transactions and other significant events to be clearly documented, and the documentation should be readily available for examination. The contract files shall be sufficient to constitute a complete history of the contract action for the purpose of providing a basis for informed decisions at each step in the acquisition. Incomplete or inadequate contract files and documentation hinder the ability of the contracting officers to perform their oversight duties. Documenting the history of a contract action is an important tool that provides management with assurance that the agency has complied with applicable regulations and has made well-informed decisions for efficient contract management.basis for informed decisions at each step in the acquisition process, and providing information for reviews and investigations, among other things. CMS contract files did not always contain documentation necessary for the life of the contract. CMS’s acquisition function. CMS stated its belief that “virtually all’ of the errors we identified related to “perceived documentation deficiencies” CMS stated it was encouraged that the errors did not involve more substantive departures from the FAR or HHSAR. We disagree with CMS's overall assessment of our findings and message of the report. A number of the findings we identified during the testing of a statistically valid sample of contract files involved the lack of documentation. The internal controls we tested are key to ensuring that contracting activities, both pre and post-award, mitigate risks. T&M contracts, the FAR requires contracting officers to prepare and sign a determination and finding that no other contract type is suitable for the acquisition. The justification is required to set forth enough facts and circumstances to clearly and convincingly justify the specific determination made. In cases when the justification memorandum was prepared, contracting officers merely quoted language from the FAR but did not set forth clear and convincing findings. We found that the determination andFinding was either not documented or insufficient in six T&M contract awards we reviewed. is, the particular circumstances, facts, or reasoning essential to support the determination—for why other contract types could not be used. When the contracting officer does not clearly and convincingly document the findings that support using a T&M contract type, OAGM does not have assurance that the appropriate contract type was used. In addition, for three of the contract actions, the contract specialist told us that the actions the document listed to mitigate the risk of awarding a T &M contract were not performed. the letter delegating duties to the project officer and the training certificate for the project officers were not in the file. Also, a chronological list of contracting officers and their dates of responsibility was consistently absent. CMS’s use of negotiation memorandums was inconsistent. The HHSAR provides that the negotiation memorandum is a complete record of all actions leading to the award of a contract and should be in sufficient detail to explain and support the rationale, judgments, and decisions. It was inconsistent with the HHSAR.  negotiation memorandums were not always prepared for actions in which they were clearly required, according to HHSAR. While many negotiation Memorandums we reviewed had signature blocks for both the contract specialist and the contracting officer, the memorandum was not always signed by the contractingOfficer. CMS’s OAGM established the Contract Review to help ensure that contracts are signed on time and in a manner that is consistent with the terms of the contract. The Contract Review was established by CMS to help the agency ensure that the contract was signed on the time and manner it was intended. We estimate that at least 46.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 CMS contract actions did not meet the FAR requirements applicable to the specific contract type awarded. Sixteen contract actions we tested had deficiencies. 1 related to a letter contract, 9 related to cost reimbursement contracts, and 6 related to T&M contracts. In the case of the letter contract,. the contract file did not contain the authorization for use of the. letter contract. The results of the other control procedures we tested can be found in appendix I. contract. CMS contract files did not always contain documentation necessary to support the action. In numerous instances, we determined that the letter delegating duties to the project officer and the project manager was not properly written. In addition, two contract files. did not maintain any information regarding the General Services Administration schedule contract. that was valid at the time of the award of the task order. We found a contract file was missing a statement of work and another file wasMissing a copy of the actual contract. mitigation strategies used to justify the selection of the T&M contract type, it increased its exposure to the risk of improper payments or waste. We estimate that for at least 52.6 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not have support for final indirect cost rates. 23 contract actions we tested didn't have documentation of final indirectcost rates or support for the prompt request of an audit of indirect costs. For an additional 19 of the total invoice amount, the agency did not maintain adequate support for provisional indirect rates. applicable FAR requirements, agency policies, and other control objectives were met. CMS did not always meet FAR requirements for specific contract types that were awarded. The agency did not timely perform or request audits of incurred direct and indirect costs, which provide assurance that costs billed by the contractor are allowable and reasonable under the terms of the contract and applicable government regulations. These control deficiencies are discussed in detail below and the results of the other tests are shown in the next section of this report. For more information, visit CMS.gov. We are encouraged that CMS is taking additional actions to implement the checklists developed by the Department of Health and Human Services to be used in fiscal year 2010. During our review and as a result of multiple conversations with OAGM staff including the team of contract auditors, we revised our testing procedures to consider and accept provisional indirect cost rates that were not maintained in the individual contract file but were maintained by the cost/price team in its central files. Therefore, all Provisional indirect cost rate determinations, regardless of location, were considered during testing. indirect cost rates for the contractor. For an additional 19 contract actions, the provisional rates either did not match the indirect rates billed on the invoices or could not be matched because the invoice did not provide sufficient detail. Provisional indirect cost rates provide agencies with a mechanism by which to determine if the indirect costs billed on invoiced are reasonable for the services provided. The amounts a contractor billed using provisional indirect cost. rates are adjusted annually for final indirect cost Rates providing a mechanism for the government to timely ensure that indirect costs are allowable and allocable to the contract. Contracting officers and other contracting oversight personnel may perform a comprehensive review of contractor invoices to determine if the contractor is billing costs in accordance with the contract terms and applicable government regulations. The establishment of provisional and final indirect cost rates helps to ensure that the government makes payments for costs that are allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the extent prescribed by the contract. For T&M contracts, the government agrees to pay fixed per-hour labor rates and contract file documents authorizations for letter contracts, adequacy of the contractors accounting systems. by the FAR for cost reimbursement contracts. Using a cost reimbursement contract when a contractor does not have an adequate accounting system hinders the government’s ability to fulfill its oversight duties throughout the contract life cycle. It increases risk of improper payments and the risk that costs billed can not be substantiated during an audit. In one instance, the contracting officer was aware that a contractor had an inadequate accounting system resulting from numerous instances of noncompliance with CAS. When choosing to use T&M contracts, the FAR requires contracting officers to prepare and prepare. of the letter contract, which is required by HHSAR. Of the contract awards in our sample, we found 9 cases in which cost reimbursement contracts were used without first ensuring that the contractor had an adequate accounting system. An adequate contractor accounting system is key to the government’s ability to perform the various contract oversight activities required by the FAR. In particular, contracting for cost reimbursement is required to ensure that the government is getting the best value for its money. The FAR states that a cost reimbursement contract may be used only when the contractor’‘s accounting System is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract. The government agrees to pay a set price for goods or services regardless of the actual cost to the contractor. A fixed price contract is ordinarily in the government’s interest when the risk involved is minimal or can be predicted with an acceptable degree of certainty. The government assumes most of the cost risk because the contractor is only required to provide its best effort to meet contract objectives within the estimated cost. If this cannot be done, the government can provide additional funds to complete the effort, decide not to provide extra funds, or terminate the contract. fixed price contracts, cost reimbursement contracts, and time and materials (T&M) contracts. These contract types may be used to provide the flexibility needed by the government to acquire the large variety and volume of supplies and services it needs. As discussed below, these three types of contracts place different levels of risk on the government and the contractor. Generally, the government manages its risk, in part, through oversight activities. The FAR places limitations on the use of cost reimbursement and T&M contract types. the invoice paid in 2008, nor the related file included evidence that the charge was investigated or further evaluated by either the project officer or contracting specialist. CMS has not set criteria for the use of negative certification. Reviewing invoices prior to payment is a preventive control which may result in the identification of unallowable billings, especially on cost reimbursement and T&M Invoices. Training on invoice review procedures still needed. The report found that OAGM’s invoice review policy was not revised to address this recommendation. unresponsive to the recommendation. The revised policy still contains the use of negative certification as a default. HHS reported that they have implemented the Acquisition Career Management Information System (ACMIS). ACMIS is a centralized tracking mechanism that maintains training records for the personnel assigned to contract activities. HHS’s implementation of the centralized system to track training addressed our recommendation. Actions taken do not achieve the intent of the recommendation and are insufficient. However, since CMS has provided training on invoice review procedures. instances in which the contracting officer or specialist did not identify items that were inconsistent with the terms of the contract. For example, facilities capital cost of money is generally disallowed by HHSAR. However, we found two instances where the contractor billed, and CMS paid, this cost. Another contractor submitted invoices under its fixed price contract that were contrary to the payment schedule stipulated in the contract terms. The contract required the contractor to submit four invoiced of equal amount every 3 months during the 1-year performance period. receipts, and subcontractor invoices, all of which are necessary to confirm if the amounts billed were compliant with the terms of the contract or otherwise allowable and allocable to that contract. In one instance, invoICES reported labor costs based on labor categories, but did not show hours worked by employees or their respective labor rates. In another example, a contractor submitted an invoice in 2008 for services that were provided in 2003. The contractor did not provide supporting documentation for the $36,944 billed. CMS’s Acquisition Policy Notice 16-01 requires the project officer to review each contractor invoice and recommend payment approval or disapproval to the contracting officer. This review is to determine, among other things, if the expenditure rate is commensurate with technical progress and whether all direct cost elements are appropriate, including subcontracts, travel, and equipment. Based on his or her review, theproject officer is then to approve the invoice for payment by signing a Payments and Progress Certification Form or disapprove by issuing a suspension notice. disapprove by issuing a suspension notice. In one case, although a contractor submitted over 100 invoices for fiscal year 2008, only 8 were certified by the project officer. The total value of the contract through January 2009 was about $64 million. The contracting officer or specialist is also required to review invoiced for critical elements such as compliance with the terms of theContract. The contract was signed in 2007 and has been in the works since 2007. It was awarded to a contractor in 2008. The cost/price team serves as an in-house consultant to others involved in the contracting process at CMS. The team, which consists of four contract auditors, provides support for contract administration including reviewing cost proposals. Project officers serve as the contracting officer’s technical representative designated to monitor the contractor's progress. The contract specialist assists with the invoice review process. The project officer is responsible for the surveillance and assessment of performance and is not authorized to commit or bind the government. The cost/ price team is available by request to assist with contract administration. CMS did not timely perform contract closeout procedures resulting in a backlog of 1,300 contracts. Contracting officers or specialists did not always identify instances where invoices did not comply with contract terms and conditions. CMS has not taken sufficient actions to investigate and recover questionable payments. CMS described several actions it has taken to investigate payments made to 3 of the 12 contractors for which we identifiedquestionable payments. The actions CMS has taken are described in the next section of this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. same contractors rely on the oversight and monitoring work of the CFA. CMS policies did not provide guidance on what constitutes sufficient detail to support amounts billed on contractor invoices to facilitate the review process. The continuing weaknesses in contracting activities and limited progress in addressing known deficiencies raise questions concerning whether CMS management has established an appropriate “tone at the top” regarding contracting activities. Until CMS management addresses our previous designated to perform functions supporting HHS as the C FA, CMS will develop appropriate procedures for monitoring Cost Accounting Standards compliance. CMS revised invoice review policy and determined that new invoice payment procedures contain clear roles and responsibilities. No action taken. The revised policy does not specify the documentation the contractors would be required to submit to support the invoices or what would be needed for the project officer, contracting specialist, or contracting officer to validate information in the invOices. CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. The new policy still contains the same requirements as the old policy. It is not clear if the new policy will be implemented in the future. CMS officials told us that during fiscal year 2008, OAGM closed 581 contracts and reduced the overdue backlog to 400 contracts. Yet O AGM officials could not provide support for these closures or a list of the contracts overdue for closeout. HHS reported that CMS will review the questionable payments identified in GAO-08-54 to determine whether CMS should seek reimbursement from the federal government. The fiscal year 2009 plan only contained three bullets stating that OAGm would provide quarterly reports to the division directors. procedures resulting in a backlog of 1,300 contracts, of which 407 were overdue for closeout as of September 30, 2007. We recommended that CMS develop a plan to reduce the number of contracts in the backlog. CMS did not provide us a closeout plan for fiscal year 2008 and the fiscal year 2009 plan was insufficient. For example, it did not contain a workload analysis. Agency-specific policies provide guidance on how CMS staff are expected to perform their day-to-day duties. Since September 30, 2007, the number of contracts eligible for closeout has increased by 24 percent, from 1,300 in 2007 to 1,611 in 2009. CMS could not fully support the analysis it provided and it related only to the time period between April 2007 and September 30,. 2007. The contract file document checklist employed by CMS was not fully supported by the data provided to us by CMS during this current review. It was only available for the period from April 2007 to September, 2007. contracts eligible for closeout by contracting officer or specialist or an estimate of the number of hours or audit funds it would need to close the contracts. The FAR establishes time standards for closing out a contract after the work is physically completed (i.e., goods or services are provided) The contract closeout process is an important internal control, in part, because it is generally the last opportunity for the government to detect and recover any improper payments. The complexity and length of thecloseout process can vary with the extent of oversight performed by the agency during the period of closeout. The total contract value of contracts eligible for closeout has increased from $3 billion to at least $3.8 billion. This is a substantial increase over the balances at the end of fiscal year 2007. The closeout process is particularly important for cost reimbursement contracts because a contractor is allowed to bill costs it incurred to provide the good or service. The government audits these billed costs to determine if they were allowable and allocable to the contract, the report says. It says insufficient progress has been made to reduce the backlog of contracts. of 2006, which required a single searchable Web site, accessible by the public for free, that reports key information for each federal award. The contract life cycle includes many acquisition and administrative activities. Prior to award, an agency identifies a need; develops a requirements package; determines the method of contracting; solicits and evaluates bids or proposals; and ultimately awards a contract. After contract award, the agency performs contract administration and contract closeout. Contract administration involves monitoring the contractor’s performance as well as reviewing and approving (or approving) the contractor's request for payment. The contract closeout process involves verifying that the goods or services were provided and that administrative matters are completed. Other tasks may include audits or reviews of the contractor’s costs and compliance with CAS. Agencies may choose among different contract types to acquire goods and services. This choice is the principal means that agencies have for allocating risk between the government and the contractor. Contract types can be grouped into three broad categories: fixed price contracts, fixed-price contracts, and long-term contracts. to a third prior recommendation that CMS review the questionable payments we identified. After reviewing this information, we revised our assessment of the status of efforts taken by CMS from “No Actions Taken” to “Actions Insufficient” No other changes were made to the report as a result of agency comments. See appendix III for a discussion of the remaining two prior recommendations (points 2, 3, and 4) for which CMS disagreed with our assess of its progress. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. The actions CMS has taken to date are insufficient to fully resolve the issues identified and more remains to be done to recover funds that may have been inappropriately paid to contractors. CMS relies on incurred cost audits that are conducted at the end of contract performance when the contract is closed to validate the overall propriety of payments. The $67 million we questioned related to costs incurred in fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006 and therefore would not be covered or investigated in an audit of fiscal 2008 incurred costs. CMS’s resolution of questionable payments of the magnitude we identified ($88.8 million) should be performed expeditiously. allocable to the contract. Putting off the control activity until the end of contract performance increases the risk of overpaying for indirect costs during contract performance. We estimate that for at least 54.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not promptly perform or request an audit of direct costs. We found that 25 contract actions for which this control applied did not have an Audit of Direct Costs promptly performed or requested. Similar to the previous article, this article is based on a report by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. that such an audit may be necessary for closing out the contract at the end of contract performance. Not annually auditing direct costs increases the risk that CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. CMS had policies for invoice certification and purchase card oversight; however, these policies were not consistently followed. The failure to follow established agency policy increases CMS’s risk of improperly paying contractor invoices or purchase card transactions. We estimate that for at least 59.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, the project officer did not always certify the invoiced. they generally adjust for final indirect cost rates during contract closeout at the end of the contract performance rather than annually due to the cost and effort the adjustment takes. When CMS is not the CFA, CMS must wait on the C FA to perform the necessary audit work required to establish the final indirect Cost Rates. Not annually adjusting for finalirect cost rates increases the risk that CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. Furthermore, putting off the control activity puts off the necessary control activity. of direct costs promptly performed or requested. Similar to the audit of indirect costs, audits of direct costs allow the government to verify that the costs billed by the contractor were allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the contract. The audit ofdirect costs is the responsibility of the contracting officer. The contracting officer may request, for a fee, that the CFA for the contractor perform the audit work. The FAR does not provide time frames or other requirements for when the audit should be performed except that such an audit may be necessary for closing out a contract. ensure adequate oversight of contracts that pose more risk to the government, specifically cost reimbursement contracts. While officials told us they could use more audit funding, we found that OAGM management had yet to determine what an appropriate funding level should be. Without knowing for which contractors additional CFA oversight is needed, CMS does not know with certainty the number of audits and reviews that must be performed annually. Without this key information, CMS can not estimate an adequate level of audit information that it needs. CMS officials told us incurred cost audits are not performed annually due to insufficient resources. A shortage of financial and human resources creates an environment that introduces vulnerabilities to the contracting process, they said. The shortage of resources hinders management’s ability to sustain an effective overall control environment, and ultimately increases risk in the contracting, they added. The report was published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) at the request of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) entity is complying with applicable acquisition laws and regulations. Audit report dated September 30, 2008, questioned approximately $2.1 million of costs that CMS paid to a contractor in fiscal year 2006. OAGM management confirmed that no action has been taken to investigate and recover the challenged costs. CMS has not established a formal procedure or system for tracking and pursuing the results of contract or contractor audits and had not provided its contracting officers guidance or procedures for when to request the assistance of internal and external audit. audits are best conducted annually, rather than at the end of contract performance. CMS’s backlog of contracts eligible for closeout delays investigations and makes recovery more difficult. CMS does not track, investigate, and resolve contract audit and evaluation findings for purposes of cost recovery and future award decisions. Tracking audit and Evaluation findings strengthens the control environment in part because it can help assure management that the agency's objectives are being met. It can also help management determine whether the entity is complying with applicable acquisition laws and regulations. when to request the assistance of internal and external audit and evaluation services. OAGM did not provide direction on when (what stage(s) in the contract life cycle and under what circumstances) the contracting officer should utilize the service of the cost/price team or other contract auditors. By not timely acting on audit results, CMS is forgoing the potential benefits from those audits and evaluations. A well-established tenet for recovery of improper payments is that it becomes increasingly more difficult with the passage of time.

ROUGE-1: 80.17, ROUGE-2: 72.87, ROUGE-L: 22.53
BERTScore: 56.64

==============================================
==================== [11/100] ====================
Summary:
Despite association of IRA ownership to individuals with higher incomes, data show that lower- and middle-income individuals also own IRAs. A study by the Congressional Budget Office found that in 2003, 4 percent of workers earning $20,000 to $40,000 (in 1997 dollars) contributed to traditional IRAs and 3 percent of these workers contributed to Roth IRas. More households with Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs contribute to their accounts than households with traditional IRas, according to the Investment Company Institute. Since 1998, IRA assets have comprised the largest portion of the retirement market. From 1998 to 2004, more than 80 percent of funds flowing into IRAs came from rollovers. In 2007, the median amount in a traditional IRA with rollover assets in 2007 was $61,000, while the median Amount in a Traditional IRA without Rollover assets was $30,000. In addition, IRA accounts withRollover assets were larger than those without rollover Assets in 2007. For example, in 2007 the Median Amount In A Traditional IRA With Rollover Assets In 2007 Was $61k, While In 2007 It Was $30k. For more information, visit www.irs.gov. largest portion of the retirement market. IRA assets in 2004 totaled about $3.5 trillion compared to DC assets of $2.6 trillion. More households own traditional IRAs, which were the first IRAs established, than Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs. Ownership of traditional and Roth IRas is associated with higher education and income levels. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were traditional IRA owners. In 2007, nearly 33 percent of all households owned traditional IRas, and about 15 percent owned Roth IR as. ICI study: median household contribution to traditional IRAs was $2,300 compared to the median contribution to Roth IRAs of $3,000. Median contribution to SIMPLE and. Salary Reduction Simplified Employee Pension IRA (SAR-SEP IRA) was $1,500. More than half of households with Roth, SIMPLE, or Salary reduction IRA contributed to their accounts in 2004. Less than one- third of households. with traditional IRas did so. This, again, may be partly attributed to the emerging role of traditional IR as a means to preserve rollover assets rather than build retirement savings. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were headed by an individual with a college degree. Over one- third of these IRA households earned $100,000 or more. Research shows that higher levels of education and household income correlate with a greater propensity to save. However, despite the association of IRA ownership to saving, IRA ownership is not linked to saving more money, according to a recent study by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) The AICPA also found that IRA ownership increases as education and income levels increase. Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement and I would be happy to respond to any questions the subcommittee may have at this time. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Barbara D. Bovbjerg, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income Security Issues at (202) 512-7215. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony can be contacted at (800) 515-8255 or bovbj Bergb@gao.gov. GAO is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material.page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tamara Cross (Assistant Director), Matt Barranca, Susan Pachikara, Raun Lazier, Joseph Applebaum, Susan Aschoff, Doreen Feldman. may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-TALK (8255). For confidential help in the UK, call the helpline on 0800 555 111 or visit the National Suicide  Prevention Line on the Samaritans. small employers to offer IRAs to their employees: Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees (SIMPLE) SIMPLE IRAs, available only to employers with 100 or fewer employees, allow eligible employees to direct a portion of their salary, within limits, to a SIMPLE IRA. Simplified Employee Pensions (SEP) IRAs allow employers to make tax-deductible contributions to their own and IRAs if they are to encourage employees to save for retirement. Labor told us that it has received no input from IRA providers as to what that flexibility would be. Several bills have been introduced in Congress to expand worker access to payroll-deduction IRAs. Tax credits should be made available to defray start-up costs for small employers of payroll- deduction IRAs, experts said. IRA providers and small business groups said increasing contribution limits for SIMPLE IRAs to levels closer to those for 401(k) plans would encourage more employers to offer these plans. Other experts said doing so could provide incentives to employers already offering 401(K) plans to switch to SIMPLEIRAs, which have fewer reporting requirements. Costs of managing SIMPLE and SEP IRAs may be prohibitive for small employers. Certain contribution requirements for these plans may, in some cases, limit employer sponsorship of these plans. Small business revenues are inconsistent and may fluctuate greatly from year to year, making required contributions difficult for some firms. For example, employers offering SIMPLE IRAs must determine before the beginning of the calendar year whether they will match employee contributions or make nonelective contributions to all employees’ accounts. Two experts said small firms may be discouraged from offering these plans because of the requirement that employers must set up a SEP IRA. The median contribution to SIMPLE and SAR-SEP IRAs was $5,000. The study noted that this difference may be related to higher contribution limits for employer-sponsored IRAs than for traditional and Roth IRAs. Few employers appear to offer their employees the opportunity to contribute to IRAs through payroll deductions, but data are insufficient to make this determination. Many small business groups said many small employers are unaware that payroll-deduction IRAs are available or that employer contributions are not required. The majority of employers with fewer than 100 employees do not offer an employer-sponsored by Labor. Employers may also provide payroll-deduction IRA programs, which allow employees to contribute to traditional or Roth IRAs through payroll- deductions by their employer. Payroll- deduction IRAs have fewer requirements for employee communication than SIMPLE and SEP IRAs, and employers are not subject to ERISA fiduciary responsibilities. Under ERISA contributions, and most low- and middle-income workers would be eligible to contribute. payroll deductions than they are without these automatic deposits. In theory, all workers under age 70½ who lack an employer-sponsored retirement plan could be eligible to contribute to a traditional IRA through payroll deduction, should their employer offer such a program. Further, based on the contribution rules for traditional and Roth IRAs, many of these individuals would beeligible to claim a tax deduction for their traditional IRA contributions, and most low- and middle-income workers would be eligible for such a deduction. Experts: Most employers would incur little or no costs since they already make payroll deductions for Social Security and Medicare, as well as federal, state, and local taxes. Labor: Costs to employers also are significantly influenced by the number of IRA providers to which an employer must remit contributions on behalf of employees. Some employers are hesitant to offer a payroll-deduction IRA program because they find Labor’s guidance limits their ability to effectively publicize the program to employees, IRA providers say. Millions of U.S. workers have no retirement savings plan through their employer. Employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs afford an easier way for workers to save for retirement. Yet, barriers exist, such as administrative costs, that may discourage employers. Encouraging employers to offer IRAs to their employees can be much more difficult, authors say. IRAs play a major role in preserving retirement assets, but a very small role in creating them, they say. In 2006, almost half of all U.S. private sector workers were employed by firms with fewer than 100 employees. Only 1 in 4 of these workers worked for an employer sponsoring a retirement plan. To address the issue of low retirement plan sponsorship among small employers, Congress created SIMPLE and SEP employer-sponsored IRAs with less burdensome reporting requirements than 401(k) plans. Under a regulation issued by Labor, employers may also provide payroll-deduction IRA programs, which are not required by law. Since the early 1980s, roughly half of the private-sector work force has participated in either a defined benefit (DB) retirement plan, commonly known as a pension. Congress created IRAs, in part, to help those individuals not covered by a DB or DC plan save for retirement. Employees of small firms, for example, are unlikely to work for an employer or union sponsoring a DB plan. About 62 million workers participated in such a plan in 2006, according to the AFL-CIO. Payroll deductions are a key feature in 401(k) and other DC plans. Neither Labor nor IRS is able to determine how many employers offer payroll-deduction IRAs. The Congressional Budget Office reported that 29 percent of all workers contributed to a DC plan in 2003, while only 7 percent contributed to an IRA. Saving for retirement in the workplace through payroll deductions helps workers save by providing a “commitment device” to make automatic contributions to retirement, the authors say. retirement and savings experts said that very few employers do so. providing a “commitment device’ to make automatic contributions to retirement savings before wages are spent. Such a commitment device helps some workers overcome a common tendency to procrastinate or not take action to save. According to Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs and several experts we interviewed, individuals are more likely to save in IRAs through payroll deductions than they are without these automatic deposits. Payroll deductions allow workers to contribute to retirement Savings automatically before wages were spent. Experts say expanding the scope of the Retirement Savings Contribution Credit could encourage IRA participation among workers who are not covered by an employer-sponsored retirement plan. They said expanding the saver’s credit to include more middle-income earners and making the credit refundable could encourage more moderate- and low-income workers to save for retirement. The tax credits could also increase public awareness about the importance of saving for retirement and how to do so. It could also encourage more people to enroll in payroll-deduction IRAs. they do not owe income tax—could encourage more moderate- and low-income individuals to participate in IRAs. An expanded and refundable tax credit would have revenue implications for the federal government. Other experts told us that automatically enrolling workers into payroll-deduction and SIMPLE IRAs could increase employee participation. Small business groups and IRA providers said that mandatory automatic enrollment could be burdensome to small employers. Low- income workers may opt out of automatic enrollment programs or be more inclined to make early withdrawals. IRS does not produce IRA reports on a consistent basis. IRS officials told us they are in the early stages of determining ways to correct it. Labor officials and retirement and savings experts say they use studies by financial institutions to find out how IRAs are being utilized. The IRS has published IRA data for tax years 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2004, but none for tax year 2003. In addition, IRS officials said they had problems with the IRAData for taxyear 2003, which prevented them from issuing a report for that year. IRA information by IRS, they use studies by financial institutions and industry associations for research purposes. Some may double- count individuals because one person may have more than one IRA at different financial institutions. More consistent reporting of IRA information could help them ensure that their analyses reflect current and accurate information about retirement assets, such as the fair market value of IRAs. Since IRS is the only agency that has data on all IRA participants, it is the best source of information for the IRS to work with. numerous errors, making it difficult and time-consuming for IRS to edit them for statistical analysis. They also said that the IRA rules, and changes to those rules, are difficult for some taxpayers, employers, and trustees to understand. Also, in the past, one particular IRS employee, who has recently retired, took the lead in developing a statistical analysis on IRAs. Since IRS does not have a process in place to train another employee to take over this role, a knowledge gap was created that IRS is trying to fill. Regulators lack information about employer- sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs. IRS collects information on employer-sponsored IRAs but does not share the information collected to offer IRAs to their employees. Providing complete and consistent data on IRAs would help ensure that regulators have the information they need to make informed decisions about IRAs, the authors say. They say changes at IRS and Labor could encourage employers to offerIRAs and improve IRA information and oversight. The authors say increasing public awareness of the importance of saving for retirement and educating individuals about how to do so could increase IRA participation. IRS does collect some information on these IRAs through several “information’ forms provided by financial institutions and employers. Key information on IRAs is currently not reported, such as information that identifies employers offering payroll-deduction IRAs. Without such information, experts said they are unable to determine how many employers and employees participate in payroll- Deduction IRas. The limited reporting requirements prevent information from being obtained about the universe of employers that offer employer- sponsored and payroll- deduction IR as. Retirement plans are reported annually by employers and others to IRS on its Form W-2. IRS cannot share the information it receives on employer-sponsored IRAs with Labor because it is confidential tax information. Labor also does not receive relevant information from employers, such as annual financial reports, as it does from private pension plan sponsors. The Bureau of Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey surveys employee benefit plans in private establishments, receiving information on access, participation, and take- up rates for DB and DC plans. Bureau of Labor Statistics: 8 percent of private sector workers in firms with fewer than 100 employees participated in a SIMPLE IRA in 2005. IRS evaluation of employer-filed W-2 forms estimated that 190,000 employers sponsored SIMPLE IRAs in 2004. IRS did not provide an estimate of the number of employers sponsoring SEP IRAs, and we were unable to reach them. The number of people who have a SEP IRA is estimated to be in the hundreds of thousands. A minimum level of oversight is important to ensure that employers are acting in accordance with the law and within Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs. Labor officials said that they do not have a process for actively seeking out and determining whether employer- sponsored IRAs are engaging in prohibited transactions or not abiding by their fiduciary responsibilities. The only agency that has data on all IRA participants, consistent reporting of these data could give policymakers and others a more comprehensive view of the IRA landscape. Congress should consider whether payroll-deduction IRAs should have some direct oversight. Labor should also have an accurate accounting of the costs to employers, authors say. Without direct oversight, employees may lack confidence, they say. They are pleased that the Committee on Ways and Means and this subcommittee are interested in retirement savings, they add. But any direct oversight should be done in a way that does not pose an undue burden on employers or their employees, the authors say, and they are continuing their work on IRAs. on employer-sponsored IRAs but does not share the information collected with Labor. Currently, Labor has no process in place to monitor employer- sponsored IRAs, and has no jurisdiction over payroll-deduction IRAs. Without direct oversight, employees may lack confidence in their retirement savings. If current oversight vulnerabilities are not addressed, future problems could emerge as more employers and workers participate in employer-Sponsored IRAs and other types of retirement plans, authors say. They make recommendations to Congress, Labor, and IRS to improve IRA information and oversight. rolling assets into IRAs or converting assets from a traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. Labor and IRS work together to oversee IRA prohibited transactions. IRS has responsibility for imposing an excise tax on parties that engage in a prohibited transaction. ERISA and the Internal Revenue Code contain various statutory exemptions from the prohibited transaction rules, and Labor has authority to grant administrative exemptions and establish exemption procedures. (See fig. 1 for a description of IRS and Labor responsibilities regarding IRAs.) Most assets flowing into IRas come not from direct contributions, but from transfers, or rollovers, of retirement assets from other retirement plans, including 401(k) plans. access to SIMPLE and SEP IRAs appears limited. Payroll-deduction IRA programs are not subject to ERISA requirements for employer-sponsored retirement plans and have no reporting requirements. Under ERISA Title I, there is no reporting requirement for SIMPLE IRAs, and there is an alternative method available for reporting of employer- sponsored SEPIRAs. The IRS receives information reports for all traditional and Roth IRAs but those data do not show how many were for employees using payroll-deductions. IRS and Labor share oversight responsibilities for IRAs. IRS enforces Title II of ERISA for all types of IRAs, which details participant eligibility, vesting, and funding requirements. Payroll-deduction IRAs are not under Labor’s jurisdiction; however, Labor does provide guidance regarding the circumstances under which an employer may provide a payroll-deductuction IRA program without being subject to ERISA Title I requirements. Labor primarily relies on participant complaints as sources of investigative leads to detect employers that are not making required contributions. Labor does not have jurisdiction to monitor whether employers are managing such programs within the bounds of Labor’s safe harbor. Labor officials told us that they are not aware of employers improperly relying on the safe harbor regarding payroll-deduction IRAs. Without accurate cost estimates and a determination of what constitutes “reasonable compensation” to employers, employers may not be able to provide adequate protections to employees. Without direct oversight of payroll- deduction IRAs, employees may lack confidence that payroll- Deduction IRas will provide them with adequate protections.

ROUGE-1: 64.76, ROUGE-2: 58.07, ROUGE-L: 25.33
BERTScore: 58.79

==============================================
==================== [12/100] ====================
Summary:
The FCC was required, within 180 days of enactment, to establish a voluntary code of "Subscriber Protection Practices" The code would govern changes in a subscriber's telephone exchange and/or toll services. Failure to comply with or withdrawal from the voluntary code would result in a carrier being subject to FCC regulation. H.R. 3888 also detailed specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into the code. The code was required to review the code every two years to ensure that its requirements "adequately protect consumers" FCC rules require a long distance company to obtain a subscriber's authorization before a switch can occur. Authorization can be obtained in writing or can be confirmed orally. If a subscriber has been a victim of an unauthorized change, he/she is absolved of payment for up to 30 days. Refunds of charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized and the victim. The FCC rules protect consumers from paying potentially exorbitant rates. Received from state regulatory bodies, telecommunications carriers, and individual consumers. carrier must refund 150% of the charges to the authorized carrier. The authorized carrier is allowed to keep an amount equal to 100 percent of the consumer's bill with the remaining 50% returned to the consumer. Primary enforcement responsibility has been given to the states with the FCC assuming responsibility in those states unwilling or unable to undertake this role or if a complainant expressly indicates it wishes the FCC to resolve the matter. According to the FCC, 37 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have chosen to take on this responsibility. The FCC's requirement that the telecommunications carrier verify that the actual subscriber, and not just the person answering the line and claiming to have authority to authorize a carrier switch, exceeded the FCC's statutory authority. The court stated that the statue does not require actual authorization but only requires that the carrier get verification. Furthermore the court said that the requirement for the carrier to obtain "actual authorization" gives carriers "a free pass" to switch providers without the carrier's knowledge. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Verification procedures used to confirm carrier switches are strengthened and extended to include a number of circumstances. These verification methods are applied to both inbound calls (that is, calls initiated by consumers) as well as telemarketing calls. These methods include a consumer signature on an authorization paper form (i.e., a Letter of Agency; LOA), an electronic authorization (usually a customer initiated call to a toll-free number), a verification by an independent third party, and the more recently approved use of an Internet-based LOA. The FCC has also applied verification procedures to the practice of implementing carrier freeze requests. The rules require that solicitations for such freezes be clear and that the consumer be informed as to how such a freeze may be lifted. Verification rules are also applied to changes in local as well as long distance carriers, but wireless carriers are exempt. The FCC also noted that these verification procedures do not preempt state law. These verification methods are to be used as a state minimum, the FCC said in a statement. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from changing a subscriber's selection of both telephone exchange (local) and toll (long distance) service. The section expanded the FCC's authority over such activity to include local as well as long distance service. State utility commissions are also permitted to enforce the procedures with respect to services within their state boundaries. Section 258(b) created a new penalty, in addition to already existing penalties contained in law, for those who violate FCC verification procedures. Any telecommunications carrier that violates those procedures will be fined up to $100,000. S. 1618 also applied to the unauthorized initiation of long distance service as well as unauthorized switching. The local telephone company was prohibited from changing a consumer's long distance provider, unless the change is accompanied by a verbal, written, or electronic verification from the subscriber. The long distance company or reseller was required to send a verification to the local phone company. Furthermore, the bill required that the verification be retained. The bill also required the verification to be retained, and that the change be accompanied by an explanation of the reason for the change. long distance company or reseller was required to send a written confirmation of the switch that includes the name of the new carrier. The use of negative option marketing, whereby a consumer must take some action to prevent a switch from occurring, was banned. The bill also strengthened the complaint procedure by requiring a company charged with slamming to resolve the complaint within 120 days; absent resolution of the complaint, the company would be required to give the consumer the information within 15 days of the change of service. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on Tuesday. a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long distance) carrier (PIC) change charges, and in a February 10, 2005 action modified the rate structure that was set in 1984. The effectiveness of the new rules and their implementation is receiving continuing attention from Members of Congress, regulators, providers, and consumers. Since the development of competition in the provision of long distance telecommunications services, consumers have been able to select the carrier of their choice. A second further notice of proposal, issued on March 17, 2003, imposing additional requirements on third-party verification services became effective on July 21, 2003. and unfair billing practices." A number of issues not addressed in the April 13, 2000 reconsideration order were addressed in a subsequent FCC order adopted on July 21, 2000. These rules went into effect on April 2, 2001. These include permitting the use of Internet LOAs in compliance with provisions contained in the E-Sign Act ( P.L. 106-229 ), thereby allowing carrier changes to be made by consumers via the Internet. retaining the three-way call as a verification method but requiring the carrier's sales representative to drop off the call once the connection has been established. to protect consumers form the unauthorized switching of their long distance service. Introduced May 19, 1999; referred to Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Introduced to protect consumers from the unauthorized switch of long distance services. Referred to the Committee on commerce, science, and transportation. Introduced in May 1999; Referred to House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Commerce. Introduced on May 20, 1999, referred to House Committee on transportation and commerce, and passed on May 21, 1999. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. PIC change charges are borne by the customer, but are commonly picked up by the newly designated interexchange carrier. The FCC established safe harbors of $1.25 for electronically-processed PIC changes and $5.50 for manually processed PIC change. Local exchange carriers can charge more if they can document higher costs and less than the safe harbor rate if they choose. If a consumer switches intrastate long distance providers and interstate providers at the same time, the PIC charge for changing the interstate carrier is decreased by half, to 63 cents. Interstate carrier is decreased by half, to 63 cents, for electronically processed changes. FCC extended, for a second time, the effective date for the filing of revised PIC charge tariffs to be effective no later than January 1, 2006. The possible misuse of the PIC freeze through the implementation of an illegal or unauthorized PIC Freeze by the customer's local exchange carrier has also been raised. The extension of the freeze option, beyond the designation of the long distance carrier, to cover thedesignation of local exchange and long distance carriers. The Competitive Telecommunications Association felt that the $5 PIC change charge safe harbor, that was established in 1984, exceeded the actual cost and hampers competition. The FCC concluded that "significant industry and market changes have occurred since the implementation of the $ 5.00 safe harbor in 1984" and sought comment on FCC policies for regulating PICchange charges. In May 2004 the FCC initiated a probe of PICChange charges and issued a notice of proposed rulemaking (CC Docket No. 02-53) Exchange carriers have expressed some concerns that they should not be held liable for solely executing a change since short of confirming each switch, they cannot insure that each change is authorized by the consumer. Some support the elimination of local exchange carrier control over the processing of all carrier changes and freezes, and favor the establishment of an independent third party to administer and execute such changes. Local exchange carriers defend the use of the PIC freeze, arguing that it is an appropriate method to protect consumers against the growing problem of slamming. distance carrier, to cover the designation of local exchange and intrastate long distance (toll call) carriers. Some feel that the PIC freeze is being misused to protect the local exchange carriers market share in the face of growing competition. Some support the elimination of local. exchange carriers and support the introduction of a national long-distance carrier. Some see the expanded use of the P IC freeze option as unnecessary and feel that it is being used to protect local exchange carrier market share. taken to curb this practice. One concern has focused on the necessity for, or concern over specific provisions contained in, legislative proposals. Two other concerns addressed in legislation have also generated controversy. Some favor voluntary private-sector initiatives to combat slamming rather than the enactment of legislation. Others support vigorous enforcement of current FCC regulations and continued consumer education to combat the increase in slamming. The National Association of Broadcasters is a trade group that represents more than 2,000 carriers across the U.S. The methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics has also been brought under question. Many local exchange carriers claim that they do not actively market the PIC freeze option but only offer it in response to customers who complain about slamming or who specifically inquire about it. The GAO criticized the FCC's methodology for developing slamming statistics. They also state that the manner in which the program is implemented varies from carrier to carrier and that many of the potential and perceived abuses, such as high charges or difficultly in switching, do not apply to most programs. S. 58 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee where no further action was taken. S. 1084 required the FCC, the Federal Trade Commission, and telecommunications carrier representatives to develop a code of practices to protect consumers. The code was required to contain, at a minimum, provisions that required companies to verify changes in a subscriber's service, restricted the use of "negative option marketing," required subscriber notification of any changes in service, and forbade the Use of unfair and deceptive practices. is prevented, since the customer's long distance carrier cannot be changed without express permission. Some see the potential for the PIC freeze to inhibit competition, if the means required to lift the freeze are perceived by the consumer as too burdensome or the charges to implement the change are excessive. The FCC, in a March 14, 2002 action, initiated a notice of proposed rulemaking (CC Docket No. 02-53) to change the way PIC freezes are applied. The PIC Freeze is an option to prevent slamming in the long distance market. because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC unless the revenue exceeds $109 million. LCI International Inc., a long distance carrier in the United States, has also expressed concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates. To enable the FCC to make comparisons, to list the top offenders, the FCC assumes that those resellers that have not provided revenue data, had revenues of $ 109 million. This assumption, the GAO states, may result in a significant overstatement of the reseller's revenue, resulting in a much lower revenue-to-complaint ratio. LCI expresses concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates yearly slamming rates. LCI claims that the FCC's current practice of dividing the number of slamming complaints by a company's annual telecommunications revenue favors larger carriers. This occurs, LCI states, because the larger a company its revenue the more consumers it can slam without appearing to be a major offender.LCI recommends that the Commission calculate its slamming rate ratio by dividing theNumber of slamming complaint by the number. of new long distance customers. The GAO criticized the methodology used by the FCC to determine the list of top slamming offenders. The FCC compares slamming offenders by citing the ratio of the number of complaints per million dollars of company revenue. That methodology, according to the GAO, is flawed because it can lead to a severe understatement of the revenue-to-complaint ratio for the smaller companies, or resellers. This occurs because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC. to further deter the practice of slamming by increasing consumer protections and strengthening enforcement at both the federal and state level. Included among the provisions to deter slamming contained in this measure were those that required extensive and written notification and verification requirements when a subscriber switches long distance carriers. The statement also advocated uniformity in state and federal slamming requirements, to lessen consumer confusion, and called for the levying of fines, but solely in cases where it has be proven that the carrier "has engaged in willful and intentional slamming...." to be subject to FCC investigation. Carriers found in violation of the voluntary code or found willfully and repeatedly slamming were subject to a fine of up to $1 million. Additional provisions in the bill included those that gave subscribers credit for charges incurred when using the slamming carrier's service; gave state attorneys general enforcement authority under the federal legislation; and directed the Commerce Department's National Telecommunications and Information Administration to report to Congress on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party. FCC: 36,220 inquiries and 1,932 complaints filed in 2005. The potential for slamming is expected to increase as competition in the provision of intrastate long distance and local telecommunications services becomes more widespread. Since many consumers who are the victims of slamming may not file complaints, and over 50 million carrier selection changes are recorded each year, it is assumed that filed complaints represent a subset of the actual problem. The FCC's slamming team in 2004 resolved approximately 3,500 slamming complaints involving over 300 telephone carriers, resulting in consumer refunds totaling $800,000. to date. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has put forth proposals to stop this activity. Some states have taken significant action to protect consumers from slamming, but others have taken little action or have no antislamming regulations. Information provided by all long distance carriers in compliance with FCC-required tariff filing procedures, is not reviewed and is no deterrent to a slammer. Consumers and the industry itself are becoming increasingly vulnerable as targets for large scale fraud, according to the report. Consumers have the right to choose the carrier of their choice from among approximately 500 companies. Unauthorized switching, known as "slamming," has a negative impact on both the consumers and suppliers of telecommunications services. Consumers often do not realize they have been slammed until they find unfamiliar names or charges on their telephone bills. The practice distorts the marketplace by increasing the customer base and revenues of the carrier that has illegally switched the consumer at the expense of the consumer. It can go undetected for months or even longer. Concern has been voiced by some that the consumer protections that were proposed were too extensive and may be overly burdensome and costly for smaller carriers. Mandatory third party verification is cited as an example of a proposal that would be costly for small carriers to implement. Proposals to require switchless resellers to post a "surety bond" with the FCC to pay for possible fines or penalties also came under criticism. The Telecommunications Resellers Association claims that such a provision not be necessary. The Telecommunications Resellers Association claims that such a provision not only discriminates against switchless resellers, but would also cause an "anticompetitive effect" in the marketplace. Additional concern has also been expressed over the content of other provisions contained in other measures. Provisions that give full reimbursement to consumers if they are slammed, instead of solely reimbursement of the overcharge, have generated concerns that it might possibly lead to consumers fraudulently claiming they have been slammed, to avoid paying any charges for long distance calls. AT&T: Proposals to require slammers to pay fines to consumers they harm could result in the creation of the "wrong incentive structure..." Some have expressed concerns that fines and punishments not be levied against the long distance carrier in all cases, since in some instances unwanted switches can be attributed to the local exchange carrier responsible for executing the switch. On the other hand, local exchange carriers have expressed some concerns that they should not be charged for long distance calls.charges for long-distance calls. The rules absolve slammed consumers of liability for charges incurred for the first 30-day period after an unauthorized switch. In cases where payment was made by the consumer, the unauthorized carrier must refund 150% of the charges to the authorized carrier. The requirement prevents violators from receiving financial rewards for the illegal switch. The rules, with the exception of the liability provisions, went into effect in April 1999. The liability provisions were stayed by the D.C. Court of Appeals. On May 3, 2000 the FCC issued revised liability rules which met court approval. AT&T v. FCC: FCC exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing certain of its slamming rules relating to customer verification. While not remanding the FCC's rules, the court did vacate fines totaling $80,000 imposed on AT&T. The FCC had imposed a fine on AT & T for slamming when, despite compliance with the FCC’s procedures, an anterograde change was made. The court did not remand the rules, but vacated the fines. charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized carrier (100%) and the subscriber (50%) Carriers proven to be in violation of FCC rules are subject to fines and penalties. From April 1994 to the end of 1999, the FCC imposed final forfeitures against 8 companies for $10.3 million, entered into consent decrees with 12 carriers with combined payments of $2.7 million and proposed $7.6 million in proposed notices of apparent liability against 5 companies. The FCC continues to take enforcement actions against violators. FCC action in 2004 resolved about 3500 slamming complaints involving more than 300 carriers resulting in $800,000 in consumer refunds. In its first joint federal/state effort, the FCC, working with 14 state agencies, filed on June 20, 2002, a $1.2 million fine against WebNet Communications Inc. of McLean, Va., for 20 alleged violations. In an April 21, 1998 action,. the FCC levied its most severe penalty for slamming to date. For the first The bill extended FCC authority over violators beyond telecommunications carriers to include others such as billing agents. First time "willful violators" would have faced up to a year in prison for a first offense with repeat offenders up to five years. The bill also allowed consumers to get refunds from unauthorized carriers; and protected consumer's rights to use the PIC freeze option. (See section on " PIC Freeze Programs and Charges ", below.) S.C. House passed the bill on Tuesday. most severe penalty for slamming to date. For the first time, it revoked the operating authority of a telecommunications provider for slamming violations and levied a multi-million dollar fine. This action was taken against the Fletcher Companies, a group of long distance telephone companies, for engaging in slamming and numerous other violations of the Communications Act and FCC rules. These companies, and their principals, are barred from providing interstate telecommunications services without the prior consent of the FCC. Furthermore, the FCC assessed forfeitures totaling $5.7 million but has never been able to collect. The FCC received more than 1,400 complaints against the Fletcher Companies. Although these companies stopped providing services in 1997, during the FCC's investigation, this action was taken. Provisions in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (see discussion below) expand the scope of FCC's authority to address the problem of unauthorized switches. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 order, took action to ensure that none of these companies can resume operation and "engage in slamming or other conduct ... harmful to consumers" The FCC was given the authority to award both compensatory and punitive damages. Minimum levels for fines were established, absent mitigating circumstances, with a fine of not less than $40,000 for first-time offenders. Individual subscribers could recover damages up to $500 from slammers and would not have had to pay the slamming carrier but could have elected to pay their designated carrier for those services. Those convicted of intentional slammers could face up to five years in prison. The FCC was also given the power to prosecute those who refuse to pay fines. Switchless resellers were required to post a bond with the FCC before they were able to offer long distance services. S. 1618 did not preclude or preempt state law or actions against slammers. slamming victims were given the option of pursuing slamming complaints through the courts, instead of the FCC, through a court system.who refuse to pay their fines. Those convicted of intentional slamming ("willful" slammers) would have been subject to criminal penalties and would have be prohibited from offering telecommunications services. S. 1618 established both a complaint process at the FCC and minimum monetary penalties for offenders. Any company that ignored a consumer's complaint was to be subject to a penalty for slamming. The FCC was given the authority to award both compensatory and punitive damages and to issue a decision on slamming complaints within 150 days of filing. The company was required to give the consumer a copy of the retained verification, information about how to pursue the complaint with the FCC, and all other available remedies. It was also required to establish streamlined complaint resolution procedures. The GAO undertook an investigation into the general issue of slamming, FCC and state regulatory efforts to curtail slamming. This report, Telephone Slamming and Its Harmful Effects, was released in conjunction with testimony given at Subcommittee hearings on April 23, 1998. Some of the major conclusions reached by the GAO, based on their three-month investigation into slamming practices and regulation, are as follows: "Neither the FCC, the FTC, nor the state regulators have taken action to curb slamming practices" are becoming increasingly vulnerable as targets for large scale fraud; Given [the present] environment, unscrupulous long-distance providers slam consumers, often with virtual impunity; and The most effective action that consumers can take to eliminate the chance of intentional slamming is to have their local exchange carrier freeze their choice of long distance providers. The conclusions reached in the GAO report regarding FCC efforts to deter slamming, were discussed during hearings held, on April 23, 1998, by the Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee. Some subcommittee members expressed concern over the findings to FCC Chairman Kennard, who was called to testify at the hearings. FCC Chairman Kennard was called to testify at the hearing. Kennard defended the FCC's actions stating that the tariff filing procedure was not developed as a deterrent to slamming. He also pointed to the severe punishment taken against Fletcher Companies to defend FCC actions. At the request of Senator Collins, the GAO undertook a second study examining the scope of and state and federal actions taken by the FCC. The GAO concluded that the FCC had taken the appropriate steps to combat slamming and that it was investigating the matter further. once the connection has been established between the subscriber and the third party verifier. New complaint reporting requirements for carriers which require carriers to submit semiannual reports to the FCC's Enforcement Bureau. Carrier registration requirements that prevent slammers from evading detection simply by changing their names. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), (known at that time as the General Accounting Office), at the request of Senator Collins, then Chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Government Affairs, undertook an investigation into the practice. The report focused on two abuses, slamming and cramming. Cramming is the practice of placing unauthorized charges for services and products on a consumer's telephone bill. The report confirmed that, based on data from 1996 through 1998, "slamming continues to be a significant problem for consumers" The report contains information on the number of complaints filed, and state and federal regulations taken to protect consumers from these abuses. It was issued in July 1999, and details actions taken to combat abuses involving telephone services. the 106 th Congress relating to the slamming issue. Senator Susan Collins introduced the "Telephone Services Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Act of 1999" ( S. 58 ), on January 19, 1999. The bill also addresses the practice of cramming. However, that is the. practice of placing unauthorized, misleading, or deceptive charges on consumer's telephone bills goes beyond the scope. of the bill and is referred to as the "Slamming Act" by Senator Collins. The Act was passed by the Senate on January 20, 1999, and the House of Representatives on January 21, 1999,. The bill was referred to the Senate as "S. 58" by senator Collins. The FCC expanded upon and adopted more stringent rules to combat slamming. The Telecommunications Act of 1996, which was signed into law on February 8, 1996 ( P.L. 104-104 ), resulted in a major rewrite of the 1934 Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 151 et.seq.) Section 258 of the Telecommunications Act, as amended, expands jurisdiction over, and creates a new penalty for, any telecommunications carrier that illegally changes a subscriber's designated telecommunications carrier. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from illegally changing a customer's phone number. The 105 th Congress actively examined this issue, with each chamber passing its version of legislation to protect consumers against slamming. However, adjournment occurred before a final measure could be passed. Some Members of Congress felt that additional legislative action was needed to be taken to address slamming.filed, state and federal regulations taken to protection consumers from such abuses, industry initiatives taken to curb these abuses, as well as state andFederal enforcement actions taken against companies engaged in these practices. The 105th Congress was the first to examine this issue. Senator McCain introduced the "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1999" ( S. 1084 ) on May 19, 1999, one day after the court stay of FCC slamming liability rules. Citing the failure of the 105 th Congress to pass slamming legislation, court action to stay FCC liability rules, and his objection to the industry-proposed third party administrator, Senator McCain offered a comprehensive measure "to better protect consumers" S. 58 attempted to further deter the practice of slamming by increasing consumer protections. requirement that the carrier obtain "actual authorization" gives carriers "a virtually impossible task" New initiatives are established to ease the filing of consumer complaints and speed their resolution. The establishment of a toll-free number at the FCC to enable consumers to file complaints over the telephone. The FCC, in conjunction with CC docket 98-170, has also adopted rules that establish truth-in-billing and billing format principles to enhance a consumer's ability to detect slamming. The rules establish requirements that are "intended to protect consumers against inaccurate and unfair billing practices" complaints through the courts, instead of the FCC, through a state class action suit. Each telecommunications carrier or reseller was required to report slamming violations to the FCC on a quarterly basis. The FCC was also directed to issue a report, within 180 days of the bill's enactment, on telemarketing practices used to solicit service provider changes by subscribers. This was to be based on a ratio of the number of subscriber complaints to the total number of subscribers served. The bill also included a number of reporting requirements. S. 1084 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee and received no further action. Carriers were required to give subscribers who are victims of slamming credits for unauthorized charges and damages of $500. The bill required the FCC to compile and publish a report, every six months, listing slamming violations by carrier. Adherence to the code would have been voluntary, but those carriers that chose not to follow the codewould have been required to follow regulations prescribed by the FCC. The FCC was also required to compile and publish a report, on a semiannual basis, ranking carriers by the percentage of verified complaints, excluding those generated by the carrier's unaffiliated resellers. Carriers listed among the five worst performers in the semiann annual reports for three consecutive times were to be subject to FCC investigation. The FCC also required carriers not operating under the voluntary code to meet specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into FCC-developed regulations for carriers not under the code. S. 1740 (Collins) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve protections against the unauthorized change of subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another, and for other purposes. S. 1084 (McCain) A bill to protect consumers form the unauthorized switching of their long-term telephone service. (McC McCain) S. 58 (Collins), A measure that would improve the protection against telephone service "slamming" and provide protections against telephone billing "cramming" vote, with amendment, October 12, 1998. S. 1051 (Campbell) A measure to enhance protections against unauthorized changes of telephone service subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another. H.R. 4176 (Markey) a measure to protect consumers against 'spamming', 'slamming', and 'cramming' S. 1137 (Durbin) AMeasure to amend section 258 of the Communications Act of 1934 to establish additional protections against the unauthorized change of subscribers. H.R. 3050 (Dingell) A measure to establish procedures and remedies for the prevention of fraudulent and deceptive practices in the solicitation of telephone service subscribers. H. R. 3888 (Tauzin) a measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced April 29, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Referred to Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Protection May 8, 1998. May 8, 1998. H.R. 3888 (Tauzin) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced May 14, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Passed Telecommunications Subcommittee, as amended, by voice vote, August 6,1998. An amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by Representative Tauzin was adopted by voiceVote by the Commerce Committee, on September 24, 1998 ( H.Rept. 105-801 ). Passed House by voice Vote, with amendment, October 12, 1998, Received in the Senate. The enactment of additional legislative measures prescribing new regulations is seen, by some, as an action that is unnecessary. Others support the enactment of legislation. The release of a GAO report critical of current FCC efforts to reduce the occurrence of slamming gave supporters of legislation additional impetus in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses. It is up to the Congress, they state, to establish through law stronger measures and increased penalties to protect both consumers and suppliers of telecommunications services from slamming. The necessary, supporters claim, to enact legislation to curb slamming. by statute, versus FCC developed policies, are less susceptible to change and will better withstand scrutiny if challenged in the courts. The May 18, 1999 U.S. Appeals Court stay of the liability provisions of the FCC's slamming rules is cited as further proof in support of the need for enactment of legislation. Those supporting legislative action, however, are not necessarily united in the approach such legislation should take. Some have expressed concern over the breadth of the proposed regulations contained in the measures that were considered in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced many bills to address this issue, but adjourned without passing legislation. No legislation addressing slamming was introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congresses and none has been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has adjournment occurred before a final measure could be passed. The FCC has revised its rules with an eye to strengthening its regulations and increasing penalties for violators. Whether the FCC's strengthened slamming rules will be a sufficient deterrent to stop the practice of slamming remains unclear. the 107 th or 108 th Congress and none has been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. The FCC continues to take actions to enforce and further strengthen its slamming rules. The last of these new rules went into effect on November 28, 2000. Under these revised rules, states have the option of processing slamming complaints, and numerous states have opted to do so. On March 14, 2002, the FCC initiated a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long range communications) The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced 11 bills to address this issue. S. 1618, the "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act," passed the Senate (99-0) with amendment, on May 12, 1998. H.R. 3888 passed the House, as amended, by voice vote, on October 12,1998. Despite intense negotiations to resolve differences between the bills, the Congress adjourned before the bill could be brought to the Senate floor for consideration. The "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1998" passed the House by voice vote, with amendment, on October 12, 1998. H.R. 3888 called for the establishment of a voluntary code of conduct as an alternative to FCC regulation to address the issue. The House-passed measure contained a different approach from its Senate counterpart to combat slamming. Failure to comply with or comply with the bill would result in a fine of up to $1,000,000 for each violation. on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party to administer a system to prevent slamming. The version of H.R. 3888 passed by the House Commerce Committee, and ultimately the full House, was significantly different from the Senate-passed measure. Negotiations between the House and Senate to reconcile differences between the two measures continued through the waning days of the session. Despite such efforts, however, H.r.3888 was not passed by Congress. H.R. 3888 was not brought to the Senate floor and legislation to address slamming was not enacted prior to the adjournment of the 105 th Congress. The telecommunications industry has acknowledged the existence of a slamming problem but is not necessarily in agreement with an approach to solve it. The Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel), a telecommunications trade association that represents competitive telecommunications service providers, issued a statement that called for "zero tolerance" of intentional slamming. CompTel urged carriers to agree to investigate all slamming allegations, repay consumers who were slammed.

ROUGE-1: 85.36, ROUGE-2: 76.83, ROUGE-L: 26.28
BERTScore: 56.60

==============================================
==================== [13/100] ====================
Summary:
Fifty-four of the IGs we surveyed reported having certain responsibilities for identifying management challenges in their agencies. Most of the 203 management challenges they reported for fiscal year 2010 focused on issues specific to their agencies’ missions and performance. Not all agencies with IGs have requirements to report management challenges. Most IGs appointed by the President and 27 of the DFE IGs reported their agency’s management challenges and provided examples of audit reports that addressed about 90 percent of those challenges reported. focused on issues specific to their agencies’ missions and performance management. For example, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s IG reported that major changes to the direction of the nation's space program present several management challenges. The Department of Health and Human Services IG cited the management challenges associated with Delivery of Health Care. The other management challenges addressed by the IGs relate to information technology, procurement, financial management, and human resources. In addition, to provide oversight coverage of management challenges, the presidential IGs issued reports that addressed about 93 percent of the management. challenges for fiscal year 2010, with a focus on their agencies’ missions, information technology, and performance management. The Farm Credit Administration’s IG reported management challenges related to the safety, soundness, and mission accomplishment of the Farm Credit System. Information technology, including information security, was often identified as a management challenge. The management challenges included in the “other” category included concerns over internal controls, improper payments, and the security of federal property. In addition, the DFE IGs issued reports that addressed almost 90 percent of the management challenges identified and contained recommendations for corrective actions. issued reports that addressed about 93 percent of the management challenges identified. The DFE IGs reported 124 management challenges for fiscal year 2010. The reports contained recommendations for improving the weaknesses specified by the challenges. For example, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation IG recommended strengthening specific controls over managing the closing process for failed financial institutions. Also, the Social Security Administration IG identified transparency and accountability issues as an agency management challenge and provided report recommendations for improved performance in this area. For more information, visit the DFE’s website. The IGs identified $43.3 billion in potential savings from audits and investigations. They reported over 5,900 criminal actions, 1,100 civil actions, 4,460 suspensions or debarments, and over 6,100 indictments resulted from their work. Based on this information, the potential dollar savings reported by these IGs represent a return on investment of approximately $18 for every IG dollar spent when compared to total IG fiscal year 2009 budget appropriations of $2.3billion. under the act with establishing and maintaining a user friendly website to foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of Recovery Act funds. To help prevent fraud and other potential wrongdoing, the IGs offered training to federal, state, and local employees, as well as contractors, private entities, and award recipients. The IGs’ training was intended to improve awareness of the legal and administrative requirements of the Recovery Act programs. The management challenges reported annually by federal agencies in their performance and accountability reports along with relevant IG reports to address these challenges are key to focusing on effective IG oversight. members to prevent and detect fraud, waste, and abuse in the stimulus-funded programs. Altogether, there are 30 IGs involved with the oversight of Recovery Act funds. Recovery Act requires IG reviews of concerns raised by the public about investments of stimulus funds and provides IGs the authority to examine records and interview Recovery Act fund contractors and grantees. The Recovery Act established the Recovery Board whose members include 12 IGs and an additional IG as the chair, to coordinate and conduct oversight of funds distributed under the act. the IGs’ requested budget amounts identified separately within their respective agency budgets, along with any comments provided by the IGs on the sufficiency of their budgets. The Recovery Act provided for IG oversight of the funds by creating the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Recovery Board) The Recovery Board has an IG Chairman and 12 additional IG board members to prevent and detect fraud, waste, and abuse in IGs. We summarized the reported management challenges to identify the major focus of the Recovery Board. of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board. Jackson W. Hufnagle, Assistant Director; Jacquelyn Hamilton; Werner F. Miranda Hernandez; Rebecca Shea; and Clarence A. Whitt made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The Dodd-Frank Act amended the IG Act with provisions to enhance the independence of IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. If the DFE has a board or commission the amendments would now require each of these IGs to report organizationally to the entire board. The Reform Act also included a provision intended to provide additional IG independence through the transparent reporting of their budgets. Of these 26 DFE IGs, 14 reported that the act’s provision designating the boards and commissions as the D FE heads enhances their independence. Dodd-Frank Act amending the IG Act is intended to provide an additional degree of independence to those IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. Survey also obtained information about the extent to which the IGs found it necessary to communicate particularly flagrant problems to their agency heads and the Congress. Most responded that the requirements for a two- thirds concurrence among the board or commission members prior to an IG’s removal increased their independence. In reported that no IGs had used the 7-day letter during the period of January 1990 through April 1998. designating the boards and commissions as the DFE heads enhances their independence, and 20 responded that their independence is enhanced by requiring a two-thirds majority for their removal. A smaller number of affected IGs stated that these provisions had no effect on their independence. One DFE IG affected by the provisions did not respond to these survey questions. Also, a former D FE IG stated that reporting to his commission would reduce his independence, according to the survey. The survey was carried out by the European Commission. to the budget if the amount of the IG budget submitted by the agency or the President would substantially inhibit the IG from performing the duties of the office. The fiscal year 2011 budget included amounts for 28 of the 30 presidentially appointed IGs. The IG Council has responded that it will review and assess this matter and, if necessary, work with congressional and administration and work with the IG Council to find a solution to the problem. The budget provisions are intended to help ensure adequate funding and additional independence of IG budgets. the President are generally located in the largest departments and agencies of the government. The presidentially appointed IGs and the DFE IGs reported to us total budget authority for fiscal year 2010 of about $2.2 billion with approximately 13,652 authorized full-time equivalent staff and 13,390 staff on board. The DFEs have smaller budgets and their IGs have correspondingly small budgets and fewer staff. The President’s budget authority constituted about 84 percent (about $1.8 billion) of the total. administration of programs or operations. The IG Act requires the agency head in turn to transmit the IG report to the appropriate committees or subcommittees of the Congress within 7 calendar days. We asked whether any of the 62 IGs we surveyed had used the 7-day letter at any time during fiscal years 2008, 2009, and 2010. Only one, a presidentially appointed IG, had used it during this time frame. Generally, issues have been resolved more informally before getting to the point of using a 7- day letter. GAO surveyed 62 federal IGs appointed under the IG Act. The IGs reported pay that was at the specified levels required by the Reform Act. GAO reviewed the President’s fiscal year 2011 budget submission to the Congress. To the extent the IGs’ budgets are separately identified, the added transparency of these amounts can help increase IG independence, GAO says.. The IG Council agreed to review and assess the matter, and the IG Council has provided written comments to the GAO. with boards or commissions on whether their independence was enhanced by these provisions designating their boards and commissions as DFE heads rather than individual chairmen. We also obtained information from the President’s budget submission to the Congress for fiscal year 2011, to determine whether the IG budget amounts were separately identified along with any comments by the IGs regarding the sufficiency of their budgets. To address the effectiveness of the IGS, we obtained information on the accomplishments of theIGs, as well as their comments on sufficiency. stated that reporting to his commission would reduce his independence because the commission has both federal and state members. The current IG who took office during our review stated that the primary concern is how nonfederal members would exercise their authority over a federal IG. The Reform Act amended the IG Act to require that IG budget requests include certain information and be separately identified in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. In addition, along with the separately identified IG budgets, the IGs may include comments with respect to the budget if the amount of the IG budget is included. same provisions for both the DFE IGs and the IGs appointed by the President. We obtained and analyzed survey responses from 62 IGs established by the IG Act. We augmented the survey data with information obtained from prior GAO reports, the President’s budget submission to the Congress for fiscal year 2010, and other information. We addressed our reporting objectives through our summary of responses to a survey sent to the federal statutory IGs. We also analyzed the responses from 30 IGs who were appointed bythe President and confirmed by the Senate. IG Act and summarized the number of IGs in each area. We conducted our work from November 2010 to September 2011 in accordance with all sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework that are relevant to our objectives. We believe that the information and data obtained, and the analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the IG Council. The IG Council has not yet responded to our request for comments on the report. The Department of State IG provides oversight of the Broadcasting Board of Governors. The IG is a member of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board. In addition to. IGs established by the IG Act of 1978, as amended, with appointment by the. President and Senate confirmation, the Department of. State IG is responsible for overseeing the Broadcasting. Board of. Governors, which is a designed federal entity. In. addition to the IG. Report, please contact me at (202) 512-8486 or raglands@gao.gov. oversight to a wide range of government programs. We also received, and incorporated as appropriate, technical comments from several IG offices. We will send copies of this report to members of the IG Council, including the Office of Management and Budget’s Deputy Director for Management. If you have any questions or would like to discuss this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8486 or raglands@gao.gov. The report will also be sent to the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Finance. The 62 federal IGs responding to our survey reported information on their expertise and qualifications. The IGs’ information showed a wide range of backgrounds, skills, and professional certifications relevant to their work consistent with the areas of demonstrated experience specified by the IG Act. Most of the IGs appointed by the President reported that they had a background in postal operations. The number of IGs in each IG provided recommendations to improve the efficiency of postal operations related to performance management in sorting the mail. by the President reported that they had a background in criminal justice, investigations, law enforcement, and public administration. Most of the IGs reported having degrees in areas that are relevant to performing in an IG position and in areas of demonstrated experience specified by the IG Act. Other academic degrees reported by presidential and DFE IGs included mathematics, science, sociology, education, psychology, and English. With respect to professional certifications, 6 IGs appointed by the. President reported having a degree in management analysis. professional certifications, 6 IGs appointed by the President reported having professional certifications. 28 DFE IGs reported they possessed at least one professional certification related to their IG responsibilities. We received comments from the IG Council (reprinted in app. V), on September 13, 2011. The council commented that the draft provided useful information on the independence, activities, and accomplishments of the federal inspectors general. The draft will contribute to a greater understanding of the work of the IGs in providing oversight to a wide range of government programs. The IG Reform Act of 2008 (Reform Act) amended the IG Act by adding requirements related to IG independence and effectiveness. The budgets of the DFE IGs made up about 16 percent (about $352 million) of the total budget authority for IGs. In a March 1995 report, we reported that the IG pay cannot be less than the average total compensation (including agencies) for all agencies. The Act requires that the grade, level, or rank designation for the D FE IGs be set at or above that of a majority of the senior-level executives. pay cannot be less than the average total compensation (including bonuses) of the senior-level executives at that agency calculated on an annual basis. Of the 30 IGs appointed by the President, 27 reported being at or even above the required pay level; with the remaining 3 IGs reporting that they were in acting positions and the requirement was not currently applicable to them. of the 32 DFE IGs who responded to our survey, 29 reported that their pay and salaries were consistent with those of the Senior Executives of their agencies. The IG community expressed concerns that IGs with attorneys located organizationally in their agencies’ offices of general counsel would not always receive independent legal advice. The results from our survey show that all the IGs established by the IG Act reported having access to a legal counsel that is organizationally independent. All 32 DFE IGs who responded to our survey indicated that they obtain independent legal counsel, with 26 employing their own counsel, 5 using the legal counsels of other IGs’ office, and 1 using legal resources of the IG Council. The IG Act created independent IG offices at 30 major departments and agencies. In 1988, the IG Act was amended to establish additional IG offices in 33 DFEs. Generally, the DFE IGs have the same authorities and responsibilities as those IGs originally established by the Act. However, they are appointed and may be removed by their agency heads rather than by the President and are not subject to Senate confirmation.. There are 10 IGs established by other statutes with provisions similar to those in the IGs Act. to be at a specified level, and for the DFE IGs, at or above a majority of other senior-level executives at their entities. The Reform Act also requires an IG to obtain legal advice from his or her own counsel or to obtain counsel from another IG’s office or from the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency. The IG Act also provides protections to the independence of the IGs while keeping both their agency heads and the Congress fully and currently informed about particularly flagrant problems and deficiencies.

ROUGE-1: 67.66, ROUGE-2: 62.02, ROUGE-L: 25.88
BERTScore: 58.23

==============================================
==================== [14/100] ====================
Summary:
As of February 2016, U.S. government assistance was reaching 4 million people inside Syria per month. USAID provides funds to UN organizations and also works through nongovernmental organizations (NGO) While State works through three main partners—two UN Organizations and one public international organization. The United States provided more than a quarter of the total international funding for the 2015 Syria humanitarian response. Since 2013, the United States has consistently led global funding efforts for the Syrian conflict. The top ten international donors to this effort in 2015. According to the UN, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance inside Syria has risen steadily since 2012. U.S. funding obligated for humanitarian assistance for people affected by the conflict in Syria began in fiscal year 2012 and totaled just over $5 billion, as of February 2016. Food, shelter, nonfood items, health and nutrition, and water, sanitation and hygiene are among the main types of assistance provided inside Syria. The U.N. estimates that more than 4.8 million people have fled as refugees to neighboring countries. Administrative procedures put in place by the Syrian government have delayed or limited the delivery of humanitarian assistance. According to the UNSG reports, international NGOs face restrictions, limiting their ability to partner with national humanitarian organizations, open suboffices, conduct missions, join interagency convoys, and undertake independent needs assessments. One organization told us that the Syriangovernment has effectively prohibited it from undertaking more permanent activities for displaced persons inside Syria, such as renovating and repairing community centers and other buildings. In early 2016 State reported that since the beginning of 2015, the Syrian Government had received 113 requests from the UN to deliver humanitarian aid, of which 13 had been approved. The increasingly violent and widespread Syrian conflict has hindered effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance is routinely prevented or delayed from reaching its intended target due to shifting conflict lines, attacks on aid facilities and workers, and other factors related to active conflict. The years of Secretary General (UNSG) reports on the humanitarian situation in Syria from March 2014, when the reports began, through December 2015, to categorize and summarize observations contained in the reports. The reports, which are submitted to the Security Council pursuant to Resolution 2139 (2014), provide information. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. You asked us to review U.S. efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to individuals affected by the conflict in Syria. In this report we examine humanitarian assistance provided by the United States. USAID says its NGO implementing partners rarely utilize cross- line deliveries. Financial oversight in humanitarian assistance programs includes managing program funds. Management is responsible for developing the detailed policies, procedures, and practices to fit the entity’s operations. Effective delivery of U.S. humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria is complicated by three related factors—a dangerous operating environment, access issues, and remote management of programs. issues, such as increasing the opportunity for fraud and losses due to theft and diversion. The UN reported that in 2015, only 10 percent of all requests for UN inter-agency convoys to hard-to-reach and besieged areas were approved and delivered. In addition, according to implementing partner officials based in Damascus, even when these convoys were approved, the officials participating in delivering the assistance were sometimes subjected to hours-long delays, stretching into the middle of the night. State's and USAID’s implementing partners also told us that they rarely operate inside ISIS controlled areas. The UN cannot ensure that they will be able to operate within the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and operational independence. The UN reports contain multiple instances of ISIS blocking humanitarian and commercial access into and through areas under its control. For example, in November 2015, the UN reported that ISIS controlled and blocked humanitarian access to a stretch of highway leading to the western parts of Aleppo city. Due to restrictions, USAID and State staff were unable to deliver assistance to over 220,000 people. The years of conflict have led to shifting areas of control as armed groups claim and lose territory. In late May 2015, for example, after ISIS took over the city of Palmyra, it reportedly seized the Syrian Arab Red Crescent warehouse, which contained food assistance for 35,000 people. According to USAID officials, this represented the largest loss USAID has experienced delivering aid inside Syria. In addition, the proliferation of armed actors has made the conflict extremely complex, according to one NGO based in Amman and operating in Syria. By 2015, USAID had awarded roughly $50 million to an international NGO to deliver emergency food items to beneficiaries in southern Syria. Officials randomly select parcels for inspection to verify the quantity and quality of the contents. USAID awarded about $16 million in fiscal year 2015 to deliver medical supplies and equipment to support health-related infrastructure, such as clinics, among other types of aid and services. In Jordan, we visited their warehouse and observed officials randomly select items for inspection. of the types of controls implemented. The U.S. government closed its embassy in Damascus in 2012 due to security conditions and the safety of personnel. The inability to access Syria limits the visibility that staff have over the provision of humanitarian assistance. USAID officials noted, for instance, that unlike humanitarian responses conducted in other countries, including those in conflict situations like Afghanistan or Iraq, USAID staff are unable to provide assistance in Syria. Over 220,000 people have been affected by the violence in Syria, including more than 20,000 children. The resumption of active conflict in several governorates has hindered the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. State's and USAID’s implementing partners contend with the multitude of actors as well as shifting conflict lines. In general, implementing partners operating out of neighboring countries, mainly Jordan and Turkey, cross the border into Syria to deliver assistance into opposition controlled areas. All UNSG reports from 2014 and 2015 include descriptions of indiscriminate aerial bombardment by government forces and indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition groups. Humanitarian workers inside Syria must work within the insecure operating environment, affecting their ability to carry out. Response Teams manage humanitarian programs for Syria in partnership with UN agencies, international NGOs, and national organizations. Humanitarian assistance operations on the ground inside Syria are heavily influenced by the ongoing conflict. The conflict began in March 2011 when demonstrations turned into protests against the government of Bashar al-Assad. Over the past 5 years, the conflict has grown more complex as the number of participating armed actors has proliferated; they now include the Syrian government, non-state opposition groups, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and the al-Nusrah Front. addition, a number of other countries, including Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, have strategic interests in Syria. In February 2016, the United States and Russia brokered a cessation of hostilities, excluding ISIS and the al-Nusrah Front. According to the UN, the reduction in violence allowed for increased humanitarian assistance deliveries to hard-to-reach and besieged locations in Syria during the months of March and April 2016. However, according to State and USAID, persistent armed conflict and aerial attacks, including attacks on medical facilities, continue to. Aid facilities are often indirectly impacted or directly targeted, leading to widespread damage. There are frequent instances of gunfire, car bombs, barrel bombs, rocket strikes, and mortar attacks near aid facilities. In one instance, an air strike hit the Syrian Arab Red Crescent offices in Idlib, destroying ambulances and vehicles. The UN reported that, as a result of the violence, many aid workers are missing or detained humanitarian workers; and injury or death of humanitarian workers. In addition, aid workers have been forced to leave their homes. destroying ambulances and vehicles. The UN reported that, as a result, the capacity of the Red Crescent to provide first aid services in the city was curtailed. Medical facilities have also been attacked (see figure 7). Physicians for Human Rights reported that as of November 2015, there had been 336 attacks on 240 separate medical facilities and 697 medical personnel killed inside Syria. In addition, as of the April 2016 UNSG Report, a total of 87 humanitarian workers have been killed in Syria in the conflict. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a serious humanitarian challenge. Syrians, as well as Palestinian and Iraqi refugees residing in Syria, have become increasingly vulnerable due to high levels of violence and insecurity. As of May 2016, the UN reported that more than 4.8 million Syrians had fled the country and registered as refugees, 6.5 million people were internally displaced, and 13.5million people inside Syria were in need of humanitarian assistance. In addition, millions of people remain trapped in besieged and other hard-to-reach areas of the country where delivery of aid is difficult. As of May 2016, the UN reported that 4.6 million people inside Syria are located in hard-to-reach areas. More than 500,000 of those remain besieged by ISIS, the government of Syria, or non-State armed opposition groups. Parties to the conflict heavily restrict or deny humanitarian access to besieged areas, and people risk infectious disease, malnutrition, poor sanitation, and lack of medical care. The UN estimated that the lives of roughly 42,000 people remained besieged by government forces in the towns of Madaya and Buqayn. contains guidelines for field monitors to document their assessment of the project at the completion of a site visit. However, it lacks specific guidelines to identify potential fraud risks during site visits. For example, the guidelines in the monitoring plan instruct field monitor to use color-coded indicators. While fraud is mentioned with the indicator, it is presented as one of several examples of highly concerning findings to document, and could potentially be a fraud risk. For more information, visit www.projectmonitoring.com. of highly concerning findings to document, and could potentially be overlooked by the field monitor. Additionally, the templates created by the third party monitoring organization to document site visits instruct monitors to verify the presence or absence of supplies, and the quality of them. For example, templates related to water and sanitation projects instructed field monitors to verification that water was delivered to a location, and that water quality tests had been conducted, when applicable. However, the template lacks specific indicators to alert field monitor to collect information on and identify potential potential problems. We agree that the field monitors do not audit the program, but they provide a crucial on the ground presence in areas unavailable to U.S. government employees. We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of State, the Administrator of USAID, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at auditing function or investigate allegations of fraud, but noted that USAID could work with the third party monitor to ensure that its field monitors are trained in methods to identify fraud risks. The monitoring plan and site visit templates do not contain specific guidance on how to recognize fraud. Field monitors have not received the USAID OIG fraud awareness training. Leading practices in fraud risk management suggest evaluating outcomes using a risk-based approach and adapting activities to improve fraud risk Management. The monitoring plan associated with the contract contains guidelines for field monitors to document their assessment of their assessment. This includes using the results to improve prevention, detection, and response, USAID officials said in a statement. alert field monitors to collect information on and identify potential fraud. The monitoring plan contains a training curriculum for field monitors, which has several objectives designed to familiarize them with the protocols, procedures, and instruments used for data collection and reporting. However, the curriculum lacks specific courses for recognizing potential or actual instances of fraud that may occur on site. USAID officials told us that the field monitors supporting the third party will be trained to spot potential fraud and report it to the appropriate authorities, such as the U.S. government. Four ongoing investigations of allegations of fraud and mismanagement related to programs for delivering humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. Two of the investigations involve allegations of procurement fraud, bribery, and product substitution in USAID funded humanitarian cross-border programs related to procurements of non-food items. In May 2016, USAID OIG reported the identification of bid-rigging and multiple bribery and kickback schemes related to contracts to deliver humanitarian aid in Syria, investigations of which resulted in the suspension of 14 entities and individuals. situations like Afghanistan or Iraq, USAID staff are unable to visit project sites in Syria and speak with program beneficiaries. USAID officials in the region explained to us that while partners provide data and information, their inability to consistently access project sites limited the extent to which partners could obtain and verify progress. Past audit work has shown challenges to such an approach, past audit work shows challenges to this approach, says the report. But USAID risks such as fraud, theft, diversion, and loss can be mitigated, it says. measures to mitigate risks and operate in a hazardous environment such as Syria. USAID officials in the region maintain regular contact with partners, attend monthly meetings with them, conduct random spot checks of aid packages at warehouse facilities. They also receive quarterly reports from partners to monitor progress before submitting them to USAID headquarters for additional review. The agency also noted that it has implemented an informal biweekly reporting system for all partners to provide reports notifying USAID of any problems with the aid effort in Syria. October 2015, USAID’s OFDA hired a third party monitoring organization to review its projects in Syria. By February 2016, field monitors had conducted site visits and submitted monitoring reports to USAID. The monitoring plan and site visit templates do not from July 2015 to July 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, the report says. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives, according to the report. The report concludes that USAID should provide field monitors with training to identify potential fraud risks.  USAID may be missing an opportunity to assist in its activities to mitigate fraud risks and design appropriate controls. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a risks and implementing appropriate controls is elevated. USAID noted that its third party monitoring in Syria is not intended to serve an auditing function or investigate allegations of fraud. In the absence of such activities, fraudulent practices may go unnoticed or take longer to detect. In addition, State and USAid may not have visibility into areas of has in place with its implementing partners. U.S. humanitarian assistance programs in Syria have experienced instances of fraud. Without documented risk assessments, implementing partners may not have all of the information needed to design appropriate controls to mitigate fraud risks. Neither USAID nor State requires implementing partners which resulted in the suspension of 14 entities and individuals involved with aid programs from Turkey. Despite these controls, the inability of some partners to consistently access areas in Syria and directly monitor programs has created challenges for oversight, the authors say. The authors conclude that opportunities to assess and mitigate the potential impact of fraud risks remain. Field monitors in Syria are trained on assessing and identifying potential fraud risks. Instruct the third party monitoring organization monitoring OFDA programs in Syria to modify the site visit forms to include specific guidance for documenting incidents of potential fraud. Include in its voluntary.oversight activities, for example, using information from assessments to ensure that control activities for programs are. designed to mitigate identified risks. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. USAID does not have Syria-specific policies and guidance regarding risk assessments related to fraud. USAID OIG received 47 complaints reporting waste, fraud, and abuse in USAID programs related to the crises in Syria and Iraq. Although most of the implementing partners in our sample did not conduct assessments of the risk of fraud, there are elevated risks for fraud in U.S. funded humanitarian assistance projects for people inside Syria. According to USAID officials, USAID has also implemented a process for documenting risks associated with programs in Syria. Past audit work has shown challenges to such an approach, including cases of partners not fully implementing monitoring practices, resulting in limited project accountability. USAID Office of Inspector General (OIG) has reported that assistance projects implemented in developing countries are at significant risk of fraud, waste, and abuse. Those risks are multiplied when projects unfold during a disaster or military contingency, the OIG said. The USAID OIG has noted that aid organizations providing life-saving assistance in Syria and the surrounding region face an extremely high-risk environment. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a complex humanitarian emergency. Neither USAID nor State requires implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. USAID Administrator should update guidance to require non-governmental organizations to conduct risk assessments addressing the risk of fraud. Use risk assessments submitted by partners to inform USAID oversight activities, for example, using information from assessments to ensure in Syria. The U.S. has taken a leading role in providing humanitarian aid to alleviate the suffering of individuals inside Syria who are affected by the conflict. the results of our review of funding instruments cannot be generalized to the entire list, they present a mix of instrument dollar values, implementing partners and their locations. Using these funding instruments, as well as the Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government and the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) internal control framework, we analyzed relevant documents from each of the organizations related to risk assessment. We also requested and reviewed risk assessments related to delivery of assistance to people inside Syria. State and USAID do not require implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance delivered to people inside Syria. While most partners assessed safety and security risks associated with such programs, most did not assess financial risks, such as the risk of fraud. In the absence of such a requirement, USAID drafts memoranda highlighting potential risks for material support to terrorist groups and identifies the mitigation strategies implementing partners will use to reduce those risks. The absence of adequate internal controls can jeopardize the integrity of these relief efforts and deny critical aid to those in need. assistance programs to people inside Syria to assess certain types of risk. USAID’s Office of Food for Peace (FFP) and Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) require some implementing partners to create a Safety and Security Plan. All of the implementing partners in our sample have policies, procedures, or guidance related to conducting risk assessment for their programs to provide humanitarian assistance into Syria, including safety and security. State has agreements with its implementing partners, called enhanced monitoring plans, asking them to provide information on current conditions. funding instruments, as well as the Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government and the COSO internal control framework. To determine the extent to which U.S. agencies are overseeing the activities of implementing partners, we interviewed officials from State and USAID in Washington, D.C. and Amman, Jordan. We also reviewed USAID’s contract with the third party monitoring organization, and supporting documentation, such as the monitoring plan, site visit template, and a complete monitoring report for February 2016. complete monitoring report for February 2016. We interviewed officials from State, and USAID in Washington, DC. We also conducted site visits to warehouses in Jordan maintained by two of the implementing partners. We conducted this performance audit from July 2015 to July 2016 in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Standards for Food and Drugs (GASF) for food production and storage. We met with officials from. State, USAID, and implementing partner organizations in Amman, Jordan; and conducted telephone interviews with officials. from USAID and. implementing partner Organizations in Ankara and Antakya. We interviewed officials from State (Population, Refugees, and Migration), and USAID (the Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance and Food for Peace), in Washington, D.C. We also interviewed USAID and implementing partner officials based in Antakya and Ankara, Turkey. To determine the extent to which State, USAID, and their partners have assessed risks to the programs, we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 12 fiscal year 2015 State andUSAID funding instruments. The Southern Syria Assistance Platform and the Syria Transition Assistance Response Team coordinate between themselves and with other State and USAID representatives. The teams are based in the U.S. embassy in Jordan and 3 other locations in Turkey. State officials, USAID Disaster Assistance Response Teams manage humanitarian programs for Syria in partnership with other regional and international entities. For more information, go to: http://www.samaritans.org/syrian-humanitarian-assistance-programs-and-coordination. types of aid and services. State and USAID have taken steps to oversee partner programs delivering humanitarian assistance inside Syria. State officials in the region conduct quarterly meetings with partners and collect information on programmatic objectives and on partner programs. State also has enhanced monitoring plans in place with its implementing partners to augment quarterly reporting with information on risks of risks of humanitarian aid. In Jordan, we visited their warehouse where supplies were received, checked for quality, affixed with quick response (QR) codes, and packaged. intended destinations. According to one of the partners, the shift of liability to the transporter has limited the instances of diversion, although we did not confirm this. Partners also implemented controls to mitigate fraud risks during the distribution process. For example, partners developed criteria for identifying and selecting eligible beneficiaries, and compiled this information into beneficiary lists to assist the process. Examples of people meeting selection criteria included internally displaced people, people with disabilities, and female heads of household. In addition, partners mentioned working with local councils to develop beneficiary lists. lists. Staff crosschecked the names of beneficiaries on the list with identification provided by the beneficiary, and then relayed that information to the partner’s field office in Jordan for verification. Officials added that this method for verifying beneficiaries was an ongoing process, as the lists sometimes changed due to the movement of people. Two implementing partners that we visited in Jordan, who delivered food and medical supplies, among other types of assistance in southern Syria, provide examples of the types of controls implemented. Emergency food items. fleeing to safety. Partners in our sample had also implemented controls to mitigate risks of fraud and loss within their operations. However, the majority of these efforts were not informed by a risk assessment. Four of the nine partners conducted cross-border delivery operations from neighboring countries such as Turkey or Jordan and procured goods in the host country or the region and warehoused them prior to transport into Syria. Officials from two implementing partners we interviewed in Amman stated that they conducted spot checks of assistance packages in warehouses to confirm the quantity of the contents. packages in warehouses to confirm the quantity of the contents and ensure that the quality of the items complied with the terms of the contract. According to another implementing partner, officials from its organization visit the vendor warehouses before signing contracts to verify that U.S. government commodity safety and quality assurance guidelines are met. partners used documentation such as packing slips and waybills to verify the contents of shipments. Once parcels arrived at warehouses in Syria, partners we interviewed stated that staff used technology, such as geotagged photographs, to document the arrival and contents of the shipment. implemented controls to account for safety and security risks to their personnel and beneficiaries receiving assistance in Syria. For example, some implementing partners identified aerial targeting of humanitarian aid workers and beneficiaries at distribution points as a major vulnerability. Another partner with field sites in Damascus identified the risk of ambush as a vulnerability and provided its drivers with instructions on taking evasive actions and fleeing to safety. Partners in our sample had also implemented controls to mitigate this risk such as distributing goods to beneficiaries on overcast days and making door to door deliveries of aid packages. to document the arrival and contents of the shipment. The partners stated that the lack of visibility over the assistance while in transit in Syria, and managing the projects remotely from Jordan, were risks to their operations and therefore required mitigating actions. Some partners shifted liability to the transporter and only paid for parcels that were delivered to the intended destinations. According to one of the partners, the shift reduced the risk of loss due to theft by the Syrian Army or armed opposition groups at checkpoints by 50 percent. partners to augment quarterly reporting with information on risks of diversion of assistance. State officials also told us that they ask partners to notify them upon discovering incidents of diversion. For example, one implementing partner provided frequent updates to State on losses it sustained from its transporters until the issue was resolved. Similarly, USAID officials provided information on several measures taken to oversee programs implemented by partners. for example, officials screen proposals from prospective partners to identify those that have appropriate measures to mitigate risks and operate in a hazardous environment. of State take the following action: Include in its voluntary contribution agreements with implementing partners a requirement that the partner conduct risk assessments addressing the risk of fraud. We provided a draft of this report to State and the USAID for review and comment. State and USAID provided written comments that are reproduced in appendix II and appendix III. In its written comments on our report, State concurred with our recommendation. State noted risk assessment initiatives that it has in place with its implementing partners, and indicated that. the partner to internal controls, including risk management. State officials noted that the framework agreement for one of its implementing partners is updated every two years. According to State, the basis of State’s funding arrangements is that partner organizations should follow their own internal requirements for risk assessments. However, the voluntary contribution agreements between State and these implementing partners do not reference the framework agreements or require comprehensive risk assessments, officials said. Moreover, acknowledging the need for additional risk management, State acknowledged that it may need to make changes to its funding arrangements. to provide humanitarian assistance into Syria, including safety and security checklists, risk registers, and other tools for conducting various types of risk assessments. Nearly all of implementing partners in our sample (seven of nine) have policies, procedures or guidance specifically aimed at assessing risks of fraud. Most of the implementing partners have conducted formal risk assessments for at least one type of risk, and several maintain risk registers that assess a wide variety of risks. One partner based in Damascus has a risk register which, according to the partner, assesses 28 different risks. FFP updated its program guidance in March 2015 to state that partners applying to conduct cash transfer and voucher-based food assistance programs should include in their applications an assessment of the risk of fraud or diversion. According to USAID, this represents a requirement that cashTransfer and vouchers-based programs conduct a fraud risk assessment. But it does not apply to all types of food assistance or to assistance provided through OFDA. In the absence of a requirement for all implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments, effective fraud risk management involves fully considering the specific fraud risks the agency or program faces. Risk assessment is essential for ensuring that partners design appropriate and effective control activities. Control activities to mitigate the risk of fraud should be directly connected to the fraud risk assessments. Over time, managers may adjust the control activities if they determine that the risk has been mitigated. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. theft and diversion. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government provides the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control in the federal programs. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) has issued an internal control framework that, according to COSO, has gained broad acceptance and is widely used around the world. Both frameworks include the five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Internal control generally serves as a first line of defense in safeguarding assets, such as food and nonfood items. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from around the world. Visit iReport.com for more travel snapshots from the world of travel and the U.S. East Coast for a weekly gallery of photos from across the globe. Follow us on Twitter @CNNTravel and @cnnireport for weekly snapshots of the world around us. For more travel news, visit CNN.co/Travel.

ROUGE-1: 78.13, ROUGE-2: 71.08, ROUGE-L: 27.80
BERTScore: 67.66

==============================================
==================== [15/100] ====================
Summary:
Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I will be happy to answer any questions that you or Members of this Committee may have. For future contacts regarding this testimony, please call Janet Heinrich at (202) 512-7119. Katherine Iritani, Matt Byer, Ellen W. Chu, Lisa Lusk, and Behn Miller Kelly also made key contributions to this testimony. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army in the region of the country where you live on the continent of Africa. The task force recommends that all people age 65 or older receive an annual influenza vaccination. According to data from CMS’s Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey of 2000, about 30 percent of Medicare beneficiaries did not receive an influenza vaccination, and 37 percent had never had a pneumonia vaccination. Many Medicare beneficiaries may not know that they are at risk for health conditions that preventive care could detect, the task force says. The task force advises that at 65 or over, people should receive at least one influenza vaccination and at least at least two pneumonia vaccinations. Medicare now covers a number of preventive services, including immunizations and cancer screenings. Not all beneficiaries, however, avail themselves of covered preventive services. For some beneficiaries, certain services may not be warranted or may be of limited value. Care depends on an individual’s age and particular health risks, not simply on the results of a standard battery of tests, says Dr. David Gergen, president of the Gergen Family Practice at Aetna. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. Most Medicare beneficiaries reported receiving what they considered to be “routine checkups.” In CDC’s 2000 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey, 93 percent of respondents age 65 or older reported that they had received a “ routine checkup” within the previous 2 years. Data from another survey indicated that Medicare beneficiaries do receive some preventive services during visits when they are ill or being treated for a health condition. Despite how often Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians, relatively few beneficiaries receive the full range of preventive care. various screening tests to identify cardiovascular disease (and related abnormalities) in “elevated risk” beneficiaries and diabetes in ‘at risk’ beneficiaries. The new coverage applies to services provided on or after January 1, 2005. Nationally representative survey data show that Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians often and that most report receiving “routine checkups” These data do not show, however, which specific services were delivered during those “checkups.” Despite the frequency of visits, many Medicare beneficiaries do not receive the full range of recommended preventive services. 32 percent of those found by the survey to have a high cholesterol level reported that no one had told them that they had high cholesterol. Projected nationally, this percentage translates into 2.1 million Medicare beneficiaries who may have high cholesterol without knowing it. A one-time initial preventive care examination covered by Medicare may offer opportunity to deliver some preventive services but alone is not enough to ensure better health among beneficiaries. Information from a CMS demonstration and from other related studies shows that ensuring receipt of follow-up care will be important to improving health. of beneficiaries participating in this nationally representative survey who, as part of the survey, had a physical examination and were found to have elevated blood pressure readings at that time, 32 percent reported that no physician or other health professional had told them about the condition before. On the basis of this survey, we estimate that, during the period when the survey was conducted, 21 million Medicare beneficiaries may have been at risk for high blood pressure. An estimated 6.6 million of them might have been unaware of this risk. CMS is exploring an alternative for Medicare preventive care that would provide systematic health risk assessments to fee-for-service beneficiaries through a means other than examination. The program will use a beneficiary-focused health risk assessment questionnaire to assess health risks. The study recommended that CMS conduct a demonstration to test cost- effectiveness and other aspects of the health risk Assessment approach for Medicare beneficiaries. The Medicare Senior Risk Reduction Program will identify health risks and follow up with preventive services provided by meansother than examinations by physicians. assessments to fee-for-service beneficiaries through a means other than examination by a physician. Such programs collect information from individuals; identify their risk factors; and refer the individuals to at least one intervention to promote health, sustain function, or prevent disease. The study concluded that health risk assessment programs have increased beneficial behavior (particularly exercise) and improved physiological variables (particularly diastolic blood pressure and weight) and general health. In addition, the study stated that to be effective, risk assessment questionnaires must be completed. will use a beneficiary-focused health risk assessment questionnaire to assess health risks. The program will test different approaches to administering health risk assessments, creating feedback reports, and providing follow-up services. According to project researchers, the program will tailor preventive interventions to individual risks; track patient risks and health over time; and provide beneficiaries with self-management tools and information, health behavior advice, and end-of-life counseling where appropriate. The design phase had not been finalized when this article was published. 1980s and early 1990s, the agency conducted a congressionally mandated demonstration to test varied health promotion and disease prevention services. The agency’s final report, published in 1998, concluded that the demonstration services were marginally effective in raising the use of some simple disease-prevention measures, such as immunizations and cancer screenings. The report did not consistently improve beneficiary health or reduce theUse of hospital or skilled nursing services. It was released in the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attacks. ensuring receipt of follow-up care will be important to improving beneficiaries’ health. A proposed CMS demonstration, currently in design, will explore another preventive care delivery option. A one-time preventive care examination will add a dedicated opportunity for delivering preventive care and could help reduce the gap in the preventive services that Medicare beneficiaries receive. At the same time, it is not a panacea, and Ensuring that beneficiaries receive needed services and follow- up care is likely to remain a challenge. counseling where appropriate. The design phase had not been finalized as of last week and, according to a CMS official, still required approval from HHS and the Office of Management and Budget. "Our work shows that more needs to be done to deliver preventive services to those beneficiaries who ... fail to receive the full range of recommended services," the report says. "Some beneficiaries may not choose to seek these services, others may not be aware that these services are available and covered by Medicare" In late 2003, MMA added coverage under Medicare for a one-time “initial preventive physician evaluation’ If performed within 6 months after an individual’s enrollment under Part B of the program. Covered services under the examination include measurement of height, weight, and blood pressure; an electrocardiogram; and education, counseling, and referral services for screenings and other preventive services covered by Medicare. MMA also added coverage for various screening tests to identify cardiovascular disease (and related abnormalities) Primary care physicians typically cannot provide services such as mammography screenings for breast cancer or colonoscopies for colon cancer. It also is uncertain whether a one-time or periodic examination would be an effective way to improve beneficiaries’ health. For example, one previous CMS initiative that included preventive health care visits ended with mixed results in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the agency says. and encourage them to make informed choices about providers and plans. Nevertheless, a one time examination does not ensure delivery of the full range of preventive services.

ROUGE-1: 79.36, ROUGE-2: 71.91, ROUGE-L: 35.26
BERTScore: 62.32

==============================================
==================== [16/100] ====================
Summary:
In 2012, the EU 27 produced more than the United States—16.2 million vehicles compared to 10.3 million. The remainder of EU production was exported, much of it to the U.S. market. Unlike some consumer goods, such as computers and apparel, most vehicles are sold in the region where they are produced. Germany is by far the largest auto producer within the EU (see Figure 2 ). The five top countries—Germany, Spain, France, United Kingdom and Czech Republic—manufacture more than 76% of all vehicles produced in the EU. U.S. sales, and about 17% of sales in the EU. In some cases, a vehicle that is entirely legal in one country may not be sold in another due to differing fuel efficiency, safety, and emissions standards. For example, Ford Motor Company's ECOnetic high-efficiency diesel engine, made in Great Britain, gets up to 71 miles per gallon (mpg) of fuel. This engine is not sold in North America because it does not comply with U.S and Canadian emissions standards, according to Ford. Ford has determined that expanding its Mexican engine plant to make a redesigned version of the ECOnetic for North America would cost $350 million. Increasingly, auto manufacturers and their parts suppliers have sought to organize their production on a global basis. The German automaker BMW, as an example, produces sport utility vehicles for markets worldwide from a plant in South Carolina. Greater commonality in regulation would make it easier for automakers and parts makers to coordinate production across major markets. This is consistent with individual automakers. coordinate production across major markets. Automakers are developing global vehicle platforms that will reduce the number of models sold around the world. For example, the new Jeep Cherokee and Dodge Dart are based on Fiat's Compact Wide platform. The Ford Focus was developed in Europe but is built with similar components in the United States, China, Germany, Russia, and Thailand and sold in 130 countries. Joining forces to meet tightening world emission standards is one of the key ways to reduce carbon emissions in the future. Many countries, including the United States, have adopted new standards that will be costly for manufacturers to meet. Many automakers believe that offering diesels will be necessary to meet higher U.S. fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions standards. Having similar standards for diesel engines in the two regions could reduce design and manufacturing costs. BMW and Toyota have agreed to jointly develop fuel cell technology. The processes by which the U States and the EU establish vehicle safety, fuel efficiency, and emission standards have evolved in different ways. steps, an industry alliance has contended, would "increase trade, lower costs, create jobs and improve the international competitiveness of the industry" The alliance estimates that current non-tariff barriers on vehicles are equivalent to a 26% tariff on vehicle imports. Safety, fuel efficiency, and emissions standards differ between the two regions (see Table 1 ), due to historical historical differences. It projects that elimination of tariffs and just 10% of non-Tariff barriers could raise U.S. vehicle and parts exports to the EU by over 200%. The United States and the EU have different standards even for an item as simple as a seat belt. Some of these differences may reflect past efforts to protect domestic vehicle industries against foreign competition. Others may result from different legal traditions or divergent views as to the best way of achieving goals such as cleaner air and reduced oil consumption. Past auto agreements have been effective in leading to a more globalized auto industry. The U.S. and EU have a long history of working together on auto issues. U.S. and European automakers have identified occupant crash protection, side impact protection, child restraint systems as priorities for selective mutual recognition. A fourth option would be to forge an agreement on emerging regulations, such as those dealing with electric and fuel cell vehicles. Under this approach, the United States and the EU would commit to jointly develop standards covering new issues or technologies. The pending free trade agreement between the EU and Canada may influence the direction of TTIP. The full text of the agreement has not been released, but according to an EU statement, "Canada will recognise a list of EU car standards" Congress could play an important role if a TTIP agreement contains significant provisions related to auto safety, emissions, and fuel economy regulations. Congress established the U.S. government agencies whose regulations are the focus of the negotiations on automobile standards. Congress has retained a strong oversight interest in vehicle safety and emissions. If the TTIP effort to obtain mutual recognition or recognition is successful, Congress could play a key role in the negotiations. The TTIP is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) seeks greater compatibility of U.S. and EU regulations. Motor vehicle safety and emissions standards are areas where the United States and the EU could break new ground. The formal TTIP negotiations began in July 2013. Trade in vehicles and parts reached $57 billion in 2012, and numerous companies manufacture on both sides of the Atlantic. and European motor vehicle manufacturer associations have called for TTIP to provide for mutual recognition of existing technical standards. Such steps, an industry alliance has contended, would "increase trade, lower lower costs" agreements have been effective in leading to a more globalized auto industry. The 1965 motor vehicle agreement between the U.S. and Canada and the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) removed barriers to trade and cross-border trade in autos. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, a separate negotiation involving the United States and 11 other Pacific Rim countries, could have a similar effect. With respect to the auto industry, TTIP represents another effort to extend these regional templates to encompass a greater share of trade and investment. In November 2011, President Obama and leaders of the European Union (EU) named a High Level Working Group on Jobs and Growth to recommend steps to broaden transatlantic economic ties. In its final report, issued in February 2013, the working group called for a new bilateral agreement to govern transatlantic trade and investment. Such an agreement, the group urged, should provide for "the promotion of more compatible approaches to current and future regulation and standard-setting" One month later, Obama notified Congress that the United States would enter into negotiations. About 10% of NHTSA and EPA standards are based on work SAE has already done. Many address manufacturing processes, not auto safety or emissions. IEC standards related to motor vehicles concern charging system architecture, lithium batteries, and other aspects of electric vehicles. Various other private-sector advocacy groups are engaged in identifying and publicizing new vehicle standards. In the United States, in the past five years, about 2,000 motor vehicle standards have been issued or updated by the U.S. government. Until the 1950s, European vehicle safety regulations developed separately in each country. In 1970, the European Community enacted a framework that laid the basis for vehicle approval harmonization across all member states. The European vehicle regulatory regime now includes both EU directives, and standards promulgated promote a single European market in motor vehicles. If NHTSA determines there is noncompliance, it can encourage the manufacturer to recall the model to correct the problem or can order a recall. They say the comparable EU vehicle system is based on government regulatory approval in advance of manufacturing. In Europe, a system of governmental control over autos was more prevalent, first in each country and later through the EU. EU directives passed by the European Parliament have the force of regulations, thereby vesting the legislators with a more direct role in the regulatory process. In the early decades of the automobile, U.S. vehicles were lightly regulated by a combination of state and federal legislation. Since then, Congress has delegated vehicle regulation to federal agencies, occasionally providing specific direction through legislation. It is unclear whether the European Union will follow suit. The rule-making process is already lengthy, and the need for international coordination could make it even longer. This raises the prospect that technologies that could reduce accidents may be delayed in reaching the market. The EU acknowledges that if vehicle standards become international, there could be less room for legislative scrutiny and for involvement by regional and national interest groups. U.S. consumer advocacy groups have raised similar concerns, writing U.N. and EU leaders in July 2013 that vehicle standards should be made international. processes and common technical standards. This initiative, resulting in the creation of the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations, has resulted in agreement on only 13 global technical regulations to date. Simultaneously, there has been a transatlantic dialogue on autos since the mid-1990s through the U.S.-EU High-Level Regulatory Cooperation Forum. In 1995, President Clinton signed an action plan which sought to move the United States and Europe toward regulatory conformity. The 1996 TransAtlantic Automotive Industry Conference on International Regulatory Harmonization produced a report on the auto sector. report on the auto sector, including ten principles to guide steps toward convergence. NHTSA sent a report to Congress in April 1997 discussing potential harmonization of U.S. and European side impact standards. A similar bilateral regulatory initiative has been under way since 2011 with Canada. An EU initiative, the Competitive Automotive Regulatory System for the 21s Century, or CARS 21, has also explored harmonization issues. In 2006, CARs 21 called for gradually replacing some EU laws with UN regulations. In the United States, these include the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, American National Standards Institute (ANSI), National Safety Council, the Center for Auto Safety, and Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety. In the EU, nonprofit groups such as the European Transport Safety Council and Transport & Environment participate in the EU standard-setting process. European, U.S. and Japanese auto industry groups sought common regulatory ground in 1996, when they proposed to harmonize regulation of five vehicle components, including windshield wipers, defoggers, and seat belt assemblies. vehicle components, including windshield wipers, defoggers, and seat belt assemblies. They believed that these five components were functionally equivalent, although each was slightly different. The regulatory bodies did not agree to any changes, however, because the data-driven review process made it difficult to prove functional equivalency of even a standard component such as a seat belt. An alternative approach was developed in the 1998 UN agreement on global technical regulations, which created a global registry of processes and common technical standards. There are different ways in which the United States and the EU could address convergence of automotive regulations under TTIP. Harmonization need not mean having identical rules in both regions. A car certified as compliant with U.S. safety, emission, and fuel efficiency standards would be accepted as compliant in the EU, and vice versa. This approach is how the EU certification process works. It would identify certain major standards for which TTIP could provide mutual recognition, rather than providing mutual recognition of all standards. Since 1970, the EU has used the Whole Vehicle Type Approval system. An automaker must submit the "type" of vehicle it intends to manufacture and sell to the proper authority in any country that is a signatory to the system. Some European automakers "preferred to limit the extension of standards to those that would create obstacles to the invasion of foreign vehicles into their national markets," according to the European Commission. Over time, the balance shifted to favor more similarity between U.S. and EU standards. Once an EU member state approves a new vehicle, it can be marketed throughout the EU. The EU agreed in 2007 that the UNECE regulations would be incorporated into the EU type-approval procedure. Legislative work at the EU level is led by European Commission's Directorate of Enterprise and Industry. Vehicle safety promotion is also pursued by the European Commission through initiatives such as DG Transport's EU road safety action program and DG Information and Society's E-safety and Intelligent program, among other things. 1958 agreement on vehicle construction and two related agreements which were adopted by some European countries to promote EU-wide integration of vehicle design, construction and safety. UNECE standards deal with vehicle safety, environmental protection, fuel efficiency, and anti-theft performance. Signatories to the 1958 U.N. agreement commit to mutual recognition of approvals for vehicle components, so that a component approved for use in one signatory country will be automatically approved in all others. WP.29's voting members are limited to government representatives, but automakers, trade associations, and other nongovernmental organizations also proper authority. certify vehicles prior to sale; (2) a production evaluation on the assembly line for early evaluation of production vehicles; and (3) a final clearance applied to verify that properly maintained vehicles continue to meet the standards after several years of use. Environmental matters were not included in the EU's founding Treaty of Rome. Prior to the mid-1980s, UNECE produced regulations relating to safety, environmental protection, and energy efficiency. It was a common practice for EU member countries to adopt standards and regulations similar to those issued byUNECE. The United States did not sign the 1958 UNECE agreement because it would require mutual recognition of standards generated outside the United States. After U.S. self-certification began in 1967, the UNecE approach was seen as incompatible with the U.N. process. The United States signed a 1998 UNECe agreement which establishes global technical regulations (GTRs), effectively transforming the UN. body into an organization with a global presence. The U.K. is the only country that does not have to sign the 1998 agreement. The World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations promulgates regulations affecting vehicle safety, environmental protection, energy efficiency, and anti-theft performance. Unlike the 1958 agreement, there is no requirement for type approval and mutual recognition of approvals. GTRs are issued in a UN Global Registry and contracting parties use their own regulatory process to implement them. Alongside UNECE, the European Economy Community (renamed the European Community in 1993) and its successor, the EU, have sought to promote a single European market in motor vehicles. In 1952, the United Nations established the Working Party on the Construction of Vehicles. The objective of WP.29 is to "initiate and pursue actions aimed at the worldwide harmonization or development of technical regulations for vehicles"WP.29 administers a 1958 agreement on vehicle construction and two related agreements which must be implemented by all member states. The standards are promulgated through a United Nations (UN) organization, which may be implemented at the discretion of a national government. WP. 29 is a subsidiary body of the Inland Transport Committee of the UN Economic Commission for Europe. frequencies of starts and stops—all factors which significantly affect the data returned by the tests. The U.S. standard regulates all the GHG emissions from the vehicle (e.g., CO 2 , NO x , CH 4 ) in terms of CO 2 -equivalents; the EU regulates only carbon dioxide emissions. In general the EU GHG standards—and by extension, fuel economy standards—return a greater sales-based and fleet-wide emission reduction than those in the United States. The EU does not issue fuel economy standards similar to the U.S. CAFE standards. Instead, it sets standards for GHG emissions in terms of the mass of CO 2 , measured in grams, emitted from a vehicle's tailpipe per kilometer driven (g/km) These standards can be used to estimate fuel economy for vehicles sold in Europe. EU fleet-average CO 2 emission targets as required by EU Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 are 130 g/km to be reached by 2015. CO 2 emissions of 140 g/km by 2008-09. After 2004 the manufacturers failed to meet their targets through voluntary actions. In response, the Commission developed a mandatory CO 2 emission reduction program, and CO 2 emissions targets for new passenger cars were adopted in April 2009. The regulation established a fleet-average CO2 emission target of 130 g/ km by 2015. It defined a long-term target of 95 g CO 2 /km by 2020. The standards include incentives for vehicles with CO2 emissions below 50 g/ kilometre. CAFE values are generally higher than typical fuel efficiency in real-world operation. This discrepancy reflects the fact that the EPA 2-cycle test is not wholly representative of vehicle operation patterns and technology. Comparing vehicle GHG and/or fuel economy standards between the two regions is challenging because these standards differ greatly in structure, form, and underlying testing methods. For example, the EU and the U.S. test cycles differ in terms of average speed, duration, distance, acceleration and deceleration characteristics. vehicles with CO 2 emissions below 50 g/km and for those running on a mixture of 85% ethanol (E85) Certain flexibilities are available for manufacturers, including credits for technology innovations, pooling between manufacturers, and exemptions for low-volume manufacturers. Emission limits are set according to the mass of vehicle using a fleet-average limit value curve. As with the other EU regulated vehicle emissions, CO2 emissions are measured over the NEDC test cycle. The United States regulates the fuel efficiency of each manufacturer's new-vehicle fleet through the CAFE. CAFE and GHG emission certification is typically based on fuel economy and emission data provided by vehicle manufacturers. The regulation also includes a system of averaging, banking, and trading (ABT) of credits, based on a manufacturer's fleet average CO 2 performance. Credit trading is allowed among all vehicles a manufacturer produces, both cars and light trucks, as well as between companies. Further program flexibilities include Air Conditioning Improvement Credits, Advanced Technology Credits, Off-Cycle Innovative Technology Credits and Flex-fuel and Alternative Fuel Vehicle Credits. The standards call for combined passenger car and light truck greenhouse gas emissions of no more than 163 grams per mile by 2025. This translates into a 54.5 mile-per-gallon equivalent. The GHG standards are based on CO 2 emissions-footprint curves, where each vehicle has a different emissions compliance target depending on its "footprint" value, related to the size of the vehicle. The EPA CO 2 -equivalent fuel economy figures are different from the CAFE figures. (the horizontal distance between the tires) and its wheelbase (the distance from the front to the rear axles) No specific vehicle must meet a specific target, but a manufacturer's fleet average must be below the sales-weighted average of the targets. This measurement procedure allows heavier cars to have higher emissions than lighter cars while preserving the overall fleet average. As a result, each manufacturer will have its own fleet-wide standard which reflects the vehicles it chooses to produce. For a summary of the 2012 CAFE and GHG vehicle standards, see Table A-3. Current EPA emissions standards for vehicles regulate CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions. Under the Tier 2 regulation, the same emission standards apply to all vehicle weight categories. Since light-duty emission standards are expressed in grams of pollutants per mile, vehicles with large engines (such light trucks or SUVs) were required to use more advanced emission control technologies than vehicles with smaller engines. The CAAA also required EPA to study the need for more stringent "Tier 2" emission standards. The Tier 2 regulations introduced more stringent numerical emission limits. of additional changes that tightened the standards for larger vehicles. "Tier 2" standards have been in place since 2004. Anyone wishing to sell an engine or vehicle within the U.S. must demonstrate compliance with the CAA and all applicable EPA regulations. This approval process differs from the self-certification used by NHTSA and is closer to the EU type approval system for safety and emissions regulations. Once EPA sets emission standards for a particular engine and/or vehicle category, it can be applied to that engine and vehicle category. In addition to exhaust emission standards, U.N. regulations address many other emission-related issues. The evolution of EU exhaust emission standards for light-duty, gasoline- and diesel-fueled vehicles is traced in Table A-2 of the Appendix. Under the type approval process, emissions are currently tested using the New European Driving Cycle (NEDC) (ECE 15 + EUDC) chassis dynamometer procedure. Effective in 2000 with the Euro 3 standard, the test procedure was modified to eliminate the engine warm-up period before the beginning of emission sampling. Further, the Euro 5/6 implementing legislation introduced a new PM mass emission measurement method. The EU uses the New European Drive Cycle (NEDC) and the United States uses the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) Surveillance testing, mandatory emissions system warranties, recall campaigns, and other features of U.S. emissions regulation are not incorporated in the European regulatory structure. The manufacturer has no liability for its continued compliance with emission limits. The test procedure that a car has to go through on a roller bench while the exhaust gas is being collected and analyzed is a key difference between the two. The most common testing procedure used by EPA is the Federal Test Procedure, as mandated by the Energy Tax Act of 1978. Tests are based on the Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule to reflect typical driving patterns. Currently, EPA uses a three-tiered compliance strategy for light-duty vehicles: (1) pre-production evaluation to certify vehicles prior to sale; (2) a production evaluation on the vehicles; and (3) a post-production test on the cars that will be sold. uses the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) Differences between the two include distance, duration, and vehicle speed. Some observers have noted that the European emission standards have historically lagged behind the U.S. standards. This lag may be attributed to the complex, consensus-based approach to standard setting originally used by UNECE and by the difficulty of obtaining agreement among so many individual countries. With the recent shift in standards, European emissions standards are now morestringent than in the past.  Directive 70/220/EEC covered CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions from gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicles. Council of Ministers of the European Council adopted the Consolidated Emissions Directive (commonly referred to as "Euro 1") under which exhaust emission standards for all passenger cars, including diesels, were certified. Euro 6 standards are scheduled to be implemented in September 2014 (strengthening NO x standards for diesel vehicles) The 2012 CAFE and GHG vehicle standards call for combined passenger car and light truck greenhouse emissions. Vehicle emissions standards established by the EU and the United States are not directly comparable because of the differences in the testing procedures and approval processes. Both the European and the U.S. systems of compliance are based on a version of "type approval" However, in the EU, emission standards only apply when the vehicle is produced (conformity of production) Once the vehicle leaves the factory and enters service, the manufacturer has no liability for its continued compliance with the standards.legislation introduced in 2007. permanent and three temporary certification levels of different stringency, called "certification bins" Manufacturers had a choice to certify particular vehicles to any of the available bins, but were required to meet a fleet-average requirement for NO x emissions in any given model year. U.S. emissions standards are shown in Table A-1 . EU standards are based on grams per kilometer, which are not strictly comparable because U.N. standards are for grams per mile and EU standards for kilometers. country retained authority to adjust the UNECE standards as it saw fit. The member states signed the Single European Act (SEA) in 1985 with a goal of unifying the European market by 1992. Under the SEA, auto emissions regulations were harmonized across Europe in 1987. Initially, the harmonized standards were less strict than US standards. Similar to the 1970 U.S. Clean Air Act proviso for California, the SEA allows member states to enact measures more stringent than those enacted by the EU. Between 1962 and 1964, Congress passed three safety bills into law, including a seat belt regulation. The most significant change in U.S. vehicle safety regulation came with the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966. Senator Abraham Ribicoff, one of the advocates of the new legislation, said "this problem is so vast that the Federal Government must have a role" The legislation was passed unanimously by both houses of Congress and signed by President Johnson. It mandated that each state put in place a highway safety. automobile, U.S. vehicles were lightly regulated by a combination of state and private sector standards. While one industry magazine called for national motor vehicle standards as early as 1902, it did so mainly to reassure would-be buyers of the structural integrity these new, little-understood machines. Regulating either driver conduct or vehicle design at the national level did not conform to existing political ideas about the appropriate federal division of responsibilities or to contemporary jurisprudential understandings of the federal government's constitutional power to regulate interstate commerce. The only useful and politically acceptable action Congress might take was to help the states and localities construct more and better roads. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) became the primary source of vehicle safety and emission rules for many decades. State governments often used SAE recommendations to enact requirements for vehicle equipment, such as dual brakes, headlamps, and windshield wipers. The first step toward a nationwide system of vehicle regulation came in 1926, when a voluntary Uniform Vehicle Code was drafted to regulate interstate commerce. 1926, when a voluntary Uniform Vehicle Code was drafted to replace the many different state rules. Among other things, the code specified the types of lighting, reflectors, brakes, mirrors, and tires that cars should have. By 1946, 30 of the then 48 states (plus the District of Columbia) had adopted the Uniform Vehicle code. With the start of the Interstate Highway system in the 1950s, greater automobile travel, and rising highway deaths, the interest in vehicle safety grew. Between 1962 and 1962, 13 states implemented portions of the code; only six had taken no action. responsibly and in such a way as to achieve a substantial improvement in the safety characteristics of vehicles. The law also makes manufacturers responsible for testing of vehicles and liable for recalls and penalties if they are later found not to meet NHTSA's standards. After a new model is in the market, NHTsa buys vehicles from dealers and tests them at its own facilities to determine whether they comply with current standards. The agency neither approves motor vehicles or parts as complying with its standards nor collects information from manufacturers as to compliance. mandated that each state put in place a highway safety program in accordance with federal standards. National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 directed the Secretary of Commerce to issue safety standards for all motor vehicles. A National Traffic Safety Agency was established to carry out the provisions; it was renamed the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) in 1970. Senator Warren Magnuson, chairman of the Senate Committee on Traffic Safety, was the first chairman of NHTSA. The agency was established in 1967. Senator Warren Magnuson, chairman of the Commerce Committee, argued that Congress was implementing a limited type of regulation. The committee also recognizes that the broad powers conferred upon the Secretary, while essential to achieve improved traffic safety, could be abused in such a manner as to have serious adverse effects on the automotive manufacturing industry. The Committee expects that the Secretary will act responsibly and inSuch a way as to achieve a better traffic safety. The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) was established in 1970. Programs to address air pollution in the United States originated in the first half of the twentieth century and were accelerated after World War II. Independent analysis in the mid-1950s identified the automobile as a key source of ground-level ozone. Research has since demonstrated that cars and other mobile sources are responsible for a variety of other air pollutants, including carbon monoxide (CO), hydrocarbons (HC), nitrogen oxides (NO x), particulate matter (PM) and greenhouse gases (GHG) From 1975 to 1988, the average fuel economy of new automobiles increased 81%, from 15.8 to 28.6 mpg. In the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 (EPCA), Congress established Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for new passenger vehicles starting with model year (MY) 1978. EPCA prohibited states from issuing their own fuel efficiency standards. NHTSA administering the congressionally established standards. The U.S. first issued vehicle fuel economy standards in response to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries oil embargo of 1973. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) raised the fuel economy standards of passenger vehicles, light trucks, and sport utility vehicles to a combined average of at least 35 mpg by 2020. EPCA prohibited states from issuing their own fuel efficiency standards. In 2009, the Obama Administration, some state governments, and the federal government changed the standards. The most significant recent change in fuel economy Standards took place outside of the previous channel of congressional action. The new standards are expected to be implemented by the end of 2015. The federal government first addressed air pollution in 1955 in the Federal Air Pollution Control Act. In 1959, California became the first state to address pollution from cars with legislation directing the state Department of Public Health to establish air quality standards. Following California's lead, in 1960 Congress directed the Surgeon General to study the "various substances discharged from the exhausts of motor vehicles" This article was amended on November 14, 2013, to make clear that the federal government did not set air pollution standards for motor vehicle emissions. California set the first HC and CO emissions regulations in 1964. The federal Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act of 1965 adopted both the California crankcase and tailpipe emissions standards for 1968 model-year vehicles. Congress's provision for national emissions standards was in the 1965 act. The act engaged the federal government for the first time in the actual regulation of vehicle emissions. It also set the stage for the creation of the National Highway Traffic Safety Act of 1987. The National Highway Transportation Safety Act was passed in 1988. Congress strengthened federal authority in 1967 by explicitly preempting states from adopting or enforcing new motor vehicle emission standards in the Air Quality Act of 1967. This preemption provision (with California as the sole exemption) remains in effect today as Section 209(a) of the Clean Air Act (CAA) At present, the federal government manages vehicle emissions controls, although the state of California remains a major force in shaping national legislation and regulations. Emission standards for engines and vehicles, including emission standards for greenhouse gases, are currently established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. of congressional action. In 2009, the Obama Administration, some state regulators, and the auto industry crafted a federal program to implement new light duty vehicle fuel efficiency standards linked to greenhouse gas (GHG) emission standards. The agreement enabled automakers to manufacture vehicles that are in compliance with both federal and state standards. This agreement grew out of the fuel efficiency Standards passed by Congress in 2007, a Supreme Court decision confirming federal authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions of vehicles under the CAA, and GHG emission standards enacted in California. California is the only state vested by the CAA with the authority to develop its own emission regulations if EPA grants the state a waiver. The CAA allows other states a choice between implementing federal emission standards or adopting the California requirements. The evolution of U.S. emission standards for light-duty, gasoline-fueled vehicles is traced in Table A-1 of the Appendix . "Tier 2" standards—the "Tier 1" standards for heavy-duty vehicles—are the most stringent. Congress may well be asked to modify the underlying statutes that govern motor vehicle safety, emissions, and fuel efficiency. The Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) of 1990 ( P.L. 101-549 ) established standards to limit tailpipe emissions from new motor vehicles effective in 1994. These Tier 1 standards applied to all new light-duty vehicles, such as passenger cars, light- duty trucks, sport utility vehicles (SUVs), minivans, and minibuses. The TTIP effort to obtain mutual recognition or harmonization affects agencies' authority. agreement among so many individual countries. In the United States, establishing fuel economy standards is a function of direct statutory authority from Congress. A comparison of current emissions standards for selected pollutants is shown in Figure 3. For a more detailed survey of the standards in each region, see the Appendix . In the U.S., NHTSA administering the congressionally established standards. The European Commission has been able to adopt more stringent emission standards due to the shift to decision procedures requiring less-than-unanimous agreement.

ROUGE-1: 82.44, ROUGE-2: 75.44, ROUGE-L: 26.88
BERTScore: 58.15

==============================================
==================== [17/100] ====================
Summary:
to be increased to 437, the District of Columbia would receive one Representative. North Carolina would be entitled to fourteen Representatives, one more than the state is scheduled to receive in the apportionment following the 2010 census. Minnesota would retain its eighth seat and no other state would be affected by the change. Another way to see the impact is to examine the allocation of the last seats assigned to the states when the D.C. is allocated a seat (presumably the 51 st seat) Apportionment is done through a "priority list" calculated using the equal proportions formula provided in 2 U.S.C. §2a.(a) Table 2 displays the end of the priority list that was used to allocate Representatives based on the 2010 Census. The law only provides for 435 seats in the House, but the table illustrates not only the last seats assigned by the apportionment formula (ending at 435), but the states that would just miss getting additional representation. Table 3 is similar to Table 2 , in that it displays theend of the prioritized list. in that it displays the end of the priority list, but the last seat is 437 instead of 435. The priority values and the population needed to gain or lose a seat do not change if DC is treated like state, as DC is entitled the constitutional minimum of one Representative. In the U.S. Congress, the House of Representatives is made up of 435 members, with the Senate making up the remaining two seats. The Senate is the only chamber of Congress in which the entire House is elected at once. Table 1 shows the shift of 12 seats among 18 states for the 113 th Congress (beginning in January 2013) Table 1 also shows the impact on the distribution of seats in the House if the District of Columbia were to be treated as if it were a state for apportionment purposes for both a House size of 435 seats and a Housesize of 437 seats. These are the actual seats to be allocated based on the results of the 2010 Census. First, due to population changes between the 2000 Census and the 2010 census, Table 1 shows a shift of 10 seats. Second, if the House size remained at 435, the House would gain four seats. entitled to one seat, and Hawaii to two seats. Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Missouri each received one less seat than they would have if the House size had been increased to 438 (as was proposed by H.R. 10264, in 1962) Table 1 displays the apportionment of the seats in the House of Representatives based on the 2000 Census apportioning population. In addition, Table 1 also shows the impact of the 2010 Census on the number of seats for the 113 th Congress. the 2010 census, and the House size remained at 435, Minnesota would lose a seat relative to what it is scheduled to get as a result of the 2010 Census. Third, if, on the other hand, the District of Columbia were to be given a vote in the House of Representatives and treated as if it were a state, Minnesota's delegation would fall to seven Representatives. The House size was increased from 435 to 437 in the 2010 Census and Minnesota's delegation would fall to 7 Representatives. When Alaska and Hawaii were admitted in 1959 and 1960 the House size was temporarily increased to 437. This modern precedent differed from the state admission acts passed following the censuses in the 19 th and early 20 th centuries which provided that new state representatives would be added to the apportionment totals. In 1961, when the President reported the 1960 census results and the resulting reapportionment of seats in the reestablished 435-seat House, Alaska was entitled to one seat, and Hawaii to two seats. size of the House was imposed in 1929 by statute (46 Stat. 21, 26-27). Altering the size of the. House would require a new law setting a different limit. For the 2010 apportionment, a House size of 468 would have resulted in no state losing seats held from the 112 th to the 116 th Congresses. However, by retaining seats through such an increase in the House size, such a state would have kept its seats in the Congress. General congressional practice when admitting new states to the Union has been to increase the size of the House. At a House size of 468, California's delegation size, for example, would be 56 instead of 53 seats. Texas' delegation size would be 38 instead of 36 seats, and Florida's delegationSize would be 29 instead of 27 seats. New states usually resulted in additions to theSize of theHouse in the 19th and 20th Congresses. The current House size is 468. H.R. 157 / S. 160 provided for a permanent increase in the size of the U.S. House of Representatives, from 435 seats to 437 seats. The bills specified that one of the additional seats was to be allocated to the District of Columbia. The other seat would be assigned to Utah, the state which would have received the 436 th seat under the 2000 apportionment process. This would add a fourth seat to Utah's three. Similar bills had been introduced in the 110 th Congress. On April 19, 2007, the House approved H. R. 1905 by a vote of 241. version of H.R. 1433 ) by a vote of 241 to 177 (Roll Call vote 231) On June 28, 2007, S. 1257 was reported out of the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs with amendments. cloture on the motion to proceed to consideration of the measure was not invoked in the Senate on a Yea-Nay vote, 57 - 42, leaving the measure pending. The 435 seat limit for the size of the House was imposed in 1929 by statute.

ROUGE-1: 83.77, ROUGE-2: 75.99, ROUGE-L: 28.76
BERTScore: 63.27

==============================================
==================== [18/100] ====================
Summary:
the Fed, negotiates with foreign regulators and multilateral organizations to coordinate prudential supervision and regulation for all highly leveraged and interconnected financial companies. The Secretary plays a role in recommending receivership procedures for failing firms that have been designated as systemic. Once a recommendation for receivership has been made, the Secretary is to make the determination and findings that trigger the resolution regime under the FDIC. The determination must address (1) the likelihood that the firm will default or is in default; (2) the likely effect of the firm's failure on financial stability. the FDIC as receiver. Note that the determination requires two-thirds vote of both the Fed and the FDIC board. The FDIC is to provide to the Secretary and the comptroller general an annual accounting report of receiverships. The Secretary must notify certain majority and ranking members of Congress within 24 hours of the appointment. The rules and regulations that theFDIC issues for the use of funds pursuant to receivership must be acceptable to the secretary. The secretary has a number of roles regarding orderly liquidation plans of covered institutions. FDIC may pay resolution costs as described in Section 204(d) of the DFA. Once a resolution has been undertaken, the FDIC has reporting requirements to the FSOC and to Congress. The FDIC must deliver a written report to the appropriate congressional committees, providing additional details of the receivership. These additional details include but are not limited to (1) describing the financial condition of the failing firm at the time of receivership, and (2) describing FDIC's plan to resolve the failing company. of roles regarding orderly liquidation plans of covered institutions. Amounts from the resolution fund to support orderlyLiquidation under a liquidation plan must be acceptable to the Secretary. To date, no firms have been subject to an orderly Liquidation. Since its creation in 1913, the Federal Reserve (the Fed) has had the authority to liquidate covered institutions with the help of the FDIC. The FDIC is to assure the Secretary of a repayment plan for the orderly liquidations plan, and the Secretary and theFDIC must report to Congress on the terms of the repayment plan. Congress created the Fed as a lender of last resort following the recommendations of a commission established to investigate the causes of a financial panic that had occurred in 1907. Relative financial stability after WWII, and congressional directives to focus on price stability and maximum employment, may have redirected the Fed's focus to macroeconomic variables. But addressing financial market instability has always been a core mission of the Fed. Under the FSOC, the Fed will not only be a lender, but will also conduct monetary policy under the new rules. The FDIC has had the authority to administratively resolve insured depositories (banks and thrifts) that fail, rather than proceed through the bankruptcy courts. The DFA extends this authority to certain large and complex non-bank financial companies, under some circumstances. In addition to the Treasury Secretary's authority, the FDIC, with the concurrence of the Fed, may also recommend a determination of systemic risk from failing non-banks. The FDIC's determination must include the votes of two-thirds of theFDIC's Board. The FDIC has powers over any of the firms' subsidiaries that pose systemic risk. The FDIC is to pay valid obligations, subject to its systemic risk determinations. The resolution is intended to ensure that shareholders and unsecured creditors bear losses. TheFDIC may pay resolution costs as described in Section 204(d) of the FDIC Act. It can form bridge companies for the purpose of orderly liquidation. It has the rights, titles, and privileges of the failing firm. It takes over its assets, with rights of collection. For banks that accept deposits insured by the FDIC, technically "insured depositories," the general prudential regulatory approach and resolution regimes were relatively unchanged. For large, complex non-banks, the DFA instructs the FSOC to identify which firms are systemically important, designates the Fed as the prudential regulator of these firms. The FDIC can resolve covered non- Banks outside the bankruptcy courts under certain circumstances. Under the D FA, policymakers have tried to construct resolution regimes for both banks and non-bank financial firms that will dispel investor fears. The DFA permits the Fed to establish standards for systemic firms in a number of additional areas. In cases in which the covered firm has another primary regulator (such as the OCC), the Fed is to give the primary regulator reasonable notice of the proposed examination. These areas include a contingent capital requirement, enhanced public disclosures, short-term debt limits, and such other prudential standards as the Board of Governors, on its own or pursuant to a recommendation made by the FSOC, determines are appropriate. The FSOC has the ability to classify (or "designate" as used in the law and this report) certain non-banks as systemic. Systemic firms with more than $50 billion in assets must also provide and maintain resolution plans (so-called living wills), which must be jointly approved by the Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The FSOC provides a common forum for financial regulators to evaluate and address risks to the stability of the financial system, including systemic risks that might emanate from less regulated non-bank financial institutions. A two-thirds vote of the FSOC is required to designate a non-bank as posing systemic risk. However, one of the affirmative votes must be that of the Secretary of the Treasury. This applies to domestic and foreign firms, and for anti-evasion. In other words, the chair of theFSOC has an effective veto over the designation of individual firms as systemically important. The chair's vote is required. to address those concerns at the hearing. The Secretary has special powers regarding the designation. of systemic non- bank firms. would be difficult to construct or estimate a firm-specific index of systemic risk arising from this type of contagion. The next section discusses the membership of the FSOC, and the special roles that some members have with respect to these six policy tools. The FSOC has 10 voting members and 5 nonvoting members. The council is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury. Voting members include prudential bank regulators (e.g., the Office of the Comptroller and the Currency [OCC] and the FDIC) securities market regulators (e.g., the Commodity Futures Trading Commission [CFTC] and the SEC), and an independent insurance expert appointed by the President, with Senate confirmation. The nonvoting members include state level representatives from bank, securities, and insurance regulators, as well as the directors from the OFR and the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) Several agencies have special roles in addressing the kinds of systemic risks that the FSOC was designed to monitor. The DFA grants specific authority under certain circumstances for the Secretary of the Treasury, the Fed, and the FDIC to act without further approval. Treasury Secretary has a number of important functions on the FSOC that differ from the other members of the council. The Secretary of the Treasury has a consultative role with the OFR, which is responsible for certain research functions related to those reports and in other areas. The Treasury Secretary, along with the Fed, negotiates with foreign regulators and multilateral organizations to resolve non-banks' financial problems. The Fed's role as prudential regulator of firms designated systemic by the FS OC is beyond the scope of this report. The FSOC was created to address some of the perceived regulatory weaknesses that may have contributed to the magnitude of the financial crisis of 2008. OFR is housed within the Department of the Treasury, although it is funded separately. Congressional staff may be interested in the organization, actions, and assessments of the FSOC, especially if a systemic financial event were to occur, a covered non-bank financial institution were to fail, and when the Secretary of theTreasury offers testimony fail. The FSOC provides a common forum for financial regulators to communicate. FSOC meetings, congressional reports and testimony, and certain rulemakings and recommendations of the council. The Secretary must testify before the House Committee on Financial Services and the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs in conjunction with the release of the annual FSOC report. If any member agencies have notified Congress of deficiencies in systemic risk efforts, the Secretary is to address those concerns at the hearing. The secretary may call a meeting of the FSOC if a majority of the members call it. The DFA does not define the terms financial stability or systemic risk. The first FSOC annual report (2011) described some essential features of stable financial systems. Applying the FSOC's interpretation of financial stability as used in Title I of the DFA, the mission of theFSOC is to help avoid financial activities, practices, and regulations that might spread or magnify shocks to the financial system. There is no single, commonly accepted definition of the term systemic risk among financial professionals. will analyze the perceived threats to financial stability as identified in law and by the FSOC in its 2013 annual report. Items (1) and (2) are arguably directed at minimizing the chances that particular firms will be viewed as too big to fail, or too connected to fail. Item (3) is arguably a more general catch-all for any factors that might destabilize the financial system. However, the DFA uses the terms financial stability and systemic risk in several places. For example, Section 112 directs member agencies to state in writing whether the agency believes that all reasonable steps are being taken "to ensure financial stability" both banks and non-bank financial firms that will dispel investor expectations that some firms are too big to fail. This report will discuss the FSOC's mission and issues it is intended to address in Section I, and the members and their roles in Section II. Section III will analyze the perceived threats to financial stability as identified in Section IV. The report will also provide more detail on the mission, members, and recommendations of theFSOC during the 113 th Congress. It will conclude with a list of recommendations for the 113th Congress. provision of any funding to the receivership out of the Fund, and (4) explaining the expected costs of resolving the firm. The FSOC's annual report to Congress is to include an analysis of perceived threats to the financial system. The following sections analyze specific threats mentioned in the 2013 FSOC annual report. For each topic, the reader is provided a brief description of the issue, how it might contribute to a systemic event, and a analysis of the FSOC report. Although commercial banks raise significant funds through insured deposits, banks and other financial institutions also use a variety of financial institutions. The 2013 annual report noted several initiatives to address operational issues. The tri-party repo task force has recommended improvements to the settlement and clearing processes in among the two central clearing banks to reduce their intra-day credit exposure. Reportedly, major financial institutions have been subjected to attempts to access confidential information or disrupt their telecommunications (cyberattacks). In the section of the 2013 report devoted to operational issues, the FSOC highlighted the need to improve the transparency and security of the financial markets in the United States. regulation of certain non-banks . The FSOC establishes the criteria and designates which firms will be subject to additional prudential regulation by the Fed. An example of a financial market utility would be an organization that provides settlement and clearing services. The distinction between depository banks and non-bank financial firms is important to understanding the FSOC because many of the new powers attempt to create a regulatory and resolution regime for non- Banks that is similar to the way depository Banks are handled. The term bank is used to refer to a financial firm. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) is composed of the heads of the agencies that regulate financial institutions and markets. The council has its own permanent staff in the newly created Office of Financial Research (OFR) The DFA establishes a regulatory framework of which the FSOC is a consultative council. The new regulatory regime has six basic policy tools with which to pursue its mission. It has a permanent staff with the ability to gather confidential financial information and the staff of the OFR are to be experts in the financial field. Dodd-Frank Act provides a mechanism between the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for a financial subsidiary. Financial Stability Oversight Council — A council created by the Dodd- Frank Act. Firewalls —Barriers that prevent banks from engaging in activities that would not otherwise be permitted within the bank itself, subject to certain limits. The Federal Reserve Board of Governors — A body that reviews the performance of the Fed’s balance sheet and determines whether it is in a position to intervene. Financial intermediaries, including but not limited to banks, can be damaged by rising interest rates if they have not adequately addressed the mismatch between the interest rates on their cost of funds and their revenues from longer-term lending. The revelations of manipulation of the London Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR) has cast doubt on the accuracy of key reference rates used to benchmark interest rates in many private contracts. The economy improves driving up the rates or because a negative shock causes a spike in interest rates. Wrong There are several examples of rising interest rates contributing to stress in the financial system. Rising rates in the 1970s and 1980s created a great deal of stress for banks. Under-reporting of LIBOR rates in 2008 may have given financial regulators an overoptimistic view of the lending ability of major financial institutions. rising rates during 2004-2006 contributed to the end of the housing bubble (which would have ended eventually, but perhaps not at that time) and a significant sell-off in the bond market. exchange rate, expansionary monetary policies can cause exchange rates to depreciate, and thus exports to rise and imports to fall. The 2013 FSOC report addressed several issues related to global financial stability. The FSOC noted a number of positive developments in Europe, including the potential for the European Central Bank (ECB) to purchase sovereign debt of member states under some circumstances. However, the report also noted that banking disruptions and policy changes could have a negative impact on the global economy. The report also noted that banking disruptions and policy responses in Cyprus (which briefly cast doubt on the status of insured bank deposits) create downside risk. austerity programs in Europe have "contributed to a contraction in euro-area economies," although euro area deficits may also have declined. The report also discussed expansionary monetary policies in Japan, which have contributed to a depreciation of the Yen. The U.S. has a strong financial stability interest in Japan finally escaping from deflation and securing more robust growth. Future interest rate changes may be a source of financial instability. A global savings glut, deficient aggregate demand, and central bank interest-rate policies have contributed to an extended period of low interest rates. At some point, interest rates are likely to rise, either because the demand for loanable funds rises as the economy improves driving up the rates or because of a change in the central bank's policy. The SEC recently proposed Regulation Systems Compliance and Integrity (Regulation SCI) to try to address malfunctions in capital markets. Investigation and prosecutions related to LIBOR (and similar reference rates) may reduce the incentive to misreport. The FSOC did express concern at potential reaches for yield, noting that the issuance of high yield bonds (riskier classes of bonds) had increased markedly. Underwriting standards for collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) had reportedly loosened. Furthermore, threats to financial stability posed by rising rates are mitigated in part by one of the potential causes of rising rates—improved financial conditions. if any of their investments experience losses. Certain pension systems may find it difficult to earn adequate returns safely. Other investors may have a greater temptation to "reach for yield" by investing in more risky categories of investments, increasing the likelihood of asset bubbles in other markets. In its 2013 report, the FSOC attributes current interest rates (low yields) to three factors. First, capital market participants forecast continued low interest rate policies by major central banks globally. Second is the second is the third. policies by major central banks globally. The second is the pricing of short-term risk, which is partially caused by the increase in Treasury market purchases by institutions with low-risk sensitivity. The third factor cited by the FSOC is the willingness of bond market buyers to accept credit risk (i.e., the risk that borrowers will not pay back fully and on time). Provisions for credit losses and loan losses have declined recently. The FSOC notes a number of initiatives to mitigate the risks when interest rates do rise. The combination of higher interest rates and higher outstanding debt can cause interest payments to crowd out other government programs. The FSOC does not see a gradual normalization of long-term Treasury yields and volatilities as a significant threat to fiscal imbalances or the wider economy. However, the long-runImbalances could threaten financial instability if there is a sudden spike in yields. TheFSOC notes that a sudden rise in yields could lead to a sharp increase in the cost of borrowing. the possibility of sovereign debt restructuring, or in the extreme a sovereign default. The resulting financial instability can cause credit to dry up, interest rates to rise, and may magnify the financial difficulties of the sovereign experiencing the financial stress. At a minimum, exposed institutions may find it difficult to find counterparties for new transactions and may suffer withdrawals, or refusals to renew loans, from existing counterparties. The mere change in the perceived risk of Sovereign debt can cause people to try to avoid institutions and markets with large exposure to that country's debt. There is no formal way to address a sovereign default. European sovereign debt crises have been a series of evolving government funding and banking crises. Even if central banks target their domestic economies rather than their exchange rate, expansionary monetary policies can cause exchange rates to go up. The global financial crisis could spread through a number of channels through which financial instability could be spread. The U.S. Federal Reserve could be forced to raise interest rates to keep the economy from overheating. The European Central Bank may have to raise its benchmark rate to keep inflation under control. There are many channels through which financial instability can cross borders. The failure of a global bank could cause cross-border resolution issues. Capital flights away from some countries can cause global investment money to flood other countries. Sovereign debt problems or banking policies in one country can cast doubt on the reliability of government debts or guarantees in other country. In introductory finance classes, sovereign debt is seen as a major source of financial instability in the U.S. It can cause asset bubbles in the recipient country. Recent events in Europe have cast serious doubt on this simplifying assumption. Changes in the perceived risk of the debt of sovereigns are potential threats to financial stability. Financial institutions and financial systems do not typically retain capital buffers against the possibility of sovereign debt restructuring, or in the extreme, writes David Blanchard at the Bank of England. In introductory finance classes, sovereign debt of the governments of developed economies is often characterized as a risk-free asset, writes Blachard. In other countries, such as Greece, Cyprus, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, many financial regulators and financial institutions treat those debts as if they were risk- free. States have been viewed as a safe haven for some foreign investors and central banks. In the short run, governments with large fiscal imbalances run the risk that investors may suddenly demand higher yields to roll-over existing debt. Unlike Cyprus or Greece, short-term fiscal problems of the U.S. could be cushioned by purchases of Treasury securities by the Fed (which would be likely because a short-run fiscal crisis is often accompanied by the same kinds of poor economic conditions that cause the Fed to expand) The FSOC notes that the financial impact of potentially disruptive short-run fiscal events has had "minimal impact" thus far. U.S. debt is still seen as a safe harbor despite the automatic tax increases and spending cuts at the start of 2013 (the fiscal cliff) and the February 2013 debt ceiling debates. Financial instability overseas can threaten financial stability in the United States. There are many ways in which financial instability abroad can affect financial stability at home, the FSOC says. The FSOC also notes that financial markets are global. Long-term fiscal policy refers to the balance between expected government spending and revenues over an extended time horizon. The United States has not experienced any backlash in bond markets for running extended fiscal deficits. Not only has the yield on U.S. Treasury bonds remained low, but obligations of the United States have been viewed as a safe haven for some. The CBO and other projections of long- term fiscal policy project an imbalance between expected federal revenues and expected federal spending for an extended period of time (spending commitments are greater than expected revenue streams) Fiscal policy refers to the relationship of government revenues and spending. Typically, recessions cause government revenues to decline and government spending to rise (fiscal policy expands) Economic booms can cause fiscal policy to contract if government revenues expand faster than government spending. Even if rates rise for the "wrong" reason, a second credit crunch is unlikely. The measurable financial resilience of major banks (such as capital levels and measures of liquidity) have improved. The potential causes of rising rates—improved financial conditions. deflation and securing more robust growth. Two companies are affiliated when one owns all or a large part of another. All subsidiaries are affiliates, but affiliates that are less than 50% controlled are usually not treated as subsidiaries. Asset-backed security is a bond that represents a share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets. The CRS Glossary of Terms has been compiled from several earlier CRS reports, the FCIC report, the CFTC and SIFMA websites, and from other sources. Business loans, and car loans. Financial institutions and activities that in some respects parallel banking activities but are subject to less regulation than commercial banks. Institutions include mutual funds, investment banks, and hedge funds. Special-purpose entities (SPEs)—Also referred to as off–balance-sheet arrangements, SPEs are legal entities created to perform a specific financial function or transaction. The assets, liabilities, and cash flows of an SPE do not appear on the sponsoring institution's books. Speculation — A venture or undertaking of an enterprising nature, especially one involving considerable financial risk. respond to emerging threats to U.S. financial stability. Firewalls —Barriers to the flow of capital, information, management, and other resources among business units owned by a common entity. In case of financial distress of one operation ("fire"), the "walls" are intended to prevent the spread of loss to the other units. Example: losses in a securities subsidiary of a holding company could not be covered by any of the holding company's bank subsidiaries. Foreign bank —Banks and their holding companies headquartered in other countries may have a variety of financial operations in the United States. Hedge funds are essentially unregulated mutual funds. They are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets, including precious metals, commodities, foreign currencies, and derivatives. A percentage reduction from the stated value (e.g., book value or market value) to account for possible declines in value that may occur before assets can be liquidated.a funding advantage over purely private competitors, while their charters restrict the kinds of businesses they may conduct. A haircut is a reduction in the value of assets for purposes of capital, segregation, or margin requirements. commodities, foreign currencies, and derivatives. Hedge funds are limited to qualified investors with high net worth. Illiquid Assets —Assets that cannot be easily or quickly sold. Insolvent —A firm whose liabilities exceed its assets. Institutional regulation —Regulation that is institution-specific as contrasted with activity specific (see "Functional regulation"). Investment bank —A financial intermediary, active in commodities, foreign currency, and other financial instruments. Hedge fund —Investing to reduce the impact of adverse movements in interest rates, commodities, or securities prices. that pools the funds of individuals and other investors, and uses them to purchase large amounts of debt or equity obligations of businesses and sometimes debt obligations of governments. Owners pay taxes on their distributions from a fund; the mutual fund itself is not normally subject to federal or state income taxation. Naked option —The sale of a call or put option without holding an equal and opposite position in the underlying instrument. Net Asset Value (or NAV)—Value of an fund's pool of securities in which a fund invests. Government, because their failure would destabilize the entire financial system. Tri-Party Repo Market — A repurchase agreement in which a third party agrees to clear and settle the transaction and to monitor and assure the treatment of collateral. Umbrella supervision — The term applied to comprehensive regulation of a holding company and its parts by one or more holding company regulator(s) Undercapitalized — A condition in which the business does not have enough capital to meet its needs. Variable Rate Demand Obligation — A security which pays a variable rate of interest.  Variable Rate Demand Obligation — A security which pays a variable interest rate, and can be redeemed upon the demand of the holder. Write-Downs —Reducing the value of an asset as it is carried on a firm's balance sheet because the market value has fallen. Appendix B. Acronyms for the variable rate demand obligation are: VRODO, VODO-R, VOR, VDO-R and VODR-R. For more information, visit the Bank of England's website. undertaking of an enterprising nature, especially one involving considerable financial risk on the chance of unusual profit. State regulation —Under the dual system of bank regulation, states as well as the federal government may charter, regulate, and supervise depository institutions. States are the primary regulators in the insurance field. States also have authority over securities companies, mortgage lending companies, personal finance companies, and other types of companies offering financial services. Structured debt —Debt that has been customized for the buyer, often by incorporating complex derivatives. senior debt takes priority. Subordinate debt holders receive payment only after senior debt claims are paid in full. Subsidiary is a company whose controlling shares are owned 50% or more by another corporation. Like companies with less than 50% ownership, it is an affiliate of the controlling company. A subsidiary is usually consolidated for regulatory and reporting purposes with its parent. Systemic Risk does not have a single, agreed-upon definition. Some define systemic risk as the risk an institution faces that it cannot diversify against. In other circumstances, systemic risk is Consolidated Supervised Entities program — Securities and Exchange Commission program that provided voluntary supervision for the five largest investment bank conglomerates. Conservatorship —When an insolvent financial institution is reorganized by a regulator with the intent to restoring it to an ongoing business. Counterparty —The opposite party in a bilateral agreement, contract, or transaction, such as a swap. Credit Default Swap (CDS)—A tradeable contract in which one party agrees to pay another if a third party experiences a credit event. party experiences a credit event, such as default on a debt obligation, bankruptcy, or credit rating downgrade. Credit Risk —The risk that a borrower will fail to repay a loan in full, or that a derivatives counterparty will default. Credit Rating Agency —Private company that evaluates the credit quality of securities and provides ratings on those securities. Credit Union —A nonprofit financial cooperative of individuals with one or more common bonds. May be state or nationally. May not be a credit union, but may be a member of a labor union. The Fed will also have additional supervision and examination authority for individual non-banks designated by the FSOC. The Dodd-Frank Act directs the Fed to supervise certain large non-bank financial companies. The regulatory standards for non-Bank financial firms under Fed supervision must be more stringent than the standard for not-Bank firms under the Fed's supervision. The FSOC recommends the standards for the non- bank financial firms that the Fed may supervise, including those that do not present systemic risks. characteristics of non-bank firms that the Fed may supervise. The Fed has several powers and duties over covered bank holding companies and non-banks. Standards for foreign firms are to acknowledge equality of competitive opportunity and take into account the extent to which the foreign non- bank is subject to comparable standards in its home country, the Fed said in a letter to the European Commission. The letter was sent to European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, the head of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the European Central Bank. bank holding companies and non-banks, upon a two-thirds vote of the FSOC. For example, the Fed can limit the ability of the company to merge with other companies. It can restrict the products the firm offers, or impose conditions on the manner that the firm conducts activities. The Fed also has information collection authority, including through examinations, for covered firms, although the Fed is to rely on existing data sources to the extent possible. In cases in which the Fed decides to impose conditions, the company must sell assets or off-balance-sheet items to unaffiliated entities. share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets. The holder is entitled to some part of the repayment flows from the underlying debt. Bank Holding Company Act —The federal statute under which the Fed regulates bank holding companies and financial holding companies (FHC) Financial institution —An enterprise that uses its funds chiefly to purchase financial assets such as loans and debt securities, as opposed to tangible property. Financial institutions are differentiated by the manner in which they invest their funds: in loans, bonds, stocks, or stocks. Investment banking functions include underwriting (marketing newly registered securities to individual or institutional investors), counseling regarding merger and acquisition proposals, brokerage services, advice on corporate financing, and proprietary trading. Investment bank holding company —A holding company for securities firms authorized under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Such holding companies are subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Issuer —A person or entity (including a company or bank) that offers securities for sale. The issuing of securities, where the proceeds accrue to the issuer, is distinct from the sale of securities. National and state-chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries to engage in activities that would not otherwise be permitted. Non-depository financial institutions such as life and property/casualty insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds obtain funds through other types of receipts, whose values may fluctuate with market conditions. Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ), both national and state chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries. Primary federal regulator is the Federal Reserve, under the International Banking Act of 1978 as amended. States and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency may also regulate them. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ) called for more functional regulation than in the past. Government-sponsored enterprise (GSEs) are private companies with government charters. Government sponsorship typically gives them a funding advantage over purely private competitors, while their charters are public. Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act provides a mechanism between the Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for FHCs. Blue sky laws —State statutes that govern the offering and selling of securities. Broker/dealer —An individual or firm that buys and sells securities for itself as well as for customers. Bubble —Self-reinforcing process in which the price of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period. The chair's vote is required to rescind or reevaluate the systemic designation of a firm. In emergencies, the chair's affirmative vote is needed as part of the determination that a non-bank will not be granted the usual hearing before its designation as systemic. As part of those anti-evasion provisions, if certain large recipients of Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) funds (specifically, if they hold over $50 billion) cease to be bank holding companies, they are automatically considered a systemically significant firm. owners' stake in an enterprise. It is a critical line of defense when losses occur. Capital requirements help assure that losses that might occur will accrue to the institution incurring them. In the case of banking institutions experiencing problems, capital also serves as a buffer against losses to the federal deposit insurance funds. Capital Purchase Program —Initiative under the Troubled Asset Relief Program providing financial assistance to U.S. financial institutions through the purchase of senior preferred shares in the corporations on standardized terms. Charter conversion —Banking institutions may, with the approval of their regulators, change their charter. institutions that did not accept deposits, but had their own prudential regulatory regime under the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. In common parlance, people have sometimes referred to "too-big-to-fail" firms (TBTF), but what is typically meant are complex and interconnected financial institutions that may not rely on deposits. As then-Federal Reserve Governor Donald Kohn evaluated lessons from the financial crisis, "We [the Fed] traditionally have provided backup liquidity to sound depository institutions" Governor Kohn expressed frustration for the perceived inadequacy of existing tools to deal with TBTF non-banks. Dissatisfaction with existing regulation grew with the progression of the mortgage crisis that began in August 2007. Some of this support was designed to prevent some creditors of failing non- Banks from protracted uncertainty in the bankruptcy courts or in the courts of appeal. The failure may spread and magnify losses throughout the financial system—rather than absolute firm size.and interconnected financial institutions that may not rely on deposits for a large share of their funding. Systemic risk is defined as the risk that the linkages between institutions may affect the financial system as a whole. Too-big-to-fail doctrine — An implicit regulatory policy holding that very large financial institutions must be rescued by the government, because their failure would destabilize the entire financial system. Thrift holding company —Also known as a savings and loan holding company, a business that controls one or more savings associations. These holding companies are regulated under the Home Owners' Loan Act by the Office of Thrift Supervision. FDIC (or NCUA for credit unions), not through the bankruptcy courts. Banks generally have access to liquidity facilities, such as the Federal Reserve discount window. Non-bank refers to financial institutions that offer loans or other sources of capital, but do not have a bank charter and do not rely on deposits for their own funding. Prior to the financial crisis of 2008, Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers were examples of large, complex, non-bank financial institutions, even though in some cases they may have had relatively small subsidiaries that accepted deposits. relatively small subsidiaries that accepted deposits (technically "thrifts"). Some non-banks accepted prudential regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Bankruptcy courts were to handle failures among most non- banks, and non-bank subsidiaries of banks. The government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, are large, complex financial institutions that did not accept deposits, but had their own subsidiaries that were regulated by the SEC. The insurance company American International Group (AIG) is another example of a large non- bank financial institution that had a relatively small subsidiary that accepts deposits. The term bank generally refers to financial institutions with bank, thrift, or credit union charters that offer loans and raise a large proportion of their funds through insured deposits. Insured depository banks have prudential regulators who monitor their assets and liabilities. Prudential regulators of banks coordinate through the Federal Financial Institutions Examinations Council (FFIEC) Resolution of failing depository Banks is done administratively by the FDIC (or NCUA for credit unions), not through the bankruptcy. banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified high-quality debt obligations, such as those of the federal government. Deposits are a customer's funds placed with an institution according to agreed on terms and conditions and represent a credit to the depositor. Derivatives are financial contracts whose value is linked to the price of an underlying commodity or financial variable (such as an interest rate, currency price, or stock index). Ownership of a Derivative is a form of ownership. residence in the same neighborhood). May be state or nationally chartered. Credit unions accept deposits of members' savings and transaction balances in the form of share accounts. The federal regulator for credit unions is the National Credit Union Administration. Commercial banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified markets, such as metals, foreign exchange, etc., for its own account and at its own risk as principal (see "Broker/dealer" for more information. The Federal Reserve is the nation's primary regulator of credit unions. The phrase refers to the fact that banks may be either federally or state chartered. The term derives from the practice whereby bankers would come to a Reserve Bank teller window to obtain credit in the early days of the Federal Reserve System. In the case of state-chartered banks, the state is the primary regulator; for national banks the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is the main regulator. To have tried to borrow elsewhere first and must provide collateral as security for loans. interest rate, currency price, or stock index). Ownership of a derivative does not require the holder to actually buy or sell the underlying interest. Derivatives are used by hedgers, who seek to shift risk to others, and speculators, who can profit if they can successfully forecast price trends. Examples include futures contracts, options, and swaps. Discount window —Figurative term for the Federal Reserve facility for extending credit directly to eligible depository institutions. It may be used to relieve temporary cash shortages at banks. central marketplace with established rules and regulations where buyers and sellers meet to trade futures and options contracts or securities. Federal safety net —A broad term referring to protection of banking institutions through deposit insurance, discount window credit, other lender of last resort support. Commercial and industrial companies generally lack any of these cushions against loss. Federal Open Market Committee —Its members are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and certain of the presidents of Federal Reserve Banks; oversees market conditions and implements monetary policy through such means. Banking institutions may, with the approval of their regulators, switch their corporate form between: commercial bank or savings institution, National or State charter, and to stockholder ownership from depositor ownership. Various regulatory conditions may encourage switching. Clearing Organization —An entity through which futures and other derivative transactions are cleared and settled. Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)—A bond created by the securitization of a pool of asset backed securities. (See CLO and CMO.) Collateralized loan obligation (CLO) is a bond created by the securitization of a pool of loans, bonds, or asset backed securities. Commercial bank is a deposit-taking institution that can make commercial loans, accept checking accounts. National banks are chartered by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; state banks, by the individual states. Commercial Paper Funding Facility Emergency Program — created to provide funding for commercial paper transactions in the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. savings and loan association, mutual savings bank, or federal savings bank. charters have been expanded to allow them to provide commercial loans and a broader range of consumer financial services. The federal regulator for most savings associations is the Office of Thrift Supervision. Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC)—a private nonprofit membership corporation set up under federal law to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers. Also known as savings and loans, thrifts, and mutual savings banks, these institutions encourage personal saving and home buying through mortgage lending. to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers and/or dealers. SIPC is a liquidator; it has no supervisory or regulatory responsibilities for its members. It is not authorized to bail out or in other ways assist a failing firm. Securitization is the process of transforming a cash flow, typically from debt repayments, into a new marketable security. Holders of the securitized instrument receive interest and principal payments as the underlying loans are repaid. Types of loans that are frequently securited are home mortgages, credit card receivables, student loans, small business loans, and car loans. Over-the-counter (OTC)—Trading that does not occur on a centralized exchange or trading facility. OTC transactions can occur electronically or over the telephone. Receivership —When an insolvent financial institution is taken over with the intent to liquidate its assets. Repurchase Agreement (Repos) —A method of secured lending where the borrower sells securities to the lender as collateral and agrees to repurchase them at a higher price within a short period, often within one day. Federal Reserve Governor Daniel Tarullo identified four such ways that in his view are most common. Domino effects occur when the failure of one firm causes its creditors to fail, which causes the creditors' creditors to failing. Fire sales may become reinforcing when a product serves.standing in a crowded stadium sees better, that strategy will fail if everyone stands at the same time. The FSOC's approach addresses commonly understood channels of risk proliferation, one might examine central bankers' views of ways that failing firms can damage financial stability.  domino effects, fire sales, and critical functions, depend upon a firm's connections to other firms. These three forms of interconnectedness will typically be correlated with the size and scope of the firm. If potential creditors to large firms judge that governments are likely to intervene to prevent an eventual bankruptcy, then this lower perceived risk of default may result in creditors being willing to offer the firms loans on easier terms than their less interconnected competitors. Big firms may thus gain funding advantages over smaller competitors, reinforcing the tendency. the same industry or with similar assets are likely to be in financial trouble. Contagion can result in the restriction of liquidity to other firms as possible counterparties shy away. The failure of critical functions can cause systemic risk if a firm provides a unique financial service with no close substitutes. For example, if a clearinghouse has a monopoly on settlement services for a market, and the clearinghouse fails, then other market participants may not be able to process their own transactions. Three of the sources of systemic risk identified by Tarullo, domino effects, fire sales, and critical functions, depend on each other. The remaining source of systemic risk identified by Tarullo, contagion, is relatively independent of firm size and complexity. Like the death of a canary in a coal mine, the failure of even the smallest firm may signal that large firms, if they are exposed to similar risks, may be in danger. Systemic risk regulators may attempt to construct and estimate a firm-specific index of systemicrisk arising from these three sources of instability. The information that comes from these sources is based on the information that is available to the public. define systemic risk, all definitions attempt to capture risks to the stability of the financial system as a whole. Possible features of systemic risks include externalities and the fallacy of composition. With externalities, there are costs or benefits of actions by financial market participants that are not borne by those participants. With fallacies of composition, what is true for each individual firm in isolation may not be true when all firms follow similar strategies. Just as while one person standing in a crowded stadium sees better, that strategy will. in danger. Tarullo interprets the run on money market mutual funds that occurred in September 2008 as contagion that had little to do with the size, complexity, or transparency of Lehman Brothers. Contagion is thus based on the information that a firm's failure provides to investors, rather than a specific transactions or interconnections of the failed firm. If correct, it would be difficult to construct or estimate a firm-specific index if it were to be constructed or estimated. reliance on government assisted sources of funding increased markedly as a share of all mortgage funding in 2008. At the origination level, the mortgage market share of Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans increased even for borrowers who could offer significant down payments with their house purchase. Private mortgage securitization almost completely evaporated, making the government sponsored enterprises (GSEs) the dominant providers of wholesale mortgage funding. GSE funding has a variety of government support, including preferred stock purchases by the government. variety of government support, including preferred stock purchases by the U.S. Treasury. The lack of significant private capital in mortgage funding is a sign that financial instability in mortgage markets has not yet completely healed. It has been an announced goal of the FSOC to restore private capital as the primary source of long-term mortgage funding, along with improvements in consumer protection and consumer protection. The FSOC was formed in September 2008 to stabilize the mortgage market and prevent a repeat of the Great Depression. The 2013 annual report says that there has been significant improvement in mortgage markets, but additional progress is needed. There may be regulatory uncertainty as federal agencies implement changes to regulations related to the mortgage market. The conservatorship agreements (Treasury Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements, PSPAs) have been modified to expedite the wind-down of the retained portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Regulatory uncertainty in mortgage Markets may be reduced by the publication of final rules for the Real Estate Settlement Procedures. long-term mortgage funding, along with improvements in consumer protection and financial stability. House prices have begun rising in a number of areas, default rates and foreclosures are no longer rising sharply. The flow business (current mortgage revenues and guarantee fees compared with current payments) of the GSEs has been positive in recent quarters. One possible contributing factor for a delay in the return of private capital to mortgage markets is general pessimism about the speed of economic recovery in general and housing in particular. failing non-banks from protracted uncertainty in the bankruptcy courts or other resolution process. Similarly, for some qualified financial contracts, support may have been designed so that some creditors would not suffer losses in a bankruptcy process. For example, in March 2008, losses on mortgage-related securities caused the distress sale of investment bank Bear Stearns. The Fed provided financial support for the purchase of Bear St earns by JPMorgan. In July 2008, the GSEs, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, had trouble raising additional capital. Policymakers tried unsuccessfully to enhance investor confidence by pledging financial support. enhance investor confidence by pledging financial support for the GSEs. Despite this pledge, in September 2008, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed in conservatorship with explicit financial support from Treasury. Lehman Brothers failed shortly thereafter, and declared bankruptcy when no firm was willing to purchase the investment bank without additional public support, which was not forthcoming. AIG, one of the world's largest insurers, would have failed the day after Lehman, but the Fed intervened on behalf of AIG. declaration of bankruptcy by Lehman Brothers, financial panic spread to other non-bank institutions and markets. Treasury offered a temporary guarantee program for money market mutual funds. Congress provided Treasury with up to $700 billion to address troubled assets (such as mortgages) in the financial system. Despite these interventions to recapitalize and restore confidence in financial institutions, damage to the broader economy (as measured by unemployment and lost output) was severe. Congress passed the DFA to reform the financial regulatory system. W wholesale funding can have many of the characteristics of a bank run by depositors. Unlike deposits, sources of wholesale funding typically do not have any government guarantee. Collateralized lending can be subject to fire sales because borrower defaults are likely to occur at the same time that the market for the collateral is also distressed. When the lender seizes the collateral, the value of the collateral may be falling. The addition of the distress sales by lenders can magnify a downward spiral in prices. The 2013 annual report notes some positive and negative developments (from the FSOC perspective) in wholesale funding. Fire sales may become self-reinforcing if failure to pay causes lenders to seize the collateral (the good itself), sell it at distressed prices, and thereby cause further losses on other holders of the asset. These holders may then default on their loans or fail to post margin. Contagion can occur if the failure of one firm is a signal to investors that firms in the same industry or with similar assets are likely to fail. On.on.co.uk, please click here for more information. Deposits, banks and other financial institutions also use a variety of other funding sources. Many of these alternative funding sources, often blending securities contracts and traditional loans, are categorized as wholesale funding. Examples of wholesale funding sources include money market mutual funds and repurchase agreements (repos) Wholesale funding sources are not eligible for certain government initiatives that assist financial stability, such as deposit insurance. Non-banks that use wholesale sources to fund capital market activity may be subject to runs similar to a depository bank. access to certain emergency lending facilities such as the Fed's discount window. Some wholesale funding markets can be subject to runs and fire sales. Financial intermediaries may lose trust in each other, and refuse to extend or roll over their loans to each other. The resulting reduction in wholesale funding can have many of the characteristics of a financial crisis. It can also lead to the loss of confidence in the financial system and a decline in confidence in banks and other financial intermediaries. It also can lead to an increase in the cost of borrowing. The annual report notes that intra-day credit exposure of the two clearing banks (JPMorgan and BNY Mellon) in the tri-party repo market has declined significantly. However, the potential for runs on broker-dealers, or fire sales should there be a default by a major market participant, has not been completely eliminated. Efforts to address potential instability in money market mutual funds have not as yet been finalized by the SEC (as regulator of the money market) in wholesale funding. The financial infrastructure can also be a source of systemic risk. This is essentially the "plumbing" of the financial system. It includes the environment in which financial trading occurs. It also includes communications of the interbank payment system, clearing and settlement of retail payments (including mobile payments) and the security of confidential financial information. The Dodd-Frank Act's ability-to-pay standard. Additional work may need to be done to raise GSE guarantee fees to make room for private competitors to the GSEs. The financial infrastructure is vulnerable to natural disasters and human activity. Hurricane Sandy temporarily halted trading on the New York Stock Exchange in October 2012. Malfunctions have disrupted the issuance of payments and the security of confidential financial information. The "plumbing" of the financial system evolves with changes in communication technology and the organization of firms. The stability of such systems can be threatened by the potential disruptions to the operational network. The risk of a cyber-attack on the U.S. financial system is very high. Commercial Paper Funding Facility Emergency Program — Created by the Fed in 2008, this program purchased three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible companies. Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA, P.L. 106-554, 114 Stat. 2763)—Overhauled the Commodities Exchange Act to create a flexible structure for the regulation of futures and options trading. Largely repealed by the Dodd-Frank Act. Community Reinvestment Act 1977 — A federal law which encouraged depository institutions to make loans and provide services in the local communities in which they take deposits. Net Asset Value (or NAV)—Value of an asset minus any associated costs; for financial assets, typically changes each trading day. Operational risk —The possibility that a financial institution will suffer losses from a failure to process transactions properly, from accounting mistakes, from rogue traders or other forms of insider fraud. Office of Financial Research (OFR)—An office created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) to support the Financial Stability Oversight Council and member agencies. Market risk is the risk that the price of a tradeable security or asset will decline, resulting in a loss to the holder. Money market mutual fund (MMF) pools funds of individuals and other investors for investment in high-grade, short-term debt and bank deposits paying market rates of return. Examples of these money market instruments include U.S. Treasury bills, certificates of deposit, and commercial paper. Most MMFs offer check-writing redemption features. Moral hazard is the tendency of people to take more risks. Moral hazard is the tendency of people to take more risks once another party has agreed to provide protection. Regulatory interventions to bail out failing firms are often said to create moral hazard, on the assumption that others will expect to be saved from their mistakes, too. Mortgage-backed security (MBS)—A bond backed by a pool of mortgage loans. Mutual fund —An investing company that pools the funds of individuals and other investors, and and other institutions to form a single investment vehicle for investors. Low interest rates make it difficult for savers to earn significant returns with relative safety. Money market mutual funds are at greater risk because their income stream (from relatively safe bonds) is close to zero. Certain pension systems are more likely to "break the buck" (return less than a dollar for each dollar invested) If any of their investments experience losses, these pension systems could be at risk of financial instability. The current interest rate environment could contribute to financial instability, according to the IMF. of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period, often followed by a rapid price decline. Speculative bubbles are usually associated with a "bandwagon" effect in which speculators rush to buy the commodity (in the case of futures, "to take positions") before the price trend ends. Regulators often require financial firms to hold minimum levels of capital. It is a critical line in the road to a bubble, as it is the owners' stake in an enterprise that must be protected. price, or the condition of a market with many buyers and sellers present. Also, the ability of a person or firm to access credit markets. Liquidity risk — The possibility that the market for normally-liquid assets will suddenly dry up, leaving firms unable to convert assets into cash. Mark-to-Market — The process by which the reported amount of an asset is adjusted to reflect true the market value instead of the purchase price, or expected future sale price. The risk that other firms will refuse to extend credit on any terms to a firm that is perceived as distressed. the proceeds accrue to the issuer, is distinct from the secondary, or resale, market, where securities are traded among investors. Lender of last resort —Governmental lender that acts as the ultimate source of credit in the financial system. In the United States, the Fed has this role. Leverage —The ability to control large dollar amounts of a commodity or security with a comparatively small amount of capital. Liquidity — The ability to trade an asset quickly without significantly affecting its price.

ROUGE-1: 89.40, ROUGE-2: 80.83, ROUGE-L: 25.54
BERTScore: 59.53

==============================================
==================== [19/100] ====================
Summary:
The court of appeals did not reach the merits of these allegations. Instead, the court held that U.S. courts lack jurisdiction over the claims against the Saudi defendants. The legal bases for this holding were lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA and lack of personal jurisdiction. The most significant aspects of the court of Appeals' opinion were interpretations of the FSia. The interpretation of "agency or instrumentality" under theFSIA is key to the court's decision. The opinion is published in the book, "The Court of Appeals: The Case of the Saudi Defendants," published by Simon & Schuster. Commission for Relief to Bosnia and Herzegovina (the SHC), a charitable organization operated in connection with the Saudi government; and (4) claims against a banker and Saudi princes in their personal capacities. Underlying all of the claims was the allegation that defendants had "played a critical role in the September 11 attacks by funding Muslim charities that, in turn, funded al Qaeda" The appeals court in 2008 affirmed dismissals of the first three sets of claims for lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA. regulation, and (2) the judgment or choice in question must be grounded in considerations of public policy or susceptible to policy analysis. He noted the 2005 district court decision in Terrorist Attacks I granting the defendants immunity for decisions involving which charities to fund. The previous judge had explained that "SHC's alleged misuse of funds and/or inadequate record-keeping—even if it resulted in the funds going to terrorists—was the result" of poor record- keeping, he said. He said the decision was "grounded in social, economic, and political policy" In r e Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001 , is a consolidated case that includes, among other claims, claims against the Kingdom of Saudi of only a subset of the claims at issue in the case. Plaintiffs in In r e terror attacks are individuals and businesses injured by the September 11 terrorist attacks. They brought claims based on state and federal tort law and various federal laws, including the Torture Victim Protection Act, for injuries suffered as a result of the attacks. The dismissed claims fall into four categories: (1) claims against Saudi Arabia; (2), claims against four Saudi princes in their official capacities; (3) claimsagainst the Saudi High Commission for Relief to Bosnia and Herzegovina. be committed by the defendant in the United States. In the case of the Saudi charities, the appellate court stated that all of the defendants' conduct had occurred abroad. The district court found that the same considerations that applied to the charities also commanded immunity for the Kingdom and the SHC. The plaintiffs, recognizing that their allegations about their alleged support for the terrorist attacks has some bearing on the application of the "entire tort" rule, appealed to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs sought to allege that the activities of certain "operational level agents and alter-egos" of Saudi Arabia within the United States in connection with the attacks are attributable to Saudi Arabia. The court found that there was an insufficient factual basis to conclude that any of these individuals were employees of Saudi Saudi Arabia acting within the scope of their employment when they carried out the allegedly tortious activities in the U.S. Neither the appellate court nor the district judge agreed with the plaintiffs' allegations. Plaintiffs argued that these Saudi defendants played a "critical role" in the September 11 attacks by giving money to Muslim groups, which in turn funded Al Qaeda. In August 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed dismissals of the claims against the Saudi defendants. Part of the reasoning for the dismissals was later overturned, and the plaintiffs were permitted a second chance to bring their suit against Saudi government and government-owned charity. This a defendant to claims in a particular case, involves no "continuous and systematic" requirement; instead, it requires that a defendant's contacts with the forum "relate to" or "arise out of" the claim at issue in the case. In re Terrorist Attacks is a case consolidated for pre-trial purposes in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals' opinion reviewed dismissals of only a subset of the claims at issue in the case. The district court again dismissed the claims based on foreign sovereign immunity, and the case is on appeal at the United States Court of appeals for the Second Circuit.and its agencies or instrumentalities be reinstated in the interest of justice to determine whether the tort exception applies. likely return to the district court for a determination of whether the suit is precluded on grounds that the alleged tortious acts retain immunity as discretionary functions. In a separate decision in In re Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001 , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal of claims against five defendants. These defendants were (1) Al Rajhi Bank, (2) Saudi American Bank,. (3) Saleh Abdullah Kamel, (4) Dallah al Baraka Group LLC, immunity extended only to government actions distinct from the actions of officials as individuals. The Second Circuit's holding was consistent with the conclusions of five of the six other federal courts of appeals that had considered whether an individual may be protected as an agent or instrumentality. Only the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit (Seventh Circuit) had reached the opposite conclusion. In Terrorist Attacks III , the Second Circuit characterized the SeventhCircuit as an "outlier" on this issue. jurisdiction over the Saudi defendants sued in their personal capacities. Plaintiffs argued that the minimum contacts test was satisfied because the defendants had purposefully directed activity at the judicial forum by supporting the attacks. The court rejected this argument, acknowledging that it had been a successful argument in cases where defendants were "primary participants" in the terrorist acts. On remand to the district court, Judge Daniels of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York dismissed the claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Supreme Court granted review and established the minority position as the correct one. Because the officials dismissed from this case were not part of the motion to vacate, plaintiffs did not have an opportunity to pursue their lawsuit against them on remand. Claims against them in their official capacity would likely be deemed to be claims against the state or the government. The court could decide whether common law immunity applies to the Saudi officials in this case. The decision is expected to come within the next few weeks. the United States." Consequently, it is insufficient to overcome immunity to allege that an injury or damage occurred within the United States. In affirming the dismissal with respect to the Saudi Joint Relief Committee (SJRC) and the Saudi Red Crescent Society (SRC), the appellate court did not appear to foreclose a finding of jurisdiction unless all conduct associated with the injury occurs wholly within the U.S., but rather only that some tortious act must be committed by the defendant in the U States. rule against litigation in U.S. courts and a number of exceptions permitting suits. As a general rule, foreign states, together with their agencies and instrumentalities, are "immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of the United States and from the states" However, the FSIA authorizes jurisdiction over foreign nations in several exceptions. The federal law authorizes subject matter jurisdiction as long as the "amount in controversy" exceeds $75,000. The FSIA is a jurisdictional gatekeeper for claims against foreign states and their instrumentalities. Attacks litigation, the previous terrorism exception remained in force. Federal law FSIA if they are sued in their capacity as individuals, but may be immune from suit under the common law of foreign sovereign immunity. One such defendant, the former president of two of the Saudi-run charities sued for alleged involvement in funding the 9/11 terrorist attacks, prevailed in a motion to dismiss the lawsuit against him on the basis of common-law foreign sovereign Immunity. The analyses for subject matter and personal jurisdiction differ according to whether the FSIA applies. claims, personal jurisdiction governs courts' power over particular defendants. Even if a court establishes jurisdiction over the subject matter of a claim, it cannot exercise its authority over a defendant for whom it lacks personal jurisdiction. Personal jurisdiction requires both statutory authority and satisfaction of Fifth Amendment due process standards. As with subject matter jurisdiction, statutory authority for personal jurisdiction over foreign defendants follows one of two distinct routes according to the FSIA's application. For a defendant who is not a foreign state or its agency or instrumentality, the ordinary procedure for obtaining statutory authority applies. forum attempting to assert jurisdiction, and (2) asserting such jurisdiction "does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice" The type and quantity of contacts necessary to constitute "minimum contacts" differ according to the type of personal jurisdiction—general or specific—that applies. General jurisdiction does not require contacts related to the specific claim in the case. Conversely, specific jurisdiction, which limits a court's jurisdiction over a defendant to claims in a particular case, involves no contacts. "Continuous and systematic" contacts with a forum. S. 2040 would provide for exclusive federal court jurisdiction over foreign states. It would leave the foreign official exclusion under the ATA intact. The bill would also clarify that a tortious act or omission would not give rise to jurisdiction where it constitutes "mere negligence" It would clarify the relationship between the FSIA exception and the ATa's civil liability exception precluding suits against foreign officials.. Aliens as well as U.S. nationals would likely be able to bring lawsuits under causes of action other than the AT a if jurisdiction is available. The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (the FSIA) applies to all foreign states and their "agencies and instrumentalities" Immunity for sovereign nations against suits in U.S. courts has a long history and is based on the principle that conflicts with foreign nations are more effectively addressed through diplomatic efforts than through judicial proceedings. Congress passed the FSIA to codify these long-standing principles and to clarify limitations on the scope of immunity that had emerged in international practice. The FSIA contains both a general, presumptive rule against litigation in the United States and a number of relevant legislative developments. Second Circuit: Individuals acting within their official capacities were indeed "agencies" of their states. The court noted that at the time the FSIA was enacted, Congress expressed a desire to codify common law principles, one of which was that immunity extends to a state's officials. It also emphasized the potential erosion of immunity for foreign states if immunity extended only to government actions distinct from the actions taken by individuals in the U.S., the court said. The case is the first of its kind in the Second Circuit. provide for exclusive federal court jurisdiction over foreign states under the new FSIA provision. The Attorney General can intervene in such cases to seek a stay of the civil action if the Secretary of State certifies that the United States is engaged in good faith discussions with the defendant state to resolve the claims. The court would be authorized to issue a stay for 180 days, which could be renewed for additional 180-day periods if such negotiations remain ongoing. All current versions of JASTA include a finding by Congress that expresses Whether the SHC was an agency or instrumentality turned on whether it was an "organ" of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The court applied a multi-factor test, derived from a previous Second Circuit decision and from decisions from other circuits, to determine whether the agency was such an 'organ' The test included whether the foreign state created the entity for a national purpose and whether it actively supervises the entity. It also considered whether the entity was not a U.S. citizen or created under the laws of a third country. supervises the entity, (3) whether the foreign state requires the hiring of public employees and pays their salaries, and (4) how the entity is treated under foreign state law. Emphasizing that the Saudi government had formed SHC and paid its employees, the court held that the SHC was an organ, and thus was an agency or instrumentality of the Kingdom. The plaintiffs sued four Saudi princes for actions taken within their official capacities. All four princes held positions of power in the SHc; three of the princes were Saudi princes. held positions of power in the SHC. Three of the princes were members of the country's "Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs" The fourth prince was the SHc's president, in addition to his roles as a provincial governor and crown prince. Although several other federal courts of appeals had ruled on the extension of foreign sovereign immunity to foreign officials, treatment of officials under the FSIA was a question of first impression for the Second Circuit. Raising a number of textual arguments and referencing. instrumentality" is entitled to the same immunity to which the state itself is entitled under the FSIA. The key threshold question was whether the SHC and the princes sued in their official capacities qualified as agencies or instrumentalities. The FSIA defines "agency or instrumentality" as any entity which is (1) a "separate legal person, corporate or otherwise"; (2) "an organ of a foreign state or political subdivision thereof"; and (3) not a U.S. citizen or created under. In r e Terrorist Attacks plaintiffs characterized defendants' charitable contributions to Muslim groups as a form of money laundering. The court rejected this characterization as incompatible with the Supreme Court's interpretation of the commercial activities exception. Under this definition, the appropriate focus in determining whether an action constitutes "commercial activity" is on an action's nature rather than its purpose. With this framework, the court upheld the district court's finding that defendants' "charitable contributions" fell outside the scope of thecommercial activities exception by reason of their non-commercial nature. The appeals court upheld the district court's determination that it lacked personal jurisdiction over the Saudi defendants sued in their personal capacities. York dismissed the claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the SHC, holding the FSIA tort exception does not apply because of the "entire tort" rule. The Supreme Court has described the tort exception as "cover[ing] only torts occurring within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States." Consequently, it is insufficient to overcome immunity United States.entitled to immunity based on the discretionary nature of their actions. The Second Circuit held that none of the FSIA exceptions applied. The fourth set of claims (those brought against princes in their personal capacities) fell outside of the scope of theFSIA. As discussed below, the court dismissed those claims for lack of personal jurisdiction. The court held that the terrorist state exception did not apply because the U.S. State Department has not designated the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as a state sponsor of terrorism. But the court found two other exceptions—the commercial activity and tort exceptions potentially potential. FSIA, namely (1) its interpretation of "agency or instrumentality" under the FSIA as extending both to the Saudi charity and to individuals sued in their official capacities. The Supreme Court later abrogated the first of these holdings. The Second Circuit reversed its own position with respect to the tort exception to foreign sovereign immunity. In December 2013, the Second Circuit ordered these claims against Saudi Arabia and its agencies or instrumentalities be reinstated in the interest of the United States. The case was heard by the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. Some courts have found the discretionary act exclusion inapplicable to tortious acts in the United States that amounted to illegal conduct. A district court in the D.C. Circuit found in Letelier v. Republic of Chile that an assassination occurring on U.S. soil under the direction of a foreign government was not a tortious act. It was the result of a discretionary function and cannot be the basis for overcoming SHC's immunity, the court said. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. under the direction of a foreign government was not a discretionary act within the meaning of the FSIA tort exception, the court said. The decision was "one most assuredly involving policy judgment and decision and thus exempt as a discretionaryAct under section 1605(a)(5)(A), that exception is not applicable to bar this suit," the judge said. "There is no discretion to commit, or to have one's officers or agents commit, an illegal act.... Whatever policy," he said. one's officers or agents commit, an illegal act.... Whatever policy options may exist for a foreign country, it has no "discretion" to perpetrate conduct designed to result in the assassination of an individual or individuals. action that is clearly contrary to the precepts of humanity as recognized in both national and international law. Accordingly there would be no " Discretion" within the meaning of section 1605(a)(5)(A) to order or to aid in an assassination. Were it to be demonstrated that a foreign state has undertaken any such act in this country, that foreign state could not be accorded sovereign immunity. country, that foreign state could not be accorded sovereign immunity … for any tort claims resulting from its conduct. Similarly, the Ninth Circuit has held that the discretionary act exclusion does not apply in the case of a foreign official who, while acting in his home country, orders a killing in the United States. Both of these cases applied the tort exception to injuries in the U.S orchestrated from abroad, suggesting that the "entire tort" rule either is not in use in these appellate circuits or that would include terrorism. The amendment would dispense with the "entire tort" rule and the statutory discretionary act exclusion for such cases only. Under the bill, a plaintiff could seek money damages from a foreign state for physical injury to person or property or death caused by both an act of international terrorism in the U.S. and a tortious act or acts on the part of that foreign state acting on its behalf. The bill would also keep the FSIA non-commercial tort exception intact in other cases. is not in use in these appellate circuits or that it is not to be taken literally. Courts may tend to view direct involvement on the part of a foreign official overseas in tortious activity that takes place on U.S. territory as included in the same tort. indirect contribution by means of lawful conduct could be viewed as at most a separate tort or as a discretionary act. If the appellate court reverses the district court's dismissal of the suit on "entire tort" grounds, the case will likely return to the districtCourt for a determination of the tort. The Supreme Court in 2004 held that the statute does not provide a cause of action for such lawsuits. It permitted courts to give effect to the statute for civil actions arising from the violation of a very narrow class of international norms "defined with a specificity comparable to the features of the 18 th century paradigms" The Second Circuit concluded that the ATS's drafting in 1789 was understood to govern at the time of the case's drafting. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in the case. In Terrorist Attacks III , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit adopted narrow interpretations of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under the FSIA. The court rejected the plaintiffs' complaints based on common law tort theories, holding that they did not demonstrate that the defendants breached any duty of care owed to the plaintiffs. The ruling appears to preclude efforts by September 11 victims and other plaintiffs seeking recovery in U.s. courts against foreign officials and government-controlled entities like the State Department. exception by reason of their non-commercial nature, regardless of the contributions' alleged money laundering purpose. This portion of the decision remains undisturbed. Finally, the court of appeals rejected the tort exception as inapplicable to claims against the Saudi defendants. It emphasized that if the exception were expanded to include all conduct conceivably, it would not apply to the Saudi case. The court was concerned about the effect that an expanded tort exception would have on the other FSIA exceptions. in U.S. courts against foreign officials and government-controlled entities like the Saudi charity. Plaintiffs' efforts to hold non-government financial institutions liable for providing material to terrorist organizations have also seemingly been stymied by the courts' interpretations of the ATA. Several bills have been introduced in Congress that would broaden the FSIA tort exception explicitly to cover terrorist acts that occur within the United States and make other changes that could boost plaintiffs' efforts against some of the world's worst terrorists. if the exception were expanded to include all conduct conceivably characterized as tortious, the tort exception would "vitiate" the terrorist state exception's limitation to designated terrorist states. In a separate case, a later panel of the appellate court disagreed with this aspect of the decision, however, effectively overturning it for the Second Circuit. It is possible that other courts could read the terrorism exception as foreclosing suits against states not designated as sponsors of terrorism. The bills would have expanded liability for foreign government officials in civil actions for terrorist acts no matter where they occur. The House did not vote on either version of the bill. The bills would have amended the tort exception to the FSIA expressly to include "any statutory or common law tort claim arising out of an act of extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, terrorism, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act" The Senate passed the bill in December 2014, but the House didn't vote on it until this month. It's possible that other courts could overturn the Terrorist Attacks III decision. H.R. 3815 would amend the FSIA tort exception in 28 U.S.C. §1605(a)(5) by limiting the type of injury to "physical injury" rather than "personal injury" It would specifically exclude "any claim for emotional distress or derivative injury suffered as a result of an event or injury to another person that occurs outside of the United States" The amendment was introduced late in 2015 and referred to the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitution and Civil Justice. The bills would implement secondary liability in somewhat different ways. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) and S. 2101 (passed by the House) would create secondary liability for conspiracy. The bills would apply to criminal and civil cases, as well as to state and local governments. The legislation would also apply to the District of Columbia, which is home to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, which has jurisdiction over criminal cases in the U.S. and many other states. under the Senate bill to any person who "aids and abets, by knowingly providing substantial assistance, or who conspires" with the perpetrator. The House bill would authorize secondary liability against anyone who aided, abetted, or conspired with the perpetrators. Neither bill would explicitly elucidate whether criminal liability under the material support provisions of the ATA would also establish civil liability, as some courts have some courts. The bill would not clarify what type of intent or knowledge would be necessary to establish liability. versions of JASTA include a finding by Congress that expresses approval in the context of civil liability under the ATA for the test established by the D.C. Circuit for aiding and abetting and conspiracy liability. The test includes the elements: the party whom the defendant aids must perform a wrongful act that causes an injury; the defendant must be generally aware of his role as part of an overall illegal or tortious activity at the time that he provides the assistance; and he must knowingly and substantially assist the principal. The Second Circuit concluded that international terrorism did not meet this standard as of September 11, 2001. Quoting its 2003 opinion in United States v. Yousef , the court stated the following: We regrettably are no closer now ... to an international consensus on the definition of terrorism or even its proscription. The mere existence of the phrase "state-sponsored terrorism" proves the absence of agreement on basic terms among a large number of States that terrorism violates [customary] international law. The court also rejected the plaintiffs' reliance on the Torture Victim Protection Act for a cause of action. The Supreme Court's interpretation of that law provides for a right of action only against natural persons who act under color of foreign law, the court said. "We thus conclude ... that terrorism—unlike piracy, war crimes, and crimes against humanity—does not provide a basis for universal jurisdiction [under customary international law," the court wrote in its ruling. The court said there is strenuous disagreement among States about what actions do or do not constitute terrorism. Plaintiffs brought claims against these defendants under a common-law tort theory as well as the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA), the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), and the Torture Victims' Protection Act (TVPA) U.S. nationals injured in their person, property, or business "by reason of an act of international terrorism" can recover treble damages, plus costs, but does not describe who can be held liable. The plaintiffs in this case alleged that the defendants were liable for knowingly. The case alleged that the defendants were liable for knowingly providing financial support and services to charities that supported Al Qaeda. Citing its recent holding in Rothstein v. UBS AG, the appellate court held that the ATA does not encompass liability on an aiding-and-abetting theory. The Alien Tort Statute provides federal jurisdiction for tort claims brought by non-U.S. citizens seeking damages for injuries caused by the actions of the defendants in this case. The Supreme Court's interpretation of the phrase "by reason of," requires a showing of proximate cause. claim implicates property rights connected with the United States. The exception for designated state sponsors of terrorism provides jurisdiction over cases involving designated "state sponsor[s] of terrorism" in suits involving "personal injury or death that was caused by an act of torture, extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, or the provision of material support or resources" The claim seeks money damages against a designated state sponsor of terrorism for injuries arising from a terrorist act. The claim is made pursuant to an arbitration agreement. hostage taking, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act if such act is engaged in by an official, employee, or agent of such foreign state while acting within the scope of his or her office, employment, or agency. The exception seems to apply only to countries designated by the U.S. Department of State as state sponsors of terrorism. This list currently includes Iran, Sudan, and Syria. At the time suit was brought in the In re Terrorist Attacks litigation, the previous terrorism exception remained in force. their suit against the Saudi government and government-owned charity. This effort also failed on sovereign immunity grounds at the district court. This report explains the legal bases for the dismissals and provides an update to the status of the case. To address some issues involving the interpretation of the FSIA, Congress is considering the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act ( S. 2040 , H.R. 3815 ) This report addresses relevant legislative developments in its final section. The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 2002 is the most significant foreign sovereign immunity law in the U.S. The 111 th Congress held a hearing to consider S. 2930, the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act. The bill would have amended the tort exception to the FSIA specifically to cover terrorist attacks within the United States. In the 112 th Congress, new legislation was introduced to reduce some of the burdens faced by victims of state-sponsored terrorism in the U.S. who seek to bring lawsuits against foreign officials. S. 1894 was ordered to be replaced by S.2930. , the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, was ordered to be reported favorably out of the Senate Judiciary Committee in September 2012. A companion bill, H.R. 5904, did not receive further action. S. 1535 was reported favorably with some amendments to the findings and provisions addressing aiding and abetting liability under the Anti-Terrorism Act, and was passed by the Senate in December 2014. The House did not vote on S.1535 or H. 3143. occur by amending 18 U.S.C. Section 2337, which currently exempts all government officials. H.R. 3143 would have included the provision of material support for terrorism in the jurisdiction provision. The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act (JASTA) has returned to the 114 th Congress as S. 2040. The Senate passed by voice vote on May 17, 2016, after accepting an amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by the House. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) and H.R. 3815 would amend the ATA to provide for secondary liability in the case of an act of international terrorism. Secondary liability would attach under the Senate bill to any person who "aids and assists" a terrorist organization. The House bill would also apply liability to an entity designated as a foreign terrorist organization as a result of the attack that gives rise to the lawsuit. The Senate bill was passed by a vote of 52-36. ATA would also establish civil liability, as some courts have found. Language in the findings section suggest the intent that the knowing or reckless provision of material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization, whether directly or indirectly, should give rise to liability. H.R. 3815 would remove the immunity of foreign officials from lawsuits as currently provided in 18 U.S.C. §2337(2) It would also add a provision to the ATA to address issues plaintiffs have confronted in establishing personal jurisdiction over foreign nationals. S. 2040 would create a new exception to the FSIA for acts of international terrorism that occur on U.S. territory. The discretionary function exclusion would remain unchanged. The bill would include among congressional findings that "no country has the discretion to engage knowingly in the financing or sponsorship of terrorism, whether directly or indirectly" "International terrorism" is defined with reference to the ATA, including the exclusion for "acts of war" The amendment would be codified as 28 U.N.C. §1605B. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) would leave the foreign official out of the case. The district courts shall have personal jurisdiction over any person who commits or aids and abets an act of international terrorism or otherwise sponsors such act or the person who committed such act. The law would apply to acts of internationalterrorism in which any national of the United States suffers injury in his or her person, property, or business by reason of such an act in violation of section 2333.

ROUGE-1: 85.68, ROUGE-2: 77.29, ROUGE-L: 37.22
BERTScore: 62.72

==============================================
==================== [20/100] ====================
Summary:
a system to register HHS employees and certain other volunteers, but it has not completed its effort. Using experience the importance of ensuring comparability of services for all responders. Although NIOSH’s proposal for a project to develop strategies for addressing responder health issues is a step in the right direction, HHS has not developed a department-level plan that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC. In the absence of a department level plan, NIOSH developed a proposal for an initiative to ensure responder safety and health. HHS has not indicated whether its policies and actions following a disaster would apply these lessons, such as by building epidemiologic research into the design of screening and monitoring services. HHS has not described the roles and responsibilities of its components in designing and implementing responder health programs. Until HHS completes this work, responders to a future disaster could be left vulnerable if they experience health problems as a result of carrying out critical response and recovery activities. NRF recommends that the Secretary of HHS take the following action: develop a department-level responder screening plan that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC program. Under the NRF, HHS is the primary agency for coordinating the federal government’s public health and medical response. Under ESF#8, HHS can deploy its public health. and medical personnel, including civilian volunteers, to the affected area. HHS can also assist state, tribal, and local officials in establishing a registry of potentially exposed individuals and conducting long-term. monitoring for potential health effects. HHS’S ASPR coordinates ESf#8 actions. HHS is a cooperating agency with the Department of Labor. related to the Worker Safety and Health Support Annex only if, after a disaster, FEMA issued a mission assignment to OSHA. HHS has not identified which components would be involved in responder health programs, which component would take the lead, and how efforts would be coordinated. In the absence of a department-level plan describing the roles of all relevant HHS agencies, NIOSH developed a proposal in February 2008 for working with some of the relevant HHS components to develop strategies to ensure responder safety and health. for worker safety and health are described in the NRF’s Worker Safety and Health Support Annex. OSHA, in coordination with HHS, is responsible for providing technical assistance, advice, and support for medical surveillance and monitoring and for evaluating the need for longer-term medical monitoring of response and recovery workers. NIOSH would receive funding specifically to carry out activities related to the Worker SafetyandHealth Support Annex only. However, OSHA and NIOSH have established an interagency agreement that broadly describes NIOSH's role in carrying out the Annex. NIOSH partnered with other HHS components, such as ASPR and NIEHS, to develop the proposal. As part of the project, NIOSH officials plan to meet with ATSDR officials about adapting the RRR and other surveillance tools to collect more specific information about a responder’s occupation and exposure. NIOSH has held or is planning meetings with state health department representatives, risk managers with an interest in responder safety and health, and other federal organizations to obtain their perspectives on the project. NIOSH official: Project would help HHS determine how it would respond to an activation of the NRF. One of the objectives of the project would be to produce a guidance document for federal, state, and local governments and private businesses and organizations to assist them in providing services to responders. A second objective is to develop a responder surveillance system to document and integrate data on exposures and health effects to identify ways to ensure responder safety and health, the official said. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. Section 709 of the Security and Accountability for Every Port Act of 2006 (also known as the SAFE Port Act) provides that the President, acting through HHS, may establish and implement a program to provide screening and monitoring services for certain individuals affected by a presidentially declared disaster. The act specifies that such a program may include collecting exposure data, developing and disseminating information and educational materials, performing baseline and follow-up follow-ups. These personnel include members of the National Disaster Medical System (NDMS) HHS’s ATSDR has developed and tested a Rapid Response Registry (RRR) survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt. The RRR survey instrument, a two-page form that can be distributed in paper or electronic format, is designed to collect information that would enable officials to inform individuals about follow-up health services and facilitate research studies. It contains 38 questions that are intended to collect basic demographic and health information, including contact information; exposure; and contact information. As of February 2008, 21 states had included the RRR survey in their disaster planning. NIOSH has also taken some steps that relate to the registering of responders. In 2005, NIOSH posted interim guidance on its Web site to help occupational health and other clinicians conduct postexposure medical screening of workers leaving hurricane disaster recovery areas. The data would be collected and maintained by state or local entities with ATSDR’s and RTI’S assistance. The instrument has been shared with other federal agencies, all state health departments, and local response organizations. who their employer was or where they reside. HHS has taken steps to ensure that responders are registered, but it has not developed a department-level plan for responder health programs. ATSDR has developed a survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt to register responders. ASPR is also taking steps to establish a system to register HHS employees and certain other volunteers, the agency says. The agency says it is working with HHS to develop a plan for responding to natural disasters in the U.S. ATSDR established a contract with Research Triangle Institute International (RTI) in October 2005. RTI’s responsibilities include providing information to the entire at-risk population on how to enroll in the RRR. RTi is also responsible for identifying individuals who left the disaster area before being enrolled. According to an ATSDR official, data would be collected and maintained. The RRR survey instrument would be used during responses to disasters. It would collect basic demographic and health information, including contact information and exposure information. medical screening of workers leaving hurricane disaster recovery areas. The guidance outlines minimum screening information needs, including contact information, health status information, type of response work, exposure information, and injuries or symptoms. ASPR is required under the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act to register federal public health and medical personnel who are deployed under the Secretary of HHS’s authority. It has not completed efforts to ensure that federal health, medical, and other personnel are registered under the Act. their employer or geographic location. HHS provided additional information about ASPR’s responsibilities and activities under the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, which we incorporated as appropriate. HHS did not comment on our recommendation that HHS develop a department-level responder screening and monitoring plan, but acknowledged that any overall HHS plan should include guidance on treatment referral processes and methods to ensure comparable treatment services across all responder groups. For example, HHS discussed ASPR's establishment of the Center. 26, 2006, ASPR was the administrator. In addition to the contact named above, Helene F. Toiv, Assistant Director; George Bogart; Hernan Bozzolo; Frederick Caison; Anne Dievler; and Roseanne Price made key contributions to this report. September 11: Improvements Still Needed in Availability of Health Screening and Monitoring Services for Responders outside the New York City Area. GAO-08-429T. Washington, D.C.: January 22, 2008. HHS’s authority, it has not completed efforts to ensure that these responders would be registered in the event of an emergency or a disaster. As part of its efforts, ASPR recently established the Center for Responder Safety, Health, and Risk Management. The Center is working to develop a system to register responders and record their health problems and make referrals. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for registering responders in an emergency. The agency is exploring how to adapt two existing electronic record systems used by NDMS. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. HHS also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact us at [email protected] or call (844) 615-3800. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114 or bascettac@gao.gov. In addition to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) all responders, excluding FDNY firefighters and emergency medical service technicians and current federal employees. In December 2004, DHS issued the National Response Plan (NRP), which detailed missions, policies, structures, and responsibilities of federal agencies. The NRP was to be invoked when the President issued a major disaster or emergency declaration under the Stafford Act. The NRF is intended to provide resource and programmatic support to states, localities, and other entities. It was first invoked in August 2005 in response to Hurricane Katrina and was subsequently updated in May 2006. In January 2008, DHSissued the NRF to supersede the NRP. The NRF is intended to provide a coordinated approach to disaster and emergency response and short-term recovery. FEMA is responsible for assigning work and providing funding to other federal agencies for performing operations included in the NRF. To execute this responsibility, FEMA uses mission assignments, which are interagency agreements. When a disaster or emergency is declared under the authority of the Stafford Act and FEMA issues a mission assignment, a federal agency has 60 days after the declaration to complete tasks described in the mission.to supersede the NRP. of Health Screening and Monitoring for All Responders. GAO-07-892. Washington, D.C.: July 23, 2007. September 11: HHS Has Screened Additional Federal Responders for World Trade Center Health Effects, but Plans for Awarding Funds for Treatment Are Incomplete. September 10: Health Effects in the Aftermath of the World Trade 11: Health effects in the aftermath of. the World trade Center Attack. September 8: September 8, 2004: September 9: September 10, 2004. HHS’s disaster response and recovery activities operate within an administrative and legal framework. FEMA, the federal agency responsible for coordinating federal disaster response efforts, collaborates with HHS on health issues related to disasters. Following the attack on the WTC, the Congress appropriated approximately $8.8 not continuously available for all responders. In addition, some of the screening and monitoring programs initially faced difficulties referring responders for treatment. Throughout the history of these programs, program officials have raised concerns about whether the duration of federal funding would be adequate. The Congress appropriated approximately $8.8 billion to FEMA, over several years, for response and recovery activities. FEMA entered into interagency agreements with HHS agencies, such as NIOSH, ASPR, and ATSDR, to distribute funding to government and private organizations to implement health screening and monitoring programs for responders and other affected groups. In fiscal year 2006, the Congress appropriated $75 million to CDC that was available for monitoring and treatment services for certain WTC responders. The Congress made additional appropriations to CDC available for the same purpose in fiscal years 2007 and 2008. Mental health effects among responders and other affected individuals included symptoms associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and anxiety. Behavioral health effects such as increased alcohol and tobacco use were also reported. The Mount Sinai School of Medicine clinical center of the NY/NJ WTC Consortium found that about half of the participants in its screening program met the threshold criteria for being referred for a clinical mental health evaluation. Some of them did not have training in disaster response and were therefore more vulnerable to the stress of the event. lack of previously tested, scientifically based protocols for conducting physical and mental health screening, making it difficult to obtain conclusive data. One clinician noted that the mental health protocol used by the NY/NJ WTC Consortium focused on delivering good clinical services but that there was not enough emphasis on making the protocol scientifically sound for drawing definitive conclusions. Officials involved in the WTC health programs and other experts have learned that screening and monitoring programs need to be able to scientifically document the health effects of the disaster on responders. mild depression might prevent a major depressive disorder from developing. Treating depression might also prevent alcoholism. Including a treatment referral process in screening and monitoring programs could improve the ability of responders to gain access to needed treatment. Before federal funding became available in fiscal year 2006 to pay for treatment of responders’ health effects, WTC health program officials told us that it was a challenge to find providers who would treat responders whose screening or monitoring examination indicated a need for treatment. As clinicians at the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium began screening responders, thorough physical health assessment. The mental health status of responders was initially assessed with a short written questionnaire, and depending on a person’s score, individuals were referred for an in-person clinical mental health evaluation. Recognizing the seriousness of mental health problems among responders, the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Department of Psychiatry sought private funding from the Robin Hood Foundation to develop a broader mental health component to the screening program. With the additional funds, the program was able to develop and use a more extensive mental health questionnaire and have a trained mental health professional conduct in-Person interviews. have a trained mental health professional conduct in-person interviews. Screening and monitoring programs that integrate physical and mental health assessments can have several benefits. For example, gastrointestinal problems can sometimes be a sign of psychological stress. Timely mental health screening and monitoring can also prevent some mental health conditions from progressing to more serious disorders. obtaining treatment for mild depression might prevent a major depressive disorder from developing, for example, in the first place. For more information, visit the National Institute of Mental Health's website. monitoring programs need to be able to scientifically document the health effects of a disaster. In 2007, NIOSH officials identified a need for additional funding to allow the monitoring programs to continue. In addition, conducting scientific research of health effects can help public health officials determine whether long-term monitoring is needed. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Corps of Engineers, to obtain their perspectives on the project. HHS said that it was possible to infer from our draft report that long-term monitoring and treatment, including referral for treatment, are appropriate each time a Stafford Act declaration occurs. However, our discussions of the lessons on the importance of registering responders and of designing responder health programs to foster epidemiological research noted that implementing these lessons would help public health officials determine whether a specific disaster resulted in health effects. HHS also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as well. The WTC screening and monitoring programs were not explicitly designed and implemented to conduct research, in particular epidemiologic research. NIOSH officials told us that the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium were not designed to conduct epidemiology research. Designing and implementing screening and. monitoring programs that foster the ability to conduct Epidemiologic. research could improve the understanding of health effects experienced by responders, the authors say. They say there remains some uncertainty and controversy about the health risks associated with the disaster. total population of responders. The WTC health programs have had to rely on participants’ recollection of their exposure. Most of the federally funded WTC health. programs were not started immediately, but rather months after the disaster, which. affected the ability of participants to remember their exposures accurately. For example, WTC Health Registry officials have been unable to determine the relationship between level of exposure and changes in physical. and mental health. It has been difficult to determine. the relationshipBetween level of Exposure and Changes in Physical and Mental Health. Responders to the WTC disaster were at high risk for mental health problems. Many workers and volunteers worked for extended periods of time without sufficient respite. Providing timely mental health screening and monitoring that is integrated with physical health screening could improve the ability to accurately diagnose physical and mental health conditions and prevent more serious mental health issues from developing. There is a need for additional funding to allow the monitoring programs to conduct research and answer important scientific questions about the health of WTC responders. Some of them did programs are designed to foster epidemiologic research. WTC Health Registry officials told us they did not begin surveying responders until 2 years after the WTC disaster. Registering responders during a response to a disaster would help ensure that responders are contacted before some scatter and become more difficult to locate. Having a complete registry could improve the ability of responder health programs to conduct outreach for screening and monitoring services, improve efforts to plan services and allocate resources, and provide data for epidemiologic research. For more information on the WTC Health Registry, visit www.wchealthregistry.org. NIOSH’s project would address some aspects of the lessons from the WTC health programs. For example, regarding the first lesson, register all responders during the response to a disaster. The proposed guidance document would include guidelines for tracking responders during an event, including their activities, exposures, and physical and mental health effects. In addition, the project’S objective to develop a responder surveillance system acknowledges aspects of a second lesson: screening and monitoring programs are designed to foster epidemiologic research.  Screening and monitoring programs for responders to the WTC disaster were set up as separate programs on the basis of the responder’s employer and geographic location. CDC issued a request for organizations to indicate their interest in coordinating a national program for WTC responders. In the event of a future disaster, providing comparable services to all responders would ensure more equitable access to services. This could help prevent future disasters. The program would ensure that all WTC responders who reside outside the NYC metropolitan area have access to federally funded screening, monitoring, and treatment services. HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program provides screening services to federal responders nationwide through its network of FOH clinics. The FDNY WTC Program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium primarily serve, respectively, firefighters and other workers and volunteers who reside in the NYC area or travel to that area for services. Table 1 provides information on the numbers of responders who have received various health services. NIOSH is the HHS administering the WTC health programs and problems with their implementation have been noted. WTC health programs have recognized the value of designing responder health programs that provide comparable services to all responders. NIOSH took steps to increase the availability of services to nonfederal responders outside the NYC metropolitan area. In June 2007 it arranged for QTC Management, Inc., to provide screening and monitoring examinations nationwide for 1 year. In March NIOSH hired a company to provide screenings and monitoring for non-NYC responders outside of the NYC area for one year. The company was based in New York City but has since moved to Washington, D.C. an ethical obligation to be able to refer people in need of care to treatment services. Making comparable services available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location could ensure more equitable access to services. Screening and monitoring programs for responders could help ensure that data collected about responders’ health are consistent and comprehensive. A working group of agency officials and other experts examining responder mental health issues concluded that providers who identified a need for treatment during screening examinations acquired a responsibility to provide access to care. WTC health programs provide voluntary health screening, monitoring, or treatment services to responders at no cost. Federal funds appropriated or awarded for the WTC health programs from October 2001 through December 2007 have totaled about $369.2 million. Unlike the other key programs, the WTC Health Registry does not provide in-person screening or monitoring services. Instead it uses periodic surveys of self-reported health status to collect health information on responders, as well as people who resided, worked, attended school, or were in the vicinity of the WTC. and disseminating information and educational materials, performing baseline and follow-up clinical and mental health evaluations, establishing and maintaining an exposure registry. The act also authorizes the President, acting through HHS, to establish cooperative agreements with a medical institution, including a local health department or a consortium of medical institutions. We have identified five important lessons from the experience of the WTC health programs. These lessons relate to the need to improve the quality of health care in the U.S. and around the world. HHS officials, clinicians involved with the WTC health programs, and other experts said that an integral part of screening and monitoring is the establishment of a linkage to treatment services. Some indicated that as professionals they also felt an ethical obligation to be able to refer people in. Case study: WTC responders who carried out cleanup services after the WTC attack often did not have health insurance, according to a labor official. Case case: WTC workers who were construction workers often lost their health insurance when they became too ill to work the number of days required for coverage. neither NYC nor the federal government developed a registry of all responders who worked at the WTC disaster site. WTC health program officials subsequently had to compile a list of responders who were potentially eligible to receive services. According to an ATSDR official, some government agencies and many employers did not cooperate with program officials, primarily because of concerns about confidentiality. Not registering responders during disaster response efforts affects outreach activities and hinders efforts to plan services. An official from the NY/NJ WTC Consortium said that without a definitive list ofresponders, the program had to issue widespread and costly public service announcements to identify and enroll eligible responders. service announcements to identify and enroll eligible responders. The lack of a complete registry with demographic and exposure information also made it difficult to quantify the needs for screening, monitoring, and treatment services for responders. Without acomplete registry of responders, it is difficult to accurately determine the incidence and causes of health problems experienced by the responder population. The number of responders who were exposed is not known. The WTC health programs have been able to collect information only on responders who seek out their services or fill out their surveys. Because these responders constitute a self-selected population, program officials have not been able. to determine incidence of health effects among the total population. status information on this population. In addition, in our discussions with clinicians and researchers affiliated with the NY/NJ WTC Consortium, they raised concerns such as the program lacking sufficient in-house experience for conducting research. For example, it did not have an adequate electronic medical records system. Information collected by the program had to go through a protracted data cleaning process before it could be analyzed. WTC health program officials and others also noted that there was a lack of previously tested, scientifically based protocols for conducting physical tests. NIOSH is the HHS administering agency for all the WTC health programs, except the WTC Health Registry. In February 2006 the Secretary of HHS designated the Director of NIOSH to take the lead in ensuring that the WTC's health programs are well coordinated. Information collected by the WTC programs and other researchers has helped to identify the physical and mental health effects of the WTC disaster. Physical health effects included injuries and respiratory conditions, such as sinusitis, asthma, and a new syndrome called WTC cough. WTC cough consists of persistent coughing accompanied by severe respiratory symptoms. Almost all firefighters who responded to the attack experienced respiratory effects, including WTC cough. One study found that exposed firefighters on average experienced a decline in lung function equivalent to that which would be produced by 12 years of aging. A study conducted by WTC Health Registry researchers found that responders’ risk of newly diagnosed asthma increased with greater exposure to the WTC disaster site, as indicated by arriving at the site at an earlier date or working there. NY/NJ WTC Consortium relied on other resources to conduct research, and the programs vary in the type and amount of studies they have published. Many of the studies have been descriptive, such as reports of the incidence of upper and lower respiratory symptoms among responders. Although the FDNY WTC program was able to refer firefighters to its Bureau of Health Services, which provided treatment, the NY/ NJ WTC Consortium did not have a similar option. For example, according to a labor official, responders who lacked health insurance were often the case. effects or to compare participants’ health with the health of a comparison group. FEMA placed restrictions on the funding for the programs. FEMA primarily provides funding for programs to address the short-term effects of a disaster. HHS’s Federal Responder Screening Program also was not designed to collect any information on responders’ Health after a disaster, an HHS official said. The National Institutes of Health says it did not design and implement FDNY and Consortium monitoring programs to conduct research because of FEMA restrictions. was not designed to collect any information on responders’ health for the purposes of research. The interagency agreement between FEMA and ASPR to establish the program limited the program to a onetime screening examination. HHS officials said they did not have the resources to conduct epidemiologic research with the federal responder population. Because of the restrictions on the use of federal funding for research, the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium relied on other resources toconduct research. In hindsight, such research clearly would have provided useful data and benefited the program.

ROUGE-1: 79.88, ROUGE-2: 72.40, ROUGE-L: 24.15
BERTScore: 61.63

==============================================
==================== [21/100] ====================
Summary:
Almost a third of DHS’s major investments received funding without having validated mission needs and requirements. Without validated requirements, life-cycle cost estimates, and regular portfolio reviews, DHS cannot ensure that its investment decisions are appropriate and will ultimately address capability gaps. 15 of the 57 DHS major investments we reviewed were designated by the Office of Management and Budget as poorly planned and by DHS as poorly performing. Among other things, we recommended that DHS reinstate the Joint Requirements Council or establish another departmental joint requirements oversight board. In fiscal year 2015 alone, DHS planned to spend approximately $7.2 billion on these acquisition programs. DHS and its underlying components are acquiring systems to help secure the border, increase marine safety, screen travelers, enhance cyber security, improve disaster response, and execute a wide variety of other operations. Each of DHS’s major acquisition programs generally costs $300 million or more and spans multiple years. The department expects it will ultimately invest more than $180 billion in them. To help, visit www.dhs.gov. gain insight into the magnitude of the cost growth for 16 of 77 programs we reviewed, but we found that their aggregate cost estimates had increased by 166 percent. Nearly all of the DHS program managers we surveyed in 2012 reported their programs had experienced significant challenges. Sixty-eight of the 71 respondents reported they experienced funding instability, faced workforce shortfalls, or their planned capabilities changed after initiation. The department is to be commended for the efforts its leadership has taken to address the acquisition management shortcomings we have identified. of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to achieve the actions and outcomes, but did not identify sufficient resources for the 4 remaining initiatives. In September 2012 we also found that DHS had not consistently met the policy’s requirements. In 2012, most major programs lacked reliable cost estimates, realistic schedules, and agreed-upon baseline objectives. In our 2015 report, we concluded that DHS needs to continue to of the policy. However, in September 2012, DHS had only verified that 4 of 66 programs documented all of the critical knowledge the policy requires. Costs) of 10 percent or greater, including five programs that faced gaps of 30 percent or more. Inconsistencies in how components were implementing the department’s acquisition management policy. Funding plans for Coast Guard programs continued to be incomplete, in that they did not account for all of the operations and maintenance funding the Coast Guard planned to allocate to its major acquisition programs. These gaps in information reduce the value of the funding plans presented to Congress and obscure the affordability of Coast Guard acquisition Programs. and constrain IT acquisitions and obtained a clean opinion on its financial statements for 2 consecutive years, fiscal years 2013 and 2014. DHS did not have modernized financial management systems, which affected its ability to have ready access to reliable information for informed decision making. addressing these and other management challenges will be a significant undertaking that will likely require several years, but will be critical for the department to mitigate the risks that management management poses to the agency's missions. The department has taken actions to address these challenges but they persist, as discussed in more detail below. each management function (acquisition, IT, financial, and human capital) as well as management integration. One of the outcomes focusing on acquisition management is validating required acquisition documents in accordance with a department-approved, knowledge-based acquisition process. Another outcome focusing on financial management include sustaining clean audit opinions for at least 2 consecutive years on department-wide financial statements and internal controls. We found in our 2015 report that DHS had made important progress across all of its management functions and significant progress in the area ofmanagement integration. DHS has identified a 30-percent gap between the 5-year funding needed for its major acquisitions and the actual resources expected to be available. To address these issues, we have, among other things, recommended that DHS assess program-specific affordability tradeoffs at all acquisition review meetings. DHS concurred with these recommendations and is taking actions to implement them. To ensure that recent efforts are sustained, the department must continue to implement its sound acquisition policy consistently and effectively across all components, the report says. In November 2008, we found that billions invested in major acquisition programs continued to lack appropriate oversight. Of DHS’s 48 major programs requiring milestone and annual reviews, 45 were not assessed in accordance with this policy. At least 14 of these programs had reported cost growth, schedule slips, or performance shortfalls. We found that poor implementation was largely the result of DHS's failure to ensure that the department's major acquisition decision-making bodies effectively carried out their oversight responsibilities and had the resources to do so. We found that DHS remained a collection of disparate organizations, many of which were performing functions with insufficient oversight. We concluded that unless DHS’s top leaders addressed these challenges, the department was at risk of continuing to exist with a fragmented acquisition organization that provided stopgap. The department is to be commended for the efforts its has taken to improve oversight of its major acquisition programs and to implement its 2008 acquisition policy more consistently. Many of DHS's recent actions correspond to the high risk outcomes, as shown in the table 4. $300 million or more and spans multiple years. DHS has established an acquisition management policy that we found in September 2012 to be generally sound. However, we also have found that DHS has lacked discipline in managing its programs according to this policy. These challenges can contribute to poor acquisition outcomes, such as cost increases or the risk of end users receiving technologies that do not meet the department’s requirements. In September 2012 we found that these documents reflect many key program management practices that could help mitigate program risks. We have made 64 recommendations to DHS on acquisition management issues; 42 of which have been implemented. DHS has fully addressed one outcome, mostly addressed two outcomes, partially addressed one outcomes, and initiated efforts to address the final outcome. Outcome 1: Validate required acquisition documents in a timely manner (mostly addressed); Outcome 2: Validates required acquisition Documents in a Timely manner (mainly addressed) Outcome 3: Validated required acquisitionDocuments in a time-sensitive manner (partially addressed) As of March 2016, DHS has partially addressed 9 and initiated 4 of the actions and outcomes. DHS has fully addressed 1 of the 5 acquisition management outcomes, mostly addressed 2 outcomes, partially addressed 1 outcome, and initiated actions to address the remaining outcome. The department has taken a number of steps to improve the maturity of its system acquisition management practices. It has also mostly addressed an additional 7 actions and. outcomes, meaning that a small amount of work remains to fully address. them. The agency has also taken steps to modernize the department’s financial management systems. it can implement and sustain its corrective actions; closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective action; and make midcourse adjustments as needed. We will continue to monitor DHS’s efforts in this high-risk area to determine if the actions and outcomes are achieved and sustained over the long term. Each year, DHS invests billions of dollars in its major acquisition programs. The agency has not yet addressed the 20 actions and outcome it has not fully addressed and demonstrate that systems, personnel, and policies are in place to ensure that results can be sustained. DHS has taken a number of actions to fully address establishing effective component-level acquisition capability. DHS has also continued to make progress addressing the outcome on validating required acquisition documents in a timely manner. We will continue to assess DHS’s progress on this outcome. In March 2005, we reported that a lack of clear accountability was hampering DHS”s efforts to integrate the acquisition functions of its numerous organizations into an effective whole. In addition, DHS has conducted acquisition Documents in a. timely manner (mostly addressed) DHS has conducted staffing analysis reports that quantify gaps in acquisition personnel by position. DHS must develop and implement a plan for filling key vacant positions identified through the reports. DHS should continue to improve its acquisition program management by effectively using the Joint Requirements Council, which it reinstated in June 2014. DHS has fully addressed 3 of 3 of IT management’s issues. It is working to address the remaining two issues, including IT management and IT modernization, by the end of the year. The agency is also working to identify and eliminate any unintended redundancies. components. We continue to track DHS’s progress through ongoing reviews of the Joint Requirements Council, non-major program acquisitions, and our annual assessment of major acquisition programs, in addition to our high risk updates. We would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time. For further information about this testimony, please contact Rebecca Gambler at (202) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov or Michele Mackin at ( 202)-512-4841 or mackinm@gaO.gov. Homeland Security: Oversight of Neglected Human Resources Information Technology Investment Is Needed. Immigration Benefits System: Better Informed Decision Making Needed on Transformation Program. Homeland Security Acquisitions: Major Program Assessments Reveal Actions Needed to Improve Accountability. Department of Homeland Security: Progress Made; Significant Work Remains in Addressing High-Risk Areas. DHS Training: Improved Documentation, Resource Tracking, and Performance Measurement Could Strengthen Efforts. The report is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection. our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Larry Crosland, Jennifer Kamara, James Kernen, Emily Kuhn, Elizabeth Luke, Valerie Freeman, David Lysy, Taylor Matheson, Shannin O’Neill, Lindsay Taylor, Nathan Tranquilli, Katherine Trimble, and Shaunyce Wallace. Key contributors for the previous work that this testimony is based on are listed in each product. reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. DHS’s efforts to strengthen and integrate its management functions have resulted in progress addressing our criteria for removal from the high-risk list. We found in our 2015 report and have observed over the last year that the Secretary and Deputy Secretary have increased their leadership commitment. DHS subsequently met an additional criterion—establishing a framework for monitoring progress—and therefore as of March 2016, has met three criteria and partially met the remaining two criteria, as shown in table 1. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has been removed from the list of countries that pose a threat to national security. 2015 report, we concluded that DHS needs to continue to identify resources for the remaining initiatives; work to mitigate shortfalls and prioritize initiatives, as needed. In its January 2016 strategy update, DHS stated that the department had addressed capacity shortcomings it previously identified and self-assesses the capacity criterion as fully met. We are analyzing DHS’s capacity to resolve risks as part of our ongoing assessment of the department's progress in addressing the Strengthening DHS Management Functions high-risk area and will report on our findings in our 2017 high- risk update. processes through strengthened departmental structures and increased capability. Action its Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management and show measurable, sustainable progress in implementing its key management initiatives and corrective actions and achieving outcomes. It will be important for DHS to maintain its current level of top leadership support and sustained commitment to ensure continued progress in executing its corrective actions through completion; continue to implement its plan for addressing this high-risk area and periodically report its progress to us and Congress. identify and work to mitigate any resource gaps and prioritize initiatives as needed. progress in successfully executing its corrective actions through completion. Action plan (met). We found that DHS has established a plan for addressing this high-risk area. Key to addressing the department’s management challenges is DHS demonstrating the ability to achieve sustained progress across the 30 actions and outcomes we identified and DHS agreed were needed to address the high- risk area. Achieving sustained progress requires leadership commitment, effective corrective action planning, adequate capacity (that is, the people and other resources), and monitoring the effectiveness of supporting initiatives. over the last year that the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security, the Under Secretary for Management at DHS, and other senior officials have continued to demonstrate exemplary commitment. They have taken actions to institutionalize this commitment to help ensure the long-term success of the department’s efforts. For example, in April 2014, the Secretary of DHS issued a memorandum entitled Strengthening Departmental Unity of Effort, committing to, among other things, improving DHS's planning, programming, budgeting, and execution processes. estimated completion dates for implementing each of them. Management integration. DHS has sustained its progress in fully addressing 3 of 4 outcomes we identified and they agreed are key to the department’s management integration efforts. These priorities include strengthening resource allocation and reporting ability and developing and deploying secure technology solutions. However, given that these management integration initiatives are in the early stages of implementation, it is too early to assess their impact. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that in the coming years, DHS needs to continue implementing its Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management and show measurable results. DHS issued its initial Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management in January 2011. The integrated strategy includes key management initiatives and related corrective actions plans for addressing DHS’s management challenges and the actions and outcomes we identified. In our 2015 report we found that DHS established a framework for monitoring its progress in implementing the integrated strategy it identified for addressing the 30actions and outcomes. However, we found DHS could strengthen its financial management monitoring efforts and financial systems modernization efforts in its 2017 high-risk update. In the June 2012 update, DHS included, for the first time, performance measures to track its progress. and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective actions and make midcourse adjustments, as needed. Demonstrated progress (partially met) DHS had made important progress in several areas to fully address 9 actions and outcomes, 5 of which it had sustained as fully implemented for at least 2 years. For instance, DHS fully met 1 outcome for the first time by obtaining a clean opinion on its financial statements for 2 consecutive years. DHS fully addressed another outcome as a result of actions it has taken to improve the maturity of its system. integration outcome—to implement actions and outcomes in each management area to develop consistent or consolidated processes and systems within and across its management functional areas. According to DHS’s January 2016 update, DHS reported that in August 2015 the Under Secretary for Management identified four integrated priority areas to bring focus to strengthening integration among the department's management functions. For example, the April 2014 Strengthening Departmental Unity of Effort memorandum highlighted a number of initiatives designed to allow the department to operate in a more integrated fashion. that DHS could strengthen its financial management monitoring efforts. DHS had not yet entered into a contract for independent verification and validation services in connection with its efforts to establish this program. Effective implementation of these modernization projects is important because, until they are complete, the department’s current systems will not effectively support financial management operations. As we concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe, moving forward, DHS will need to closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective measures. We currently assess DHS to have met the framework to monitor progress criterion. Information security remains a major management challenge for the department. DHS has fully addressed 2 financial management outcomes, partially addressed 3, and initiated 3. Most notably, DHS received a clean audit opinion on its financial statements for 3 consecutive years, fiscal years 2013, 2014, and 2015, fully addressing 2 outcomes. However, the remaining material weaknesses reported by DHS auditors continue to hamper DHS’s ability to improve its financial management. The department has made progress in remediating findings from the previous year. its human resource environment, which with respect to learning management, included limitations resulting from nine disparate learning management systems that did not exchange information. DHS established the Performance and Learning Management System (PALMS) program to provide a system that will consolidate DHS’s nine existinglearning management systems into one system. However, in our February 2016 report we found that selected PALMS capabilities had been deployed to headquarters and two components, but full implementation at four components was not planned. We further found that DHS did not fully implement effective acquisition management practices. DHS has made progress on its human capital strategic plan. However, the agency has a long way to go to improve employee morale. DHS ranked last among 37 large federal agencies in all four dimensions of the survey’s survey's survey's data. It has actions under way to identify current and future human capital needs, an outcome it mostly addressed since our 2015 report due to progress implementing its Workforce Planning Model. It also has work to do to improve the morale of federal employees. large federal agencies in all four dimensions of the survey’s index for human capital accountability and assessment. DHS has developed plans for addressing its employee satisfaction problems. DHS needs to continue to improve its root-cause analysis efforts related to these plans, the authors say. The agency has also developed and implemented mechanisms to assess training programs but could take additional actions, they say. For example, in September the agency implemented a new training program for its employees that included more on-the-job training. programs but could take additional actions. In February 2016, we reported that DHS had initiated the Human Resources Information Technology (HRIT) investment in 2003 to address issues presented by its human resource environment. With respect to learning management, we found that the five DHS components in our review all had documented processes to evaluate their training programs. However, to fully achieve this outcome, DHS also needs to, among other things, issue department-wide policies on training and development and strengthen its learning management capabilities. on IT human capital management. In October 2014, DHS identified that it had resources needed to implement 7 of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to implement. The agency is working to modernize the U.S. Coast Guard’s financial management system and implementing an IT humanCapital strategic plan. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that DHS's strategy and approach to continuously refining actionable steps to implementing the outcomes, if implemented effectively and sustained, should provide a path for DHS to be removed from our high risk list. DHS has fully addressed 3 of the 6 IT management outcomes, mostly addressed another 2, and partially addressed the remaining 1. The department has also made progress in implementing its IT Strategic Human Capital Plan for fiscal years 2010 through 2012. However, in January 2015 DHS shifted its IT.capability goals to focus more on human resources rather than IT. The agency has also finalized a directive to establish its tiered governance and portfolio management structure for overseeing and managing its IT investments, and annually reviews each of its portfolios and the associated investments. reported by DHS auditors continue to hamper DHS’s ability to establish effective internal control over financial reporting and comply with financial management system requirements. DHS continues to make progress on three multi-year projects to modernize selected components’ financial management systems. According to its January 2016 strategy update, DHS has made the most progress on its U.S. Coast Guard modernization project; whereas additional planning and discovery efforts need to be completed on its projects tomodernize Federal Emergency Management Agency and Immigration and Customs Enforcement systems. will be in a position to implement modernized solutions for these components and their customers. Without sound controls and systems, DHS faces long-term challenges in sustaining a clean audit opinion on its financial statements. DHS has fully addressed 1 human capital management outcome, mostly addressed 3, and partially addressed the remaining 3. For example, the Secretary of Homeland Security signed a bill to improve the ability of the federal government to monitor and respond to terrorist threats. The bill was passed by the Senate Homeland Security Committee and signed into law by the President. through 2012. In January 2015 DHS shifted its IT paradigm from acquiring assets to acquiring services, and acting as a service broker. According to DHS officials in May 2015, this paradigm change will require a major transition in the skill sets of DHS’s IT workforce. As such, this effort will need to be closely managed in order to succeed. Additionally, we found that DHS continues to take steps to improve the quality of its IT services and IT support to the Department of Homeland Security and the general public.

ROUGE-1: 75.18, ROUGE-2: 67.40, ROUGE-L: 22.72
BERTScore: 59.62

==============================================
==================== [22/100] ====================
Summary:
in the Department of Defense's "Web and Internet-Based Capabilities (IBC) Policies. The National Guard Bureau does not use disaster specific web pages and does not respond to individual requests for assistance. In addition to flood control and improving and maintaining navigable channels, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) provides emergency response activities through more social media channels. The U.N. National Guard uses response-specific analytics to help make data-driven decisions with respect to future applications of social media for emergencies. USACE social media platforms include Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Youtube, and Pinterest among others. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers synchronizes outgoing information across the platforms and coordinates with other federal agencies such as FEMA and NWS. In general, the Emergency Operations Center and the Joint Field Office for each incident have external affairs personnel with USACE. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. At the start of FY2015, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers began collecting Facebook usage data. USACE does not use incident-specific web pages or respond to individual requests. The text box at right provides composite data and results for FY2015. It is not specific to disaster or emergency related posts. The NWS is a component of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the Department of Commerce. It provides weather, water, and climate data, along with forecasts and warnings for the protection of life and property. National Guard personnel who are activated under Title 32 remain under state control, but pay and benefits are provided by the federal government. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) is a joint activity of the Department of Defense and serves as the channel of communications between the Departments of the Army and Air Force and the states on all matters pertaining to the National Guard. NGB operates its social media efforts out of its public affairs office to educate and inform the public about National Guard preparedness and response efforts. NGB uses social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Instagram, and YouTube. The National Guard Bureau also monitors social media for situational awareness, and rumor control. Policy guidance for the NGB's use of social media is outlined in the Department of Defense's "Web and Internet-Based Capabilities (IBC) The NGB also uses internal pages to conduct internal communications. For example, uploaded images of damages posted by social media users are circulated internally to help understand the extent of damages caused by an incident. The National Guard is both a state and federal organization. It is simultaneously the organized militia of a state or territory and a reserve component of the Army and the Air Force. Due to its size (over 450,000 individuals), trained personnel, and available equipment, it is frequently used for emergency response. Normally, the National Guard does not use social media during an emergency. During an emergency, social media information is coordinated through CDC's Joint Information Center (JIC) to ensure all platforms provide consistent information. The National Guard operates in a state status, under the control of state and territorial governors. In this state capacity, National Guard personnel are not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act. Under certain conditions, the National Guard can also be activated to respond to emergencies and disasters under Title 32 of the U.S. Code. Guard personnel who are activated under Title. 32 can perform law enforcement functions. The National Guard is frequently used for emergency response, and has a wide range of equipment. HHS uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook and Twitter. Social media plays an integral role in HHS's National Health and Security Strategy. Each subentity of HHS contains working groups with separate social media efforts that focus on their particular organizational mission and goals. The working group monitors social media to dispel rumors, obtain situational awareness, and answer questions about preparedness and public health issues. HHS also provides health information through social media during incidents and directs people to health resources through web links and hashtags. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) works with states and localities to detect, investigate, and prevent disease and injury. CDC responds and supports state and local efforts to save lives and reduce suffering when a disaster occurs. HHS does not respond to immediate requests for assistance. The working group also coordinates information with other organizations with preparedness and response responsibilities. CDC also helps to monitor the effect of environmental conditions on health, and to study illness and injury in the workplace. The group also helps with public health issues. Emergency alerts used at the federal level include the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Personal Localized Alerting Network known as "PLAN" Implemented in 2011, PLAN expands the emergency alert system notifications sent over TV and radio to include mobile and smart phones. PLAN sends geographically targeted alerts through cell towers in the form of text-like messages to the cell phones of people who have requested to be notified in the event of an emergency. It also includes searchable hashtags and links to more information on the agency's website. Wireless Emergency Alerts or WEA), radio and television (using the Emergency Alert System), and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) weather radios. In addition, the NWS can send weather alerts, and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children can send AMBER alerts over IPAWS. For example an estimated 3.5 million tweets with the hashtag #sandy were generated in 24 hours during Hurricane Sandy and roughly ten pictures per second were uploaded using Instagram. As previously mentioned, many citizens expect help within three hours of posting a request on social media. Each of the Weather Service's 122 weather forecast offices, along with other specialized field offices, national centers, and regional and national headquarters utilize social media. This approach allows the NWS to serve both local and national communities. The NWS mainly uses social media as a tool to provide information about weather events to users, including important safety information on a variety of hazards. Following significant meteorological or hydrological events, NWS conducts Service Assessments to evaluate NWS products and services. within three hours of posting a request on social media. Some jurisdictions may not yet have the capacity or resources to meet this expectation. Congress could explore the feasibility of using social media to make requests and investigate potential polices to help state, local, and federal jurisdictions develop their capacity to receive and effectively respond to the requests. The use of social media as a tool to request assistance (similar to a call to 911) may be of potential interest to Congress. The program could then be used as a pilot program. According to a study by the American Red Cross, younger people generally use social media more frequently than older segments of society. They are also more likely to request help through social media, believe agencies should monitor their postings, and have high expectations that agencies will respond quickly to their requests. There are also indications that older adults are increasingly using social media. Some may argue that emergency managers and officials may need social media to help with crisis situations. As more older adults use social. media, they too may develop similar expectations. The American Red Cross found that 76% of American expect help within three hours of posting a request on social media and 40% would use social media to inform others they were safe. The study also found that roughly 75% of social media users use the medium to seek information about an incident including road closures, damage reports, and road closures. The figures are higher than the percentages reported (68% and 24% respectively) in their 2011 survey. In 2012, 20% of Americans received some form of emergency information from an app. CDC uses Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, and YouTube among other social media platforms. CDC does not use incident-specific social media accounts, but does have web pages for specific incidents. CDC's primary social media focus is disseminating public health and preparedness information. CDC also helps states and localities recover and restore public health functions after the initial response to an incident.and reduce suffering when a disaster occurs. CDC has 30 different Facebook profiles and over 60 Twitter profiles addressing various public health topics. In an emergency, CDC coordinates with other federal entities, state and local agencies, and partners through the emergency operations center. CDC uses a handful of social media staff in an emergency event, but has the capacity to surge if needed. During the 2014 Ebola response, the social media team surged to meet the round-the-clock needs of the response and interest of the public. Oversight for CDC social media is overseen by the CDC’s social media director, who can be reached at 1-800-273-8255 or by emailing jennifer.smith@cnn.com. Social media is being increasingly used to provide "real-time" updates as an event unfolds. For example, Orlando authorities used social media to inform the public on the shootings in the Pulse nightclub. Another example is a stream of tweets issued by the Boston Police Department to keep citizens up to date in real-time throughout the Boston Marathon bombings and subsequent manhunt. Social media are also used for community outreach and customer service purposes by soliciting feedback on public safety-related topics. For more information on how to use social media in your community, visit CNN.com/Heroes. the Boston Marathon bombings and subsequent manhunt. The National Weather Service (NWS) also used social media to alert citizens in Massachusetts of road conditions during the 2015 snowstorms. Similarly, the U.S. Geological Survey launched a pair of Twitter feeds to give out automated, real-time river levels and rainfall amounts during heavy rains in Texas. The platform automatically Tweets out river gauge levels and flow rates when they hit the flood stage. It also includes searchable hashtags and links to more information. using uploaded images to create damage estimates; and using social media to conduct investigations and post-incident analysis. The federal government does not use a single platform for emergency and disasters. Rather, federal entities use different social media for different purposes. Some have platforms dedicated to emergencies and disasters while others have emergency and disaster information comingled with other agency information. This section highlights just some of the ways in which social media are being used by the federal government. It is important to note that social media is subject the other challenges described in this report. The use of social media for emergencies and disasters can be conceptualized as two broad categories of usage. Some examples of using social media as an emergency management tool include using the medium to conduct emergency communications and issue real time warnings. Some may argue that emergency managers and officials may need to embrace social media technology in order to be responsive to the public's needs. Others may question the feasibility of taking requests through social media. disasters will increase as people continue to embrace new technologies. This increase will lead to a greater expectation that government will meet their information needs during crisis situations. In the last 10 years social media has played an increasing role in emergencies and disasters in both the public and private sectors. Facebook hosts numerous emergency-related organizations, including Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management (ISCRAM), and the Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) Project. There is also evidence that social media is increasingly being used at disasters.recently as 15 years ago. In the last decade social media have played a greater role in emergency planning and management. There is evidence that social media is increasingly being used at the community and household level to respond to emergencies and crises. A study conducted in 2012 by the American Red Cross found that 40% of the respondents said they would use social tools to tell others they were safe. Other examples of community use of the media include warning others of unsafe areas or situations, creating ad hoc volunteer response groups, and raising funds for disaster relief and recovery. That percentage is most likely higher today given the rapid proliferation of social media in recent years. moments before the attack took place. Forensic analysis of the information was used to construct incident timelines and retrieve first-hand accounts of the event as it unfolded. Obtaining real-time information as an incident unfolds can help officials determine where people are located; assess victim needs; and alert citizens and first responders to changing conditions and new threats. Emergency managers can also use the information to direct certain resources to reduce damages, loss of life, or both. In some cases it might be possible to obtain this information before first responders reach the disaster area. second were uploaded using Instagram. Social media can also be used by users to let family and friends know they are safe if they are near an incident or natural disaster. For example, Facebook activated a feature called "safety check" during the Paris terrorist attacks to allow users to post if they were safe or not in the area of an incident. The above are examples of how information is disseminated through outputs. However, social media can Also use inputs to provide unique emergency and natural disaster information. some concern that individuals or organizations might intentionally provide inaccurate information to confuse, disrupt, or otherwise thwart response efforts. Malicious use of social media during an incident could range from mischievous pranks to acts of terrorism. One tactic that has been used by terrorists involves the use of a secondary attack after an initial attack to kill and injure first responders. Social media could be used as a tool for such purposes by issuing calls for assistance to an area, or notifying officials of a false hazard or threat. Social media are often used by emergency management organizations to coordinate and send out notifications of upcoming training events and exercises. Notifications can also be sent to mobilize first responders to respond to an incident. Using social media for mobilization purposes can be particularly useful when traditional call systems fail. For instance, during Hurricane Gustav, a Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) used social media to send mass email notifications to team members through Facebook. The CERT group also updated status messages to notify first responders and citizens of developments as the incident unfolded. response groups, and raising funds for disaster relief and recovery efforts. People generally continue to have access to information through social media platforms with SMS and Global Positioning Satellite (GPS) frameworks, such as Twitter. The use of social media for emergencies and disasters can be beneficial, according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) The NIST says social media can remain viable during catastrophic events when traditional forms of communication are rendered unusable. For more information, visit nist.org. provides the public with another method to communicate with the government. Social media are increasingly seen by some as a supplement or replacement to "911" emergency system lines. The use of social media to request assistance is likely to become more common in the future, according to the authors of the book. The book is published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Penguin Random House, which also publishes The New York Review of Books. For more information, visit www.simonandschuster.com. The term "social media" refers to Internet-based applications that enable people to communicate and share resources and information. Social media can be accessed by computers, tablets, smart and cellular telephones, and mobile telephone text messaging (SMS) The use of social media is an evolving phenomenon. Rapid changes in communication technologies in the past decade have enabled people to interact and share information through media that were non-existent or widely unavailable as recently as 15 years ago. In the last 10 years, social media has become more popular than ever. agencies to complete PIAs prior to: (1) developing or procuring information technologies that collect, maintain, or disseminate personally identifiable information (PII); or (2) initiating, consistent with the Paperwork Reduction Act, a new collection of PII from ten or more individuals in the public. In March 2011, the Department of Homeland Security issued a Privacy Impact Assessment for the Use of Unidirectional Social Media Applications Communications and Outreach. The PIA uses the Fair Information Privacy Principles (FIPPs) to assess and mitigate any impact on an individual's privacy. The E-Government Act of 2002 mandates that federal agencies conduct an assessment of the privacy impact of any substantially revised or new Information Technology System. The document that results from these mandated assessments is called a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) Section 208 of the E-government Act requires federal agencies to complete PIAs prior to: (1) developing or procuring a new information technology system; or (2) developing, procuring, or developing a new IT system that could be used to monitor individuals. Act of 2002 to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a social media working group. The law requires the social media group to submit an annual report to Congress. The report includes a review of current and emerging social media technologies being used to support preparedness and response activities related to terrorist attacks and other emergencies. It also includes recommendations to improve DHS's use of social media for emergency management purposes, to improve public awareness of the type of information being disseminated through social media and how to access such information during a terrorist attack. with the private sector to discuss and resolve legal, operational, technical, privacy, and security concerns. H.R. 3517 requires the DHS Secretary to conduct a one-year pilot program with the American Red Cross. The bill was referred to the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications. The following section describes how some federal entities use social media for emergencies and disasters. This list is not exhaustive—there are many federal entities that useSocial media for emergency preparedness and response. information about an incident including road closures, damage reports, and weather conditions. H.R. 623 , which was enacted on November 5, 2015 ( P.L. 114-80 , the DHS Social Media Improvement Act of 2015) amended the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to use social media to communicate with the public and private sectors. The legislation was introduced in the 113 th Congress ( H.r. 4263 ) and later in the 114 th Congress. Inaccurate information could complicate situational awareness of an incident and hinder or slow response efforts. The extent to which inaccurate information poses a problem to the emergency management community is not clear and claims of inaccuracy are debatable. Too much information can also pose a problem. Congress could investigate the accuracy of emergency and disaster information and examine strategies and best practices that could increase organizational capacity to handle a large influx of information. Similarly, Congress could examine methods that could help prevent or reduce the spread of misinformation. Crisis maps combine information scattered across the Internet along with other information and places them on a single map. Information posted at the time of an event could be valuable later for investigative and research purposes. For example, viewers at the 2012 theater shooting in Aurora, CO, tweeted and posted messages moments before the attack took place. Users can use the crisis map to ascertain storm paths and flood zones, as well as identify evacuation routes, shelter locations, and power outage areas.10,000 reports each. Crowdsourcing consists of obtaining needed services, ideas, or content by soliciting contributions from the online community. An example of a federal government crowdsourcing tool is a U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) "Did You Feel It?" project which creates automatic intensity maps based on "felt" reports submitted online. More than 2 million reports have been filed on this website, with 40 earthquakes receiving more than 10,000 reports each. Another useful source of information during an emergency is media. sectors might be applied at the federal level. Crowdsourcing information can be geotagged with longitude and latitude coordinates. According to Mathew Stepka, Vice President, Technology for Social Impact for Google, during some disasters, authoritative sources may not have as expansive information as individuals who are experiencing the incident first-hand. Stepka provided an example of crowdsourcing in his testimony to the Subcommittee. He related that it was unclear during Hurricane Sandy which filling stations had gasoline. He said that crowdsourcing can be used to enhance the quality and timeliness of critical information. Student volunteers called stations in New Jersey to check whether they were open and had gas available. Within a few days they had data for more than 1,000 different stations, which was fed into our Sandy crisis map automatically. Study findings reported at the hearings also underscored the growing use of social media during emergencies and disasters. According to Suzanne DeFrancis, Chief Public Affairs Officer of the American Red Cross, 20% of Americans received a social media message during a disaster. The Department of Energy's call center ended up referencing this information.  unofficial sources are often trusted and used as information sources by the general public. Some reports have indicated that information from unofficial sources can be just as, and even more, desirable than information from official social media websites. This is because citizens may think official sources are too slow, general, or inaccurate to be useful. In a June 4, 2013, hearing, Jorge Cardenas, vice president of asset management and centralized services for Public Service Electric and Gas Company (New Jersey) stated that official sources were too slow and general. by its Web 2.0 policy which describes how to sign up for third party outlets, how to moderate discussions (including which comments can be deleted), and what information needs to be retained in accordance with records management. FEMA's Office of External Affairs has a growing digital engagement section. Their responsibility includes designing and developing social media items. SBA has been a major source of assistance for the restoration of commerce and households in areas stricken by natural disasters. The social listening section can also be activated to assist with social listening in the event of an emergency or major disaster. will often provide links to information on their website for more technical information and may link and share posts from FEMA and other agencies. SBA comingles emergency and disaster information with other information about small business programs on their social media platforms. HHS directs and coordinates preparedness activities and oversees public health agencies within the Department with responsibilities for emergency preparedness and response. These include the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) SBA often issue web pages dedicated to each declaration. what types of assistance is available to individuals and households, how to apply for assistance, announce application deadlines. Other agencies and organizations that provide recovery assistance such as the American Red Cross, or the Small Business Administration's Disaster Loan Program (SBA) Social media could be used to raise funds in such cases through private contributions. However, it would not likely be capable of supplanting federal assistance altogether. Recovery from large-scale disasters can cost billions of dollars (the federal government). In some cases, individuals and Households do not qualify for FEMA Individual Assistance grants. SBA offers low-interest, long-term loans for physical and economic damages to businesses, individuals, and households. SBA utilizes social media on several different platforms including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and blogs. Each SBA region has its own Twitter account to provide users with specific local information. Using social media SBA will often provide links to information on their website for those who want to learn more about SBA's services. The SBA provides loans to help repair, rebuild, and recover from economic losses after a declared disaster. FEMA began using Youtube in 2006, Twitter in 2008, and Facebook in 2009. FEMA also uses social media to inform people where and how to apply for federal and nongovernmental assistance. FEMA can use social media as an emergency management tool by integrating various social media platforms through the use of tools referred to as "social media management system" The social media management systems include software that allows the agency to better handle information overload by eliminating non-critical information. Doing so helps FEMA focus or "listen" to. FEMA's app also allows users to take a photograph in a disaster area and submit it, along with a short text description, to the "Disaster Reporter" which gathers crowdsourced information. FEMA's social media, however, cannot be used for individual or immediate requests for assistance. Doing so helps FEMA focus or "listen" to relevant user information. Listening information is used to improve customer service, obtain situational awareness of an incident or situation, and discredit inaccurate information about the incident. short text description, to the "Disaster Reporter" which gathers crowdsourced disaster-related information within the United States. FEMA has staff responsible for day-to-day social media operations but has the capacity to deploy people from Regional Offices for surge support. For example, 10 people were deployed to the National Response Center during Hurricane Sandy to assist social media efforts. FEMA's social medial policies are guided by its Web 2.0 policy which describes how to sign up for FEMA's service. Many terms of service agreements are incompatible with federal law, policies, and regulations. To address this challenge, federal agencies have negotiated federal-compatible terms ofService agreements with social media vendors. These agreements modify or remove problematic language or clauses in standard Terms of Service agreements. Negotiated terms of Service can be developed individually by the federal entity, or through the assistance of the federal agency. The terms can be changed to reflect changes in technology or language in the agreement. The agreement can also be updated to reflect the changes in social media technology. A key issue of interest with respect to social media and emergencies and disasters is the diffusion of technology developed in the private sector to the public sector. One potential method that could be used to accelerate diffusion is through public-private partnerships (PPPs) FEMA provides a number of tools and models to help organizations start emergency management PPPs. Once developed, the new technology would be shared with thePublic sector. The program could then be evaluated to determine its effectiveness.request assistance through social media. inject additional resources in to the development of social media as a tool for emergency management. Some argue that government agencies can potentially achieve more objectives more efficiently through PPPs than they could on their own. Detractors, on the other hand, might argue that P PPs are complicated arrangements and require too much oversight. They may also be concerned about potential fraud and abuse of technology grants. Instances of inaccurate and false information may be an inherent problem given the nature of social social media platforms. Large-scale disasters can cost billions of dollars. Social media has the capacity to accelerate the damage estimate process by transmitting images of damaged structures. For example, in Kansas a smart phone application has been used to help the Army Corps of Engineers identify and report breeches, seepage, overtoppings, and other areas of structural weakness in levees. The application allows the Army corps of Engineers to take a photo of the levees and upload it to the social media site to be used by the Corps. allows the Army Corps of Engineers to take a photo of problem areas and then "geotag" its precise location. According to Corps officials, the application has helped improve the efficiency, speed, and accuracy of detecting and responding to levee failures. The application has also helped reduce human error by reducing instances of mislabeling or misreporting problems. Within the past decade, reports on successful use of social media during emergencies and disasters have spurred congressional interest and policy discussions concerning how to better incorporate social media at the federal level. Congress determine how the money has been spent and what resources have been provided to the nation. Financial information can also potentially help Congress identify cost saving opportunities. Privacy concerns exist about the potential for the collection, retention, and data mining of personal information by the federal government with respect to its use of social media for disaster recovery purposes. Specifically, the use of status alerts and the creation of personal pages to establish status alerts is a potential privacy concern for the public. The information is also useful for congressional oversight of the entities that have received the funds and to evaluate the overall effectiveness. Some have argued that privacy laws can hamper the use of information obtained from social media during disasters. Efforts are being made to develop software that could remove personal information from social social media messages without loss of vital disaster information. Congress could consider amending existing laws to make theUse of PII less restrictive during disasters, or investigate methods that could help the federal government develop software to remove PII while retaining valuable disaster information in the event of a disaster. Social media has made tremendous inroads into.and other similar operations. the use of social media. Another concern is the potential of overwhelming Internet traffic during crisis situations. For example, Internet traffic in Belgium after the terrorist attacks in Brussels slowed parts of the country's networks. It is unclear how much the federal government is paying for its various social media efforts with respect to emergencies and disasters. The number of personnel required to handle social media in a crisis is also a concern for the government. The U.S. Congress could help develop methods to address the issue. respect to emergencies and disasters. The number of personnel required to monitor multiple social media sources, verify the accuracy of incoming information, and respond to and redirect incoming messages is also uncertain. In addition, federal entities may experience a large volume of incoming messages from the public during a disaster. As mentioned previously, responding to each message in a timely manner could be difficult and may require an increase in the number of employees responding to incoming messages. Knowledge concerning federal expenditures on social media use during disasters can help Congress determine how the money has been spent and what is being spent. The federal government uses social media as an output to disseminate information. A different approach would be to reorient the focus with an emphasis on inputs. Some might argue that the decentralized nature of social media makes the medium too unwieldy for large, centralized organizations to control in a manner similar to the government's social media efforts. The reorientation, however, could be a complicated matter. It could prevent the federal government from fully realizing social media's potential as an effective emergency management tool. Many smartphones and tablets have battery lives lasting twelve hours or less depending on their use. In some cases disaster survivors will not have the means to recharge their devices. In other cases, the device may have adequate power, but cellular towers in the area do not, significantly limiting their use in the event of a disaster.requires a response. When using social media for situational awareness and response efforts, officials and first responders should be aware it could be used for malicious purposes and develop measures to mitigate those possibilities. Congress could also consider other methods that would help residents recharge their devices during power outages. Still, while social media may improve some aspects of emergency and disaster response, some may be concerned that overreliance on the technology could be problematic. Some may argue that traditional forms of communications still need to be used in conjunction with social media. They may further argue that emergency managers and officials consider alternative or backup options during extendedPower outages, or other occurrences that could prevent the use ofsocial media. Congress could require FEMA to develop and deploy 3G and 4G mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters. FEMA could also provide grants to state and local governments to help them develop their social media capabilities. Congress could also investigate the use of social media at the federal level to help inform decisionmaking and policymaking. This could include determining hardware and software costs, personnel costs, surge capacity during large-scale disasters, and the federal government's ability to keep pace with advances in and the social media. in the area do not, significantly limiting their use in crisis situations. Congress could require FEMA to develop and deploy 3G and 4G mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters. We encourage the subcommittee to explore innovative solutions to provide deployable 3/4G mobile Networks, as well as mobile device charging stations, to the public during large-scale emergencies. In a June 4, 2013, hearing, Jason Payne of Palantir Technologies testified that internet and cloud technology, such as social media, are extremely valuable as long as people have power and connectivity. FEMA Administrator Craig Fugate met with representatives from Apple, Craigslist, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Twitter to discuss how to harness the "capabilities of the digital world to better serve the public" According to Fugate, possible future applications include using smartphone-friendly mobile versions of FEMA websites to allow users to use social media to help with disaster response and recovery. The FEMA Administrator testified before the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Subcommittee on Disaster Recovery and Intergovernmental Affairs on May 5, 2011. Smartphone-friendly mobile versions of FEMA websites to allow users to access information, request assistance, and facilitate communication. Subsequent hearings were held by the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications Committee on Homeland Security on June 4, 2013, and July 9, 2013. The hearings also explored how social media was transforming preparedness, response, and recovery efforts in the private sector and how lessons learned in these sectors might be applied at the federal level. In the U.S., social media efforts could be enhanced.

ROUGE-1: 82.21, ROUGE-2: 74.67, ROUGE-L: 26.29
BERTScore: 56.52

==============================================
==================== [23/100] ====================
Summary:
abandoned sites and hazardous features vary substantially by state. Some states, such as Colorado and Wyoming, indicated they had done extensive and rigorous fieldwork to identify sites and were reasonably confident that their estimates were accurate. Other states, however, relied less on fieldwork, and more on unverified, readily available records or data sources such as published or unpublished geological reports, mining claim maps, and the Mineral Availability System/Mineral Industry Locator System (MAS/MILS), which states indicated were typically incomplete. used the literature only as a starting point, and then estimated the number of features on the basis of experience. Some states were less readily able to provide the data directly from their systems without manipulation or manipulation. For example, while one state estimated that there were about three times the. number of public safety hazards as identified by the literature, another state. estimated thatthere were four times as many, and a third state estimated. that there was up to six times more hazards than originally thought. only the number of sites with environmental degradation, if they reported data for this request at all. Because most states do not maintain environmental degradation data by feature, states could only speculate about this figure, or compute it by estimating an average number of features per site. Because of these limitations with feature-level data, we report only the number  sites with data on environmental degradation in order to ensure more reliable and consistent reporting across the states. As a secondary confirmation that states provided data consistent with this request. abandoned hardrock mines on their lands. Using our consistent definition, 12 western states and Alaska estimated a total of at least 161,000 abandoned hardrock mine sites in their states on state, private, or federal lands. The estimates for a particular state do, in some cases, vary widely from study to study. For example, for Nevada, the Western Governors’ Association/National Mining Association estimated that the state had 50,000 Abandoned Hardrock Mine Sites in 1998. In 2004 EPA estimated that Nevada had between 200,000 to 500,000 sites. To estimate abandoned hardrock mining sites in the 12 western states and Alaska, we developed a standard definition for these mine sites. We consulted with mining experts at the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs; the Interstate Mining Compact Commission; and the Colorado Department of Natural Resources, Division of Reclamation, Mining. We then provided states with an edit-controlled data collection instrument that requested data specifically tailored to our definitions and methods. Other efforts to assess the magnitude of the abandoned mine situation have acknowledged limitations in their efforts. for abandoned hardrock mining sites for a given study. Some states define an abandoned mine site as a mine opening or feature, while others define a site as all associated mine openings, features, or structures at a distinct location. See appendix III for more information on estimates from these studies. In addition, some regional or state estimates included specifically tailored to our definitions and methods. Our definition of abandoned hard rock mine sites includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances. This includes prospecting, exploration, uncovering, drilling, discovery, mine development, excavation, extraction, or processing. An abandoned hardrock mine site is a site that includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances. Using this definition, states reported to us the number of abandoned sites in their states. At these sites, on the basis of state data, we estimated that at least 332,000 features may pose physical safety hazards, such as open shafts or unstable or decayed mine structures. At least 33,000 sites have degraded the environment, by, for example, contaminating surface water and groundwater. and associated environmental problems; and includes only hardrock (also known as locatable), non-coal sites. Features that pose a significant hazard to public health and safety include features, such as mine openings, structures, and highwalls; and impoundments. Sites with environmental degradation include features that lead to environmental degradation, and, consequently, require remediation of air, water, or ground pollution. Rather than reporting, as requested, the number of features leading to environmental degradation, most states reported only the number of features. BLM and the Forest Service are responsible for managing more than 450 million acres of public lands in their care. BLM manages about 258 million acres in 12 western states, including Alaska. Forest Service manages about 193 million acres across the nation. In 1997, BLM and Forest Service each launched a national Abandoned Mine Lands Program to remedy the physical and environmental hazards at thousands of abandoned hardrock mines on the federal lands they manage. According to a September 2007 report by these two agencies, they had inventoried Thousands of abandoned sites and taken actions to clean up hazardous substances and mitigate safety hazards. Previous state estimates of the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites vary widely in the six studies that we reviewed. In September 2007, the agencies reported that there were an estimated 100,000 abandoned mine sites. The Forest Service was unable to provide this information by state. See appendix II for BLM, EPA, and OSM total funding by state and for state funding for coal mine clean-up by state, see appendix I for state-by-state funding for clean-ups of coal mines. Some estimates included coal and other non- hardrock mineral sites because it was not important to distinguish between the type of minerals mined. EPA commented on this problem, noting that a universally applied definition of an does not exist at present. BLM officials said that the agency’s field offices used a variety of methods to identify sites in the early 1980s, and the extent and quality of these efforts varied greatly. For example, they estimated that only about 20 percent of BLM land has been surveyed in Arizona. Historically, the mining of hardrock minerals, such as gold, lead, copper, silver, and uranium, was an economic incentive for exploring and settling the American West. When the ore was depleted, miners often left behind a legacy of abandoned mines, structures, safety hazards, and contaminated land and water. Even in more recent times, after cleanup became mandatory, many parties responsible for hardrock mining sites have been liquidated through bankruptcy or otherwise dissolved. Under these circumstances, some hard rock mining companies have left it to the taxpayer to clean up the mining site. The Superfund program was established under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 to address the threats that contaminated waste sites pose to human health and the environment. The act also requires that the parties statutorily responsible for pollution bear the cost of cleaning up contaminated sites. Some contaminated hardrock mine sites have been listed on Superfund’s National Priorities List. Typically, these sites are expensive to clean up and the cleanup can take many years, according to EPA. programs at BLM, the Forest Service, EPA, and OSM to request expenditure data. We reviewed agency documents, budget justification reports and reports detailing agencies’ cleanup efforts and programs. We obtained data on total expenditures for cleaning up and reclaiming abandoned hardrock mine sites that were compiled from BLM’s Financial Accounting and Reporting System. BLM officials told us that in addition to the expenditure data they provided, the agency receives funding allocations from other sources, such as the Department of the Interior's Central Hazardous Materials fund. Testimony to determine federal funds spent to clean up abandoned hardrock mine sites since 1998. Number of abandoned mine sites and the number of associated hazards, and value and coverage of mine sites. Key contributors to this testimony were Andrea Wamstad Brown (Assistant Director), Casey L. Brown; Kristen Sullivan Massey; Rebecca Shea; and Carol Herrnstadt Shulman. For further information about this testimony, please contact Robin M. Nazzaro, Director, Natural Resources and Environment (202) 512-3841.  appendix provides information on federal expenditures used to clean up abandoned hardrock mines by fiscal year (table 5) and by state (table 6) Range of estimated abandoned mines previously (2001) (2007) Mineral Policy Center (2003) Earthworks (formerly Mineral policy Center) ( 2007) (2004) “openings” No data provided Western Governors’ Association and National Mining Association, Cleaning Up Abandoned Mines: A Western Partnership, 1998. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented. We did not base any conclusions or recommendations on these data. EPA spent substantially more to clean up mines that are generally on nonfederal lands. OSM provided grants with an annual median value of about $18 million to states and Indian tribes through its SMCRA program. Wyoming was the largest recipient of OSM grants for cleaning up hardrock mine sites—receiving about $99 million. See appendix II for more detailed information on agency expenditures by fiscal year. The Forest Service was was $1.billion.billion in 2007. The median amount spent for the public lands was about $5 million. OSM has provided more than $3 billion to clean up dangerous abandoned mine sites. Its Abandoned Mine Land Program has eliminated safety and environmental hazards on 314,108 acres since 1977. Between fiscal years 1998 and 2007, the four federal agencies spent at least $2.6 billion to reclaim abandoned hardrock mines on federal, state, private, and Indian lands. EPA has spent the most—$2.2 billion. In 2004, EPA’s Office of Inspector General in 2004, 63 hardrock mining sites were on the National Priorities List. amendments to the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) of 1977, can provide grants to fund the cleanup and reclamation of certain hardrock mining sites. OSM has provided more than $3 billion to the U.S. since the act was passed in 1977. The Secretary of the Interior grants the request if it is at the request of a state or Indian tribe to address problems that could endanger life and property, constitute a hazard to the public and safety, or degrade the environment. We limited our year-by-year presentation of expenditure data to the past 10 years (1998 through 2007) Because of limited time in preparing, we presented these data in 2008 constant dollars. We presented EPA’s data, for fiscal years 1988 through 2007; and OSM’S data, from fiscal years 1993 to 2007. We performed a limited reliability assessment of the expenditure data and determined that we would limit the presentation of the data to just the last 10 years of spending. in 2008 constant dollars. Because of limited time in preparing this testimony, we were unable to fully assess the reliability of the agencies’ expenditure data. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented to meet our objectives because we (1) attribute the data to what agencies report as their expenditures, (2) present rounded data to minimize the perception of precision, and (3) do not base any conclusions or recommendations on the data. To answer our second objective, we summarized selected prior survey efforts by federal agencies and organizations. As a secondary confirmation that states provided data consistent with the definition, our data collection instrument included a section for states to provide a brief description of how the various data points were calculated. Based on comments in these fields, and basic logic checks on the data, we followed up as needed through telephone interviews to clarify and confirm problematic responses. Our definitional and editing processes provided us with reasonable assurance that the data were as clean and consistent as possible. We calculated the final edited data, and using these final editedData, we calculated the Reclamation involves regrading and reshaping disturbed land to conform with adjacent land forms and to minimize erosion. One of the agencies’ key responsibilities is to ensure that adequate financial assurances, based on sound reclamation plans and cost estimates, are in place to guarantee reclamation costs. If a mining operator fails to complete required reclamation, BLM or the Forest Service can take steps to the number of associated hazards, and the value and coverage of the financial assurances operators use to guarantee them. reclamation, BLM or the Forest Service can take steps to obtain funds from the financial assurance provider to complete the reclamation. Both agencies allow several types of financial assurances to guarantee estimated reclamation costs for hardrock operations on their lands. BLM also allows surety bonds, state bond pools, trust funds, and property. EPA administers the Superfund program, which was established under the Comprehensive Environmental Environmental Protection Act of 1972. The Forest Service is developing a database to collect this and other information on hardrock operation by late summer 2008. provide the data directly from their systems without manipulation or estimation. As of November 2007, hardrock mining operators had provided financial assurances valued at approximately $982 million to guarantee the reclamation costs. The report also indicates that 52 of the 1,463 hardrockmining operations had inadequate financial assurances. The $33 million shortfall is about $61 million less than needed to fully cover estimated reclamation Costs. The number of operations with inadequate financial. assurances by state, the financial assurances required, BLM’s calculation. of the shortfall in assurances, and our estimate of. the shortfall. plan-level operations, a greater percentage of plan-level. operations had inadequate financial assurances than did notice- level operations. Over one-third of the number of all hardrock operations and about 84 percent of the value of all financial assurances are for hardrock mining operations located in Nevada. See appendix IV for further details on the number and value of hardrockmining operations in each state. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of the Committee may have.  BLM’s approach to determining the adequacy of financial assurances is not useful because it does not clearly lay out the extent to which financial assurances are inadequate. For example, in California, BLM reports that, statewide, the financial assurances in place are $1.5 million greater than required, suggesting reclamation costs are being more than required. In contrast, we totaled the difference between inadequate financial assurances. and the actual shortfall for each of the 52 operations for which BLM had determined that financial assurances were inadequate. increase their financial assurances because they anticipate expanding their hardrock operations. While financial assurances were inadequate for both notice- and plan-level operations, a greater percentage of plan- level operations had inadequate assurances. The appendix provides information from BLM’s November 2007 Bond Review Report, which includes information on the number of financial assurances in place for hard rock operations on BLM lands in 11 western states. The value of these financial assurances by state is shown in the table below, as well as the differences between financial assurance requirements and the actual value of the operations. greater than required, suggesting reclamation costs are being more than fully covered. However, according to our analysis of only those California operations with inadequate financial assurances, the financial assurances in place are nearly $440,000 less than needed to fully cover reclamations costs. BLM officials agreed that it would be valuable for the Bond Review Report to report the dollar value of the difference between financial assurances and required for those operations where financial assurances are inadequate and have taken steps to modify LR2000. Officials said that financial assurances may appear inadequate in the Bond review report. assurances may appear inadequate in the Bond Review Report when expansions or other changes in the operation have occurred, thus requiring an increase in the amount of the financial assurance. Conversely, hardrock mining operators may have financial assurances greater than required for a number of reasons. For example, they may increase their financial assurances because they anticipate expanding their hardrock operations. For more information, visit the Hardrock Mining Association’s website at: http://www.hardrockmining.org/news/press-releases. possible, and using these final edited data, we calculated the estimated number of abandoned mine sites, the number of features that pose physical safety and environmental hazards. To answer our third objective, we requested the BLM Bond Review Report from BLM’s Legacy Rehost System 2000 (LR2000) database. Because we had previously reported reliability problems with data on financial assurances in LR2000, we conducted a limited reliability assessment. We used the data to determine the value and coverage of financial assurances to guarantee coverage of reclamation costs. financial assurances in LR2000, we conducted a limited reliability assessment of the bond report data. This limited assessment included (1) basic logic checks on the data we received, (2) interviews with BLM minerals management officials knowledgeable of the changes made to LR2000 to address GAO’s 2005 recommendations. We concluded that the data are of undetermined reliability, but our limited assessment indicates that management controls were improved for the generation of bond review reports from LR2000. The data are not considered reliable.

ROUGE-1: 72.85, ROUGE-2: 66.36, ROUGE-L: 25.88
BERTScore: 57.46

==============================================
==================== [24/100] ====================
Summary:
World requested $12.6 million for FY2012, an increase of $1.2 million (10.7%) from the $11.38 million provided in P.L. 112-10. The House-passed bill would have provided $ 1.0 million, a decrease of 91.2%. The Senate-reported bill, in contrast, would haveprovided $10.0million (-12.1%). The Senate report states that "despite the fiscal constraints of the budget this program is" "despite the fiscal constraints of the budget this program is necessary for the promotion of democratic principles in countries with historically oppressive rule" The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides the Senate-reported level of $10.0 million. The FY2011 level represented a decrease of $623,000 (5.2%) from the $12.0million provided for FY2010. In FY2008, Open World received $8.98 million in budget authority, a decreases of 35% from $13.86 million provided in FY2007 and FY2006. authority is contained in three accounts: (1) congressional printing and binding, (2) Office of Superintendent of Documents (salaries and expenses), and (3) the revolving fund. FY2009 levels for these accounts are as follows: Congressional printing, binding: $90.7 million, a decrease of $2.9 million (-3.1%). GPO: $100.0 million, an increase of $6.4 million (6.9%) over the $93.6 million provided for FY2011. The Library requested nearly $456.0 million (not including $6.35 million in authority to spend receipts), a decrease of $26.3 million (-6.1%). The Library had requested $21.7 million, an increase of $3.9 million. The House-passed bill would have provided $14.5 million and the Senate-reported bill would has provided $16.99 million. These numbers do not include authority to spending receipts. The Architect's budget also contains funds for the Library buildings and grounds. level of $628.7 million. The House-passed version of H.R. 2551 would have provided $575.3 million, a decrease of $53.4 million (-8.5%). The Senate-reported version would has provided $579.2 million. GPO had requested $148.5 million, an increase of $13.4million (9.9%). GPO's budget authority is contained in three accounts: (1) congressional printing and (2) the Consolidated Appropriations Act. The Architect had requested $754.8 million, an increase of $153.2 million (25.5%). In FY2010, a 21.7% increase (or $644.6 million) was requested and a 13.6% increase was provided. The FY2008 budget authority represented a decrease of 8.1% from the $449.9 million (including supplemental appropriations) provided in FY2007. The budget authority for FY2012 is $585.8million, including a $14.6million rescission for the Capitol Visitor Center. The Capitol Police requested $299.3 million for salaries. The Senate-reported bill would have provided $276.9 million, a decrease of $203,000 (-0.1%) The Consolidated Appropriations Act continues funding at the same level as FY2011 for both salaries and general expenses. Another appropriation relating to the Capitol Police appears within the Architect of the Capitol account for Capitol Police buildings and grounds. The Capitol Police had requested $32.2 million, an increase of $5.4 million (19.9%), over the previous year. The USCP FY2012 request and FY2011 funding level are also presented in Table 7. Previously, the FY2010 appropriations act provided $328.3 million and P.L. 111-212 provided an additional $12.96 million. The USCP had requested $15.956 million in FY2010 supplemental appropriations. The general expenses account contains funds for the salaries of employees; overtime pay; hazardous duty pay differential; and government contributions for employee health, retirement, Social Security, professional liability insurance, and other benefit programs. GAO works for Congress by responding to requests for studies of federal government programs and expenditures. Formerly the General Accounting Office, the agency was renamed the Government Accountability Office effective July 7, 2004. The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $511.3 million, a decrease of $34.96 million (-6.4%) from the $546.3million provided for FY2011. The House-passed bill ( H.R. 2551 ) would have provided $511,3 million. request funding for the 2013 Presidential inauguration; use of GPO's revolving fund for capital improvements and possible alternatives; and plans for responding to the tight budget environment. The Office of Compliance is an independent and nonpartisan agency within the legislative branch. It was established to administer and enforce the Congressional Accountability Act, which was enacted in 1995. The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $3.82 million, the same level as contained in the House-passed version of H.R. 2551. This level represents a decrease of $260,000. GAO received $531.0 million, not including offsetting collections, in the FY2009 Omnibus Appropriations Act and an additional $25 million in P.L. 111-5 to cover responsibilities under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. At a hearing on March 11, 2011, a House subcommittee discussed GAO's use of field offices and tenant use of excess space in GAO headquarters. The subcommittee also discussed studies related to Member security; and funding for mandates. 112-6 (through April 8, 2011) Both the House and Senate adopted language in the 112 th Congress affecting spending within each chamber. H.Res. 22 reduces the authorized amounts for the Members' Representational Allowances, House leadership offices, and all committees except the Committee on Appropriations by 5%. S.Amdt. 182 is offered by Senator Nelson (NE) to S. 493 , the Small Business Innovation Research/Small Business Technology Transfer Reauthorization Act of 2011. food service facilities of the House of Representatives, which failed by recorded vote (179-234). The House passed the bill, as amended, on July 22 (Roll no. 629, 252-159). On September 8, 2011, the Senate Appropriations Committee reported a subcommittee allocation of $4.307 billion ( S.Rept. 112-76 ). The committee reported its version of H.R. 2551 , as amended,. by a recorded vote of 28–2 on September 15, 2011. The following sections discuss the various legislative branch accounts. Division G of the FY2012 Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2055 , P.L. 112-74 ) provided $4.307 billion in discretionary funding for the legislative branch. This level is $236.9 million (5.2%) below the FY2011 enacted level and $549.6 million (11.3%)below the request. The legislative branch represents approximately 0.4% of the total discretionary appropriations provided in this act. From October 1, 2010, until the enactment of this legislation on April 11, 2011, the legislative Branch operated on continuing resolutions. These sites contain information on the FY2012 and FY2011 legislative branch appropriations requests and legislation, and the appropriations process. House Committee on Appropriations http://appropriations.house.gov/ Senate Committee on appropriations http://senate.gov/. CRS Appropriations Products Guide http://www.crs.org/Pages/AppropriationsStatusTable.aspx?source=QuickLinks Congressional Budget Office http:// www.cbo.gov Government Accountability Office http:www.gao.gov Office of Management & Budget http: www.whitehouse.Gov/omb/ CBO requested $46.9 million for FY2012, less than $100,000 more than FY2011 in P.L. 112-10. House-passed version of H.R. 2551 would have provided $43.8 million, a decrease of nearly $3.0 million, or -6.4%. Senate-reported version would haveprovided $44.4 million (a decrease of $2.4million, or 5.1%). CBO requested two administrative provisions for FY 2012, neither of which were included in the House- Passed or Senate- reported versions. The FY2012 U.S. Budget submitted on February 14, 2011, contained a request for $4.857 billion in new budget authority for legislative branch activities. This request, however, preceded the enactment of the FY2011 appropriations law on April 11, 2011. By law, the legislative branch request is submitted to the President and included in the budget without change. A substantial portion of the increase requested by legislative branch entities was to meet mandatory expenses, such as increased government contributions, and (2) expenses related to increases in the costs of goods and services due to inflation. of 2011, stated, "It is the sense of the Senate, that it should lead by example" The amendment was adopted on March 16, 2011. No further action on this bill occurred as of the date of this report. Section 1902 of P.L. 112-10 also contained language reducing allowances for Senators' offices by 5%. Previously, the FY2010 Legislative Branch Appropriations Act provided $4.66 billion for FY2010 legislative branch operations. In FY2009, an additional $25 million was added to the bill. The FY2012 Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $868.59 million for Senate operations. This is a decrease of $45.56 million (-5.0%) from the $914.15 million provided in FY2011 and $102.95 million (-10.6%) less than the requested level of $971.55 million. The Senate had requested $161.3 million for inquiries and investigations. The Committee on Appropriations account contains funds for the Senate Appropriations Committee. The conference agreement also contained administrative provisions related to the waiver of erroneous payments. Appropriations account contains funds for the Senate Appropriations Committee. The Senate has requested $15.8 million, which is equal to the FY2010 and FY2011 funding level. The Senators' Official Personnel and Office Expense Account provides each Senator with funds to administer an office. It consists of an administrative and clerical assistance allowance, a legislative assistance allowance and an official office expense allowance. The funds may be used for any category of expenses, subject to limitations. The bill would have provided $14.9 million, a decrease of $948,000. Senate version of H.R. 2551 would have provided $504.5 million (not including $18.3 million in offsetting collections), a decrease of $41.7 million (-7.6%). The act also contained one administrative provision, also included in the House-passed version, related to voluntary separation incentive payments. GAO had requested $556.8 million, an increase of $10.6 million (1.9%) from FY2011 and equal to the bill. The Consolidated Appropriations Act provides $126.2 million, a decrease of $8.9 million (-6.6%) from the $135.1 million provided for FY2011 in P.L. 112-10. The House-reported bill ( H.R. 2551 ) would have provided $113.0 million. H.Amdt. 704 , offered by Mr. Stutzman and agreed to by recorded vote (218-194), further reduced this funding by $4,946,140.80. The USCP had requested $387.6 million for FY2012, an increase of $47.5 million (14.0%). The House-reported bill would have provided $340.1 million, the same as provided in FY2011. H.Amdt. 697 increased this amount by $1 million for district office security. The Senate-reported version of H.R. 2551 reduced funding for the Botanic Garden account by $632,780 (15.6%) The House-passed version of H.R. 2551 would have provided $1.226 billion for FY2012, a level continued in the Consolidated Appropriations Act ( P.L. 112-74 ). This level represents a decrease of $85.7 million (-6.5%) from the FY2011 level. The House had requested $ 1.334 billion, an increase of $22.3 million (1.7%) over the FY 2011 level. At a hearing on May 12, 2011, the House subcommittee discussed Member and district office security, including costs for legal services related to the Defense of Marriage Act. of the Members' Representational Allowance for certain mailings not on a Member's stationery (voice vote). The full committee ordered reported a $3.3 billion bill with a roll call vote of 28-19 ( H.R. 2551 , H.Rept. 112-148 ). The total funding level represents a $227 million, or 6.4%, reduction from the FY2011 level (not including Senate items). The House-passed bill would have provided $26.7 million. The House had requested $28.5 million.  FY2012 requests and FY2011 funding levels for headings in the House of Representatives account are presented in Table 6. The proposed FY2012 decrease follows a decrease in FY2011 of $57.6 million (-4.2%) from the FY2010 level of $1.369 billion. On January 6, 2011, the House agreed to H.Res. 22 , which reduces the authorized amounts for the Members' Representational Allowances, House leadership offices, and all committees except the Committee on Appropriations by 5%. House Appropriations Committee released a subcommittee allocation containing $4.314 billion in new budget authority for the legislative branch for FY2012. This level is $227 million less than the FY2011 enacted level. The House Appropriations Committee Subcommittee on the Legislative Branch held a markup on July 7, 2011, and reported the bill to the full committee with no amendments by voice vote. The full committee held its markup of the bill on July 13, 2011. Two amendments were adopted by voiceVote, including a manager's amendment with report language related to Open World. The location of Open World at the Library of Congress has been a topic of discussion at appropriations hearings. The House Appropriations Committee expects the Open World program to become financially independent of funding in this bill. The subcommittee also had discussed this issue during the FY2008 appropriations cycle. The committee is fully supportive of expanded efforts of the Open world Center to raise private funding and expect this effort to reduce the requirements for funding from the Legislative Branch appropriations bill in future years. The center is located in Washington, D.C. The Open World Leadership Center administers a program that supports democratic changes in other countries. The first program was authorized by Congress in 1999 to support the relationship between Russia and the United States. The program encouraged young federal and local Russian leaders to visit the U.S. and observe the democracy and free enterprise in the country. The Senate subcommittee discussed actions to minimize costs; how the agency would operate under various potential funding cuts; and discussions with the Library of Congress regarding information technology concerns. The hearing was held on March 3, 2011. The Open World Leadership Center was established at the Library of Congress in 2000. The center is housed in the Library and receives services from the Library through an inter-agency agreement. Open World requested $12.6 million for FY2012, an increase of $1.2 from the previous year.local Russian leaders to visit the United States and observe its government and society. The program was expanded to include specified additional countries in 2003. In 2004, Congress further extended the program's eligibility to other countries designated by the center's board of trustees. workforce diversity, and an amendment offered by Ranking Member Honda directing the House Chief Administrative Office to review and improve contracting controls. Three amendments were rejected, including an amendment offering by Representative Flake prohibiting the use of the Members' Representational Allowance for online advertising (voice vote) The House also rejected an amendment to prohibit use of funds for the purchase of polystyrene products for food service facilities in the House of Representatives (Roll no. 1, 18-26); and a proposal to prohibit the Use of Members' Representational Allowance for certain mailings not on the Internet. Chief Administrative Officer to make any payments from any MRA for the leasing of a vehicle in an amount that exceeds $1,000 in any month, which was agreed to by voice vote. H.Amdt. 709 , offered by Mr. Flake, to require all mail funded by the Members' Representational Allowance (MRA) and from funds for official mail for committees and leadership offices of the House bear the official letterhead of the Member, committee, or office involved, failed by voiceVote. legislation, which was agreed to by voice vote. H.Amdt. 706 , offered by Mr. Paulsen, to prevent use of funds to distribute printed copies of the Congressional Record to Member offices, failed by recorded vote (130-283) H. amdt. 707, offered by. Mr. Thompson, to prohibit use of. funds to purchase, acquire, install, or use any medium screw base compact fluorescent lamp or. light bulb (CFL), failed. prohibit use of funds by Members, committees, and leadership for purchase of online ads that link to a website maintained by Members. H.Amdt. 711, offered by Mr. Holt, to provide $2.5 million for the congressional Office of Technology Assessment and reduce funding for the House Historic Buildings Revitalization Trust Fund by the same amount, failed by recorded vote (176-235) H. amdt 712, offeredby Mr. Moran, to prohibit the use of. funds for polystyrene containers in the food service facilities of the House of Representatives, failed. establish a Security Fund for Members' District Office Security Upgrades, which was agreed to by voice vote. H.Amdt. 698 , offered by Mr. Watt, to reduce funding for the Office of Congressional Ethics by 40% ($619,200) and transfer the funds to the Spending Reduction Account, failed by recorded vote (102-302) H. amdt. 699, offered by H.amdt. Broun, was to reduce funds for the Joint Economic Committee by $1,050,750 (25%) and transfer those dollars to the spending reduction account, which failed. the Thirty-Year Mass Deacidification Program with the Library of Congress's Salaries and Expenses Account, which was agreed to by voice vote. H.Amdt. 704 , offered by Mr. Stutzman, to reduce the GPO funding by $4,946,140.80 by transferring $3,414,150.29 from GPO, Congressional Printing and Binding and $1,531,990.51 from GPo, Office of Superintendent of Documents, to the spending reduction account. by Mr. Broun, to reduce funding for the Office of Compliance to the FY2008 level ($467,000 reduction), which failed by voice vote. H.Amdt. 701 , offered by Ms. Hayworth, to reduced funding for Botanic Garden by $632,780, which was agreed to by recorded vote (299-112). 6. Mr. Altmire, offered by Mr.Altmire, to restore $1 million in funding to the Thirty-Year Mass Deacidification Program with the Library of Congress's. letter to Speaker John Boehner regarding the President's determination that Section 3 of this act is unconstitutional and the Speaker's March 9, 2011, announcement that the House General Counsel was directed to initiate a legal defense of this law. Greening efforts, including functions of the Architect of the Capitol and the use of Styrofoam in the House cafeteria. The House wounded warrior program and the experiences and long-term employment prospects of its alumni. The U.S. Capitol Police (USCP) are responsible for the security of the Congress and the Capitol Complex. mission; how the Capitol Police could adjust to a funding reduction; efforts to establish safe evacuation procedures, particularly for the disabled. The status of racial and gender discrimination complaints and the hiring of a new diversity officer; and district office security assessments. The Architect of the Capitol (AOC) is responsible for the maintenance, operation, development, and preservation of the United States Capitol Complex. The Capitol Complex includes the Capitol and its grounds, House and Senate office buildings, Library of Congress buildings and grounds, Capitol Power Plant, Botanic Garden and Capitol Visitor Center. supplemental appropriations) provided in FY2007. The FY2012 request and FY2011 funding level for each of the AOC accounts is presented in Table 8. At a hearing on March 3, 2011, the Senate subcommittee discussed the timing of repairs to the Capitol dome; the completion of the tunnel project, scheduled for 2012; and potential savings from a unified legislative branch financial management system. The Capitol Power Plant east chiller relocation project was discussed at a hearing in March 2011. The agency would operate under various potential funding cuts. The Consolidated Appropriations Act contains an administrative provision directing the Architect of the Capitol to transfer amounts made available for construction projects to the Capitol Police to reimburse them for overtime expenses related to these projects. The act also contains language transferring a parcel of land from the National Park Service to the architect. The House subcommittee discussed the project prioritization process, the Capitol dome project, the Cannon revitalization project, energy consumption and savings, and repairs to the House garages. CBO is a nonpartisan congressional agency created to provide objective economic and budgetary analysis. The Architect had requested $706.1 million, an increase of $120.3 million (20.5%) from the FY2011 level. Operations of the Architect are funded in the following 10 accounts: general administration, Capitol building, Capitol grounds, Senate office buildings, House office buildings,. Capitol power plant, Library buildings and grounds. Capitol Visitor Center, and Botanic Garden. The Architect is responsible for the Supreme Court buildings and. grounds, but appropriations for their expenses are not contained in the legislative branch appropriations bill. under the rule for consideration of the bill ( H.Res. 359 , H.Rept. 112-173 ). The House agreed to this rule on July 21, 2011 (Roll no. 613, 239-172). Consideration of theBill began on July 20, 2011, and continued the next day. The following 16 amendments were considered, and 7 were adopted: 1. H.Amdt. 697 , offered by Mr. Honda, to transfer Member Transition Activities funds to increase the Capitol Police fund by $1,000,000. more than 634,667 hours of overtime and added reporting requirements. At a hearing on May 12, 2011, the Senate subcommittee discussed the basis of the Capitol Police request for the 2012 presidential nominating conventions. On June 2, 2011,. the House subcommittee discussed  the activities and budget request of the. Capitol Police, including determinants of the police mission and how the Capitol. Police could adjust to a funding change. The Capitol Police requested three additional full-time equivalents (FTEs) for 2012. of $17.9 million (-39.3%). A total of $67.9million was requested, an increase of $22.2 million (48.5%). The FY2011 level represented a 0.2% reduction from the $45.8 million provided for Library buildings and grounds in FY2010. The Library requested two recurring administrative provisions. It also requested two provisions that would 1. make available balances of expired Library of Congress appropriations available for the purposes of making payments for employees. of Congress under Section 8147 of Title 5, United States Code (relating to workers compensation payments); and 2. authorize the Librarian of Congress to dispose of surplus or obsolete personal property. The House-passed bill contains the workers compensation provision but not the surplus property provision. The Senate-reported version of the bill contains both of these provisions as well as a provision amending the Library of Congress Fiscal Operations Improvement Act of 2013. The bill was passed by the House on Wednesday. amending the Library of Congress Fiscal Operations Improvement Act of 2000 related to the use of revolving funds. The Consolidated Appropriations Act included the four provisions requested by the Library. At a hearing on March 11, 2011, the House subcommittee examined Library operations at various potential funding levels. The Senate subcommittee discussed the impact of funding cuts; the deferral of funding; and telework. The House panel discussed the search for a chief of the Asia Division; the relationship between fees for copyright registrants and costs to process registrations; the requested information technology security funding. its use of outside specialists; and plans for a tighter budget environment. The Library of Congress serves simultaneously as Congress's parliamentary library and the de facto national library of the United States. Its broader services to the nation include the acquisition, maintenance, and preservation of a collection of more than 147 million items in a wide range of traditional and new media. Its direct services include service to the general public and scholarly and library communities; administration of U.S. copyright laws by its Copyright Office; and administration of a national program to provide reading material to the blind and physically handicapped. material to the blind and physically handicapped. The Library requested $666.7 million, an increase of $38.1 million (6.1%) from the FY2011 level. The House-passed version of H.R. 2551 includes an increase in funding for the Library of Congress from $628.7million to $666million. The increase is in addition to the $628million requested by the Congressional Research Service (CRS) for research, analysis, and legislative assistance. The Congressional printing and binding account pays for expenses of printing, binding, and distribution of government publications for specified recipients at no charge. Included within these publications are the Congressional Record, Congressional Directory, Senate and House Journals, memorial addresses of Members; nominations; U.S. Code and supplements; serial sets; publications printed without a document or report number. The account also pays for envelopes provided to Members of Congress for the mailing of documents; House and Senate business and committee calendars; bills, resolutions, and amendments. committee calendars; bills, resolutions, and amendments; committee reports and prints; committee hearings; and other documents. The Office of Superintendent of Documents account funds the mailing of government documents for Members of Congress and federal agencies, as statutorily authorized. GPO's overhead, including the cost of producing and delivering the Congressional Record, was discussed at a hearing in the House on May 11, 2011. The Congressional Record is the official record of the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate. each fiscal year to remain available until expended for information technology security projects, and 2. allowed appropriations available to be used to pay the compensation of certain employees with non-immigrant visas. At a hearing on March 17, 2011, the Senate subcommittee discussed the prioritization of cost estimates; CBO's information technology request; its use of outside specialists; and plans for a tighter budget. At the House hearing on May 11, 2011,. the subcommittee discussed CBO's workload, impetus for reports, protocols for determining priorities, process for making long-term projections, and potential consequences of budget cuts. GPO's overhead, including the cost of maintaining unused space; security concerns; staffing issues. The future of paper in digital age and the operation of FDsys (the Federal Digital System), which will replace GPO Access. The timing of requested funding for the 2013 presidential inauguration. The role of GPO in the digital age; why GPO included in its request funding for 2013 Presidential inauguration; and the future of the GPO's use of the Congressional Record. The Senate subcommittee held a hearing on March 17, 2011, on GPO and FDsys.

ROUGE-1: 72.82, ROUGE-2: 67.66, ROUGE-L: 27.80
BERTScore: 63.78

==============================================
==================== [25/100] ====================
Summary:
The Section 5 Pilot to reduce reporting burden has made progress. The design of the procurement portion of the pilot has improved substantially. The current design remains limited by its lack of specifics regarding how a pilot focused on assessing contractors’ experiences with a centralized portal will be applicable to many other federal procurement reporting requirements. By addressing issues such as this and continuing to focus on implementing the act, the administration greatly increases the likelihood of creating a system that will achieve the goals of the act. The goal is to increase the transparency of financial information and improve the usefulness of that data. types of FAR-required reporting and the revised design briefly mentions other FAR requirements such as those for service contracts and affirmative action plans. The absence of an assessment methodology and an approach to test the scalability of the design is inconsistent with leading practices for pilot design. The pilot design will meet its stated objective of reducing procurement reporting burden more broadly. HHS has taken a number of steps to reduce the reporting burden on the federal government, including the creation of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Section 5 Pilot has two primary focus areas—federal grants and federal contracts (procurements) OMB partnered with HHS to design and implement the grants portion of the pilot and with GSA to implement the procurement portion. HHS developed six “test models” to evaluate different approaches to potentially reducing grantee reporting burden. OMB’s Office of Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP) developed and test a proof of concept reporting portal for reports required by the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and is piloting it with the centralized reporting of certified payroll by contractors working construction projects. grants and procurement portions of the Section 5 Pilot. The DATA Act requires that the pilot program should include the following design features: collect data during a 12-month reporting cycle and include a diverse group of federal award recipients. We determined that the updated design meets the statutory requirements for the pilot established under the DATA Act. The updated design for both parts of the Pilot meets the requirements for a pilot program. The pilot program will be rolled out over the course of the next two years, with a goal of completing it by the end of 2015. OMB’s July 2016 revision of the design of the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot also showed substantial improvements in reflecting the leading practices for effective pilot design. 5. Ensure appropriate two-way stakeholder communication and input at all stages of the pilot project, including design, implementation, data gathering, and assessment. The revised design includes a data-analysis plan that describes how OMB will collect, track, and analyze data produced by the pilot. It specifies that participants will submit payroll information to the centralized test portal on a weekly basis. leading practice were met. If we identified a critical gap or shortcoming related to the practice, we determined that the criteria were not met. HHS and OMB generally accepted the design of the grants and procurement portions of the pilot during our review. The design partially met the criteria. When we were unable to assess whether all aspects of a leading practice were meeting, we deemed the design partially meeting the criteria, the report said. The report said the design was in line with the requirements of the DATA Act. a risk of errors being introduced though human error. Agencies that are developing interim solutions will only have until May 2017 to test the data before the reporting deadline. As required by the DATA Act, OMB is conducting a pilot program, known as the Section 5 Pilot, aimed at developing recommendations for reducing reporting burden for grantees and contractors. The Section 5 pilot has two primary focus areas—federal grants and federal contractors. An OMB document commended these agencies for developing robust contingency plans since this will better position them for timely implementation. OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to providing technical guidance. To assess whether the Section 5 pilot designs meet statutory design requirements, we reviewed Section 5 of the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006. We reviewed the draft design documents to assess OMB and its partners’ plans for meeting these requirements. To supplement our review of those plans, we also spoke with cognizant staff implementing these pilots at OMB, HHS, and General Services Administration. of the pilot during our review. Officials generally accepted our feedback as useful and, in some instances, noted that they have or planned to make changes to their design as a result of our input. We also met with OMB to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to the design of the pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. We conducted the work upon which this report is based from May 2016 to December 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to HHS’s March 2016 revised design for the grants portion of the pilot partly reflects all five of the leading practices for effective pilot design. For example, in our April 2016 review we found that the grants design lacked specific details regarding how the data will be analyzed and how conclusions will be reached. Based on our feedback, OMB and HHS developed a plan to analyze survey and other data prior to the these pilots at OMB, HHS, and General Services Administration. We determined that the design met the criteria when we saw evidence that all aspects of a leading practice were met. federal contracts, grants, and subawards with an aggregate value between $1 billion and $2 billion. Based on our review of design documents as well as interviews with cognizant agency staff, there has been substantial improvement in this area since our last review. Both the grants and procurement portions of the pilot showed substantial improvements in the extent to which they reflect leading practices for pilot design (shown in the textbox below). The design of the overall pilot would meet these requirements. plan to analyze survey and other data prior to the start of data analysis. This plan specifies the types of quantitative and qualitative data analysis HHS intends to conduct for each test model and how that assessment links back to the stated hypotheses. HHS also added a sampling plan and information on participant outreach efforts to the design of the grants portion of the pilot which helped it to meet the leading practices for effective pilot design. Establish well-defined, appropriate, clear, and measurable objectives. Clearly articulate an assessment methodology and data gathering. more broadly. HHS has taken a number of steps to begin implementing the design of the grants portion of the pilot. Officials told us that they have attended an estimated 70 events since 2015 to discuss the grants pilot, during which they provided information to interested attendees on how to get involved. As of August 2016, HHS has begun administering data collection instruments for all of the test models. It has engaged in a number. of outreach efforts to recruit participants for its test models, officials told us. They have attended around 70 events. since 2015. objectives. Clearly articulate an assessment methodology and data gathering strategy. Identify criteria or standards for identifying lessons about the pilot to inform decisions about scalability. Develop a detailed data-analysis plan to track the pilot program’s implementation and performance. evaluate the final results of the project and draw conclusions on whether, how, and when to integrate pilot activities into overall efforts. Ensure appropriate two-way stakeholder communication and input for the project. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In August 2016, we reported that agencies are relying on a series of software patches from their enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors to facilitate their data submissions. ERP vendors are developing patches that will extract data to help their clients develop files that comply with DATA Act requirements. Patches that will facilitate the generation of agency file submissions were planned to be completed between August 2016 and February 2017. As of September 2016, the release of one of these patches has been delayed. These patches will help link an agency’s financial and award systems. implemented since the patches will enable them to construct and format their files for submission to the broker. Two agencies reported in their implementation plan updates that a delay in the release of the patches could jeopardize complete and timely data submission for May 2017. Treasury officials acknowledged that patches will make the submission process easier, but also pointed out that not every agency is able to take advantage of software patches. Some agencies reported that they developed plans for interim solutions to construct these files until the patches can be developed, tested, and configured. example, USDA officials said that the effort to create an interim solution has been very resource intensive. HHS has also developed an interim reporting solution that can generate the required files without depending on a patch. However, HHS officials said this interim solution is complex and their processes cannot be fully automated until the Oracle patch is released. Furthermore, since these processes are not fully automated, they carry a risk of errors being introduced though human error, officials said.. Agencies are working with HHS to develop a solution. As of September 30, 2016, data uploaded to the broker needs to successfully meet less than a quarter of these complex validation checks in order to be accepted for submission to Treasury. Treasury officials said that having about half of the validation rules produce warnings rather than fatal errors would provide agency officials with the flexibility to correct issues flagged by the broker or not to do so, depending on their knowledge of the context and situation of specific data elements. According to Treasury documents, in a future release of the broker, data submissions will need to pass more of these validation rules at a later date. The files will undergo two types of validation checks in the broker before being submitted to Treasury. Data element validations check whether data elements comply with specific format requirements such as field type and character length. Complex validations perform tasks such as checking data against other sources or using calculation rules to verify whether certain data elements sum up to each other. Treasury has configured these complex validation rules so that if a rule is not met, the broker can either produce a warning message while still accepting the data for submission or. Treasury released the schema version 1.0 on April 29, 2016—4 months later than planned and approximately a year before reporting is required to begin under the act. Under the act, agencies must report data in compliance with established standards by May 2017. OMB’s summary of agencies’ implementation plan updates acknowledged that the.still needs to be addressed to ensure agencies report consistent and comparable data. The newly established Data Standards Committee will be responsible for developing guidance to provide additional operational clarity regarding these data definitions. systems limitations, modernization efforts, and timing. For example, one agency reported that validation presents challenges because its financial systems are not properly integrated with procurement and grant systems. Similarly, several of its components are undergoing grant, procurement, or financial system improvements that coincide with implementing the DATA Act, which could pose a risk to timely DATA Act implementation if the improvements are delayed. The lack of properly integrated systems increases the risk of delays in implementing the Data Act, according to one agency. Another agency reported, for one of its legacy systems, obtaining the unique identifier to generate award financial data will likely be a manual process. The broker also extracts award and sub-award information from existing government-wide award reporting systems. This function was added during software development efforts in late September and early October 2016. Unlike the files submitted by agencies, these extracted files are not subject to any validations in the broker. However, Treasury implemented additional validation checks on the file containing agency financial information. Some of the programs, grants award-level information may not be reported for security reasons. The broker is based in Washington, D.C. Treasury’s software development team has been iteratively testing and developing the broker. On September 30, 2016, Treasury released a version of the broker, which it stated was fully capable of performing the key functions of extracting and validating agency data. Treasury officials told us that although they plan to continue to refine the broker to improve its functionality and overall user experience, they have no plans to alter these key functions. According to Treasury guidance documents, agencies are expected to use the brokers to upload three files containing data. We reviewed the broker made available by Treasury through open source code posted on a public website. We observed several demonstrations of how agencies submit their data to a prototype of the broker and the feedback produced by the system regarding data verification. We also interviewed knowledgeable officials from OMB, Treasury, and selected federal agencies and inspectors general, as well as enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors assisting federal agencies with technical issues. We reviewed the schema version, 1.0 and the broker's documentation related to the broker. Agencies may use the broker to verify the data files the agency plans to submit to Treasury. The broker uses validation rules to test the completeness and accuracy of the data elements and linkages between financial and award data. If data does not pass validation (see Step 6), the broker will provide error details to the agency. The agency should then update information and systems to make the data more accurate and reliable. Step 6: Test Broker Outputs and Ensure Data are Valid. Step 7: Update Data. agencies to complete each step. Playbook 2.0 states that agencies can use the milestones in Treasury’s implementation roadmap to help determine their own implementation milestones. Step 5: Prepare Data for Submission to the Broker. Step 6: Test Broker Outputs and Ensure. Step 7: Mapping agency data to the schema version 1.0, and implementing system changes as needed to collect and link data. Step 8: Testing Broker outputs and ensuring agency data is submitted to the broker. Treasury officials told us that the responsibility for ensuring the accuracy of these files lies with the DATA Act SAO at each agency. OMB Management Procedures Memorandum 2016-03 specifies that SAOs must provide reasonable assurance that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the agency account-level and award-level data. Before final submission of the data files in provide error details to the agency. The agency should then reference the authoritative data sources and address the discrepancies. Once the data is linked, validated, and standardized, agencies are to submit the data to Treasury for posting on USASpending.gov. Currently, the broker does not allow agencies to submit their data with qualifications, such as known quality limitations. OMB staff and Treasury officials said that they are reconsidering this position. Agencies have made progress toward creating their data submissions and testing them in the broker, but work remains to be done before actual reporting can begin. Treasury has made empty sample files available to agencies so they can begin testing their data. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Inspectors general are particularly concerned about their agencies’ ability to provide quality assurances for data that are not directly provided by the agency. OMB released draft guidance in August 2016 that specifies DATA Act reporting responsibilities when an intragovernmental transfer (both allocation transfers and buy/sell transfers) is involved. The guidance also explains how to report financial assistance awards with personally identifiable information (PII), and clarifies the SAO assurance process over the data submitted to the broker.on USASpending.gov. their initial DATA Act submissions, as well as senior accountable officials (SAO) certification and reporting non-financial data. One agency reported that its SAO may be unable to certify the quality of data if OMB’s guidance for the SAO certification cannot be supported by existing processes. Another agency reported concerns with the burden of reconciling account data with financial and award data. In addition, two agencies reported challenges with reporting beginning balances at the level of detail required by the DATA Act. GAO has made a number of recommendations that could help ensure the full and effective implementation of the act. OMB and Treasury have made progress implementing 5 of our recommendations related to DATA Act implementation. However, additional effort is needed to address 11 previous GAO recommendations that remain open. See appendix II for a list of our previous recommendations relating to the DATA Act and their implementation status. In written comments submitted to us, OMB provided an overview of their implementation efforts since the passage of the Data Act. These efforts include issuing three memoranda. This report will be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff has any questions about this report, please contact J. Christopher Mihm at (202) 512-6806. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of our report. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about the report or its findings. We will make the report available at a no charge to all interested parties. GAO’s Data Act Internal Working Group contributed to the development of this report. Additional members of the DATA Act Internal working group also contributed to its development. For more information on the Data Act, visit GAO.gov/DataAct. For additional information on GAO's Data Act internal Working Group, visitGAO.com/Data Act InternalworkingGroup. for more information about the data act, visit the dataact.gov/. For more on the data law, visit www.gao.org/data. we reviewed our past reports to identify applicable laws, regulations, and guidance, as well as reports from other entities that could inform our work. We selected a range of organizations, including domestic and international standards-setting organizations, industry groups or associations, and federal agencies. All of the organizations we identified endorse establishing and using a governance structure to oversee how data standards, digital content, and other data assets are developed, managed and implemented. Based on these selection factors we drew on work from the following organizations to help us identify data. Act of 1990 (CFO Act) agencies in their implementation plan updates; (3) the operationalization of government-wide data standards and the technical specifications for data reporting; and (4) updated designs for the Section 5 Pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. To identify key practices for data governance we reviewed our past reports to identify applicable laws, regulations, work from the following organizations. We also met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of their efforts to address our previous recommendation that they establish a data governance structure. This review is part of an ongoing effort to provide interim reports on the progress being made in implementing the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014. This report examines: (1) steps taken to establish a clear data governance structure which is particularly important during the upcoming transition to a new administration; (2) challenges reported by Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) agencies in their implementation plan; and (3) key contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV.on the last page of our report. Both approve new standards and ensure that already established standards are consistently applied and enforced across the federal government. Having a robust, institutionalized data governance structure is important is to provide consistent data management during times of change and transition. The transition to a new administration presents one such situation. We have previously reported that, given the importance of continuity when implementing complex, government-wide initiatives, the potential for gaps in leadership that can occur as administrations change can impact the effectiveness and efficiency of such efforts, potentially resulting in delays and missed deadlines. In July 2015, we reported that OMB and Treasury had not yet established a formal framework for providing data governance throughout the lifecycle of developing and implementing standards. Such a framework is key for ensuring that the integrity of data standards is maintained over time. We recommended that O MB and Treasury establish a clear set of policies and procedures for developing and maintaining data standards that are consistent with leading practices. The first of these steps was to establish a new Data Standards Committee that will be responsible for maintaining established standards and developing new data elements. OMB staff told us that the committee will focus on clarifying existing data standard definitions. OMB and Treasury have not yet institutionalized and clearly documented policies and procedures that are consistent with these key practices. A common set of key practices endorsed by standards setting organizations recommend that data governance structures should include the key practices shown in the text box below. The key practices include developing and approving data standards, managing, controlling, monitoring, and enforcing consistent application of data, and involving stakeholders in key decisions, as appropriate. one functional community (e.g., financial management, financial assistance, and procurement) According to OMB staff, the Data Standards Committee held its inaugural meeting on September 15, 2016, and will meet on a monthly basis. The committee has also drafted a charter that will delineate the scope of the committee’s work, as well as the composition and responsibilities of its members. Members include representatives from a range of federal communities including the grants, procurement, financial management and human resources communities. document, OMB will also be monitoring progress toward the statutory deadline and setting up meetings with any of the 24 CFO Act agencies that OMB identifies as being at risk of not meeting the implementation deadline. The agency will schedule these visits by reviewing the implementation plan updates and discerning which agencies appear to be experiencing the most challenges to implementation. To help address their challenges, 16 of the 22 agencies reported that they use certain mitigating strategies in their implementation plans. Five agencies did not identify any challenges in their plans. The SAO assurance means, at a minimum, that data reported are based on appropriate internal controls and risk management strategies identified in OMB Circular A-123. Table 3 shows the information that OMB required CFO Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates. The information also includes information on remaining actions the agencies should take to implement suggested steps 5 through 8 in Playbook 2.0. Table 4 describes the categories of challenges reported by 19 of the 24 CFO act agencies. Act implementation plans that they submitted in response to OMB’s May 2015 request. Each agency was to (1) update its timeline and milestones and explain the agency's progress to date and the remaining actions it would take to implement the act. OMB neither agreed nor disagreed with GAO's recommendation. Each of the 24 CFO Act agencies expect that they will fully meet the May 2017 deadline for DATA Act implementation, the GAO found in a review of the agencies’ updates. Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates, remaining actions to implement the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0, and the number of CFO Act agencies that included the information. In our July 2016 report, we reported on challenges agencies included in their initial implementation plans. We analyzed the agency-reported challenges and mitigating strategies and categorized them. We interviewed cognizant OMB and Treasury officials and obtained any supporting documentation to further understand the implementation challenges reported by agencies in the DATA Act. Treasury’s DATA Act Implementation Playbook (Version 1.0) contained eight suggested steps and a timeline. Steps 1 through 4 were to be completed by September 2015. As of October 2016, only 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had completed all steps 1 through 3. Four agencies reported they had not completed their inventory of data and identified the gaps in systems and processes for data elements (step 3) Playbook 2.0—issued June 24, 2016—includes expanded guidance on actions to be included in steps 5 through 8. the agencies, we found the following: Each of the 24 CFO Act agencies’ updates included timelines and milestones. Most of the updates included most of the OMB required information. Some of the CFO act agencies did not include information about some of the remaining actions to implement the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0. For example, 5 of the 22 CFO acts did not included information about testing for completeness and accuracy of data elements. For more information, visit the Playbook2.0 website. In May 2015, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directed federal agencies to submit Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014 (DATA Act) implementation plans to OMB concurrent with the agencies’ fiscal year 2017 budget requests. OMB and Treasury have taken significant steps toward implementing the act’s various requirements. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We have previously reported on these efforts and others and have identified a number of ongoing challenges that will need to be addressed. Signed into law on May 9, 2014, the DATA Act expanded on previous federal transparency legislation. The act requires government- wide reporting on a greater variety of federal funds. It also calls for the federal government to set government-wide data standards, identify ways to reduce reporting burdens for grantees and contractors (Section 5 Pilot) and regularly review data quality to help improve the data quality. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on May 8, 2014. It will take effect on July 1, 2015. seven overarching categories of mitigating strategies reported by these agencies to address DATA Act implementation challenges. Changes to internal policies and procedures, leveraging existing resources, using external resources, continuing communications, employing manual and temporary workarounds, monitoring and developing guidance, and enhancing existing systems. These strategies, as a whole, were similar to the mitigating Strategies reported by agencies in their initial implementation plans. See table 5 in appendix III for descriptions of the categories of mitigation strategies and the number of CFOs involved. Three agencies were selected for our January 2016 and August 2016 reports. This allowed us to assess progress in DATA Act implementation at these agencies. Although the information obtained from these three agencies is not generalizable to all agencies, they illustrate a range of conditions under which agencies are implementing the act. We met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of the DATA Act. At each agency, we reviewed Data Act implementation plan updates and interviewed officials responsible for implementation and DATA Act Implementation team members. information about testing for completeness and accuracy of data elements submitted to Treasury. 11 CFO Act agencies did not include information about workflows for addressing validation errors and revisions needed to agency data submissions. 13 CFO act agencies didn't include information on testing linkages of program and financial data or possible interim solutions to link such data, if needed. Without such information in agencies’ updates, it may be more difficult for OMB and Treasury to determine where to target their monitoring and assistance efforts to help ensure the DATA Act is successfully implemented. As of October 2016, 21 of 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had begun testing their data files in the broker. Only the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had completed testing the broker and revised its data files accordingly. Treasury also collects data from the four shared service providers that are helping to manage data submissions for their agency clients. As of October2016, two of these shared service provider reported to Treasury that they have completed testing all of their files in their broker. The broker is available to agencies so they can begin testing theirData. In January 2016 we reported that ensuring that data definitions are generally consistent with leading practices is important. We also reported that although the standardized data element definitions issued by OMB largely adhered to leading practices for establishing data definitions, several definitions had limitations that could lead to inconsistent reporting. In May 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB released additional guidance on reporting financial and award information required under the act. While OMB’s additional guidance addresses some of the limitations we identified, it does not address all the clarity issues we identified. In June 2016, OMB directed the 24 CFO Act agencies to update their initial DATA Act implementation plans that they submitted in response to OMB’s and classified data. One agency also reported ongoing issues with inconsistent quality of data submitted from their financial systems. A lack of complete and accurate agency data increases the risk that agencies may not be able to meet the DATA Act reporting requirements within the mandated timeframes. Such transitions may disrupt the momentum for meeting implementation timeframes or cause the government to fail to continue to build on previous accomplishments. of the DATA Act. These efforts include issuing three memoranda providing implementation guidance to federal agencies. OMB and Treasury met with each of the 24 CFO Act agencies to discuss their implementation timelines, risks, and mitigation strategies, and took steps to address issues that could affect successful implementation. The Data Standards Committee to develop and maintain standards for federal spending; and developing and executing the Section 5 pilot. Through these meetings, OMB staff learned that 19 of the24 CFO act agencies expect that they expect that the Act will be implemented. 21 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported costs to date and future estimated costs to implement the DATA Act reporting requirements. Total estimated cost reported by agencies to implement DATA Act includes costs for systems integration and modernization. It is important to note that the estimated total costs reported are relatively small when compared to the almost $81 billion spent on information technology in fiscal year 2016 alone. See appendix III for more details about the information that OMB required C FO Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates. challenges reported by agencies that may impede their ability to effectively and efficiently implement the DATA Act. These include systems integration issues, lack of resources, evolving and complex reporting requirements, and inadequate guidance. See table 4 in appendix III, which describes the categories of challenges and the number of CFO Act agencies reporting challenges in each category. Some of the challenges reported by the C FO Act agencies in their updates include the following: systems integration. staffing issues or funding constraints. Reporting. Data quality. the lack of timely and consistent guidance, agencies may need to continuously update or change their processes, which could adversely affect their ability to meet the DATA Act requirements. Some agencies are at increased risk of not meeting the May 2017 reporting deadline because of these challenges. In addition, inspectors general for some agencies, such as the Departments of Labor and Housing and Urban Development, have issued readiness review reports that also indicate their respective agencies were at risk of failing to meet this deadline. The CFO Act requires agencies to report to Congress by May 31, 2017. 11 of the 24 CFO Act agencies highlighted challenges related to the guidance provided by OMB and Treasury in their implementation plan guidance. One of the commonly cited challenges concerned complications arising due to the iterative nature or late release of the guidance. For example, one agency reported that developing its implementation plan was highly dependent upon the concurrent development of the schema version 1.0 and technical guidance being developed by Treasury. This agency stated that any delays or changes to these components will significantly affect its solution design, development and testing schedule, and cost estimate. to further understand the implementation challenges reported by agencies in their implementation plan updates. We also met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendations related to agency implementation plans. To assess efforts to date to operationalize government-wide standards, we reviewed OMB policy guidance intended to facilitate agency reporting. To examine the technical structure and specifications for reporting, we assessed Treasury’s processes for developing technical guidance and reviewed applicable technical documentation related to the schema version, 1.0 and 1.1. as a result of the aggressive implementation timelines specified in the act and the complexity associated with linking hundreds of disconnected data elements across the federal government, they made the decision to use an iterative approach to provide incremental technical guidance to agencies. The report is being sent to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; the Chief Executive Officer of Treasury; and other key stakeholders. According to Treasury, among other things, the report enabled agencies to provide feedback and contribute to improving the technical guidance. indicate their respective agencies are at risk of not meeting the reporting deadline. As discussed further below, the technical software requirements for agency reporting are still evolving. Any changes to the technical requirements over the next few months could also affect agencies’ abilities to meet the deadline. In August 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB established procedures for reviewing and using agency implementation plan updates that include procedures for identifying ongoing challenges. OMB’s document also states that it has worked to address these challenges and provide both policy and technical guidance. The final guidance, OMB M-17-04, was issued on November 4, 2016. OMB staff told us that they received feedback from 30 different agencies and reviewed over 200 comments on the draft guidance. Although OMB has made some progress with these efforts, other data definitions still needs to be addressed to ensure agencies report consistent data, the authors say. For example, officials from USDA, one of our case example agencies, told us they are waiting for guidance on insurance and indemnity reporting. Eight agencies reported that if policy or technical guidance continues to evolve or be delayed, the agencies’ ability to comply with the May 2017 reporting deadline could be affected. Some agencies also reported concerns about the requirement for SAOs to certify the data reported quarterly. Because of the lack of timely and consistent guidance, agencies may need to implement appropriate validation steps needed to give assurance over the data. For example, if guidance clarifying certification procedures is delayed, one agency reported that it may not have time to implementappropriate validation steps. enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors assisting federal agencies with technical implementation. To obtain specific information on how agencies use the technical guidance, we selected three agencies based on whether they were in compliance with existing federal requirements for federal financial management systems. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) were chosen. Although the information obtained from the vendors was obtained from a public source, the information was based on a request for information. OMB plans to only include data collected up to June or July 2017 in order to allow for sufficient time to analyze the results and incorporate them into the report’s findings. Staff said that that they plan to continue to collect data through the procurement portion of the pilot until they obtain a full 12 months of contractors’ experiences with centralized payroll reporting. Afterwards, OMB will analyze this data, compare it to the smaller data set produced for the August 2017 report to Congress and, if necessary, make any needed revisions to the findings. certified payroll reporting to other types of FAR-required reporting. The current design lacks a plan for integration. This is of particular concern given the diversity of reporting requirements contained in the FAR. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; and the Secretary of the Treasury. The draft report has been sent to the Department of the Interior, the Secretary for the Treasury, the Department for the Agriculture, the Treasury and the State Department. OMB staff and GSA officials informed us that they decided to delay launching the portal to conduct the procurement portion of the pilot in order to ensure that security procedures designed to protect personally identifiable information (PII) were in place. OMB staff said that despite the security-related delay, they still plan on collecting 12 months of data through the procurement pilot as required by the act. GSA said they needed to issue a System of Records Notice and redesign the certified payroll reporting platform so that it conforms to agency security procedures. The portal is expected to begin collecting data between late January 2017 and late February 2017. GSA’s 18F completed a prototype for the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot at the end of May 2016. HHS officials reported e-mailing almost 8,000 potential participants and plan on emailing additional prospects, if needed, to reach an established minimum number of participants for each test model. 18F's role was to explore how an electronic certified payroll reporting portal could reduce contractor burden for federal Davis-Bacon contracts. In August 2016, GSA”s Federal Acquisition Service, the implementation lead for the pilot, presented a prototype to OMB. GSA’s Federal Acquisition Service, the implementation lead for the pilot, awarded NuAxis the contract to build the prototype from information obtained as a result of the 18F prototype process. GSA officials told us that starting in September 2016, Nu Axis began developing a web-based reporting interface that will allow users to centrally enter and submit certified payroll data. They plan to make this interface compatible with other existing systems, such as the System for Award Management (SAM) and Wage Determination Online (WDOL)

ROUGE-1: 74.79, ROUGE-2: 68.14, ROUGE-L: 19.90
BERTScore: 60.96

==============================================
==================== [26/100] ====================
Summary:
Judge Gorsuch dissented from the majority's holding that federal agents did not abridge the defendant's Fourth Amendment rights when they approached the house where he was staying. The house had several "No Trespassing" signs posted in its yard and on its front door. In one of these decisions, United States v. Carloss, Judge Gorsuch wrote that these signs "revoked the implied license that the public has to approach the house and knock on it" The term "no trespassing" is used in this context. the public has to approach the house and knock on the door" on the grounds that the placement of such signs around a home would not have conveyed to an objective officer that he could not knock on its door asking to speak with its residents. In so doing, he noted that, at the time when the Fourth Amendment was drafted, "the common law permitted government agents to enter a home or its curtilage only with the owner's permission or to execute legal process" He also observed that at common law, homeowners could generally revoke licenses to enter. In the second case involving the scope of the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures, Judge Gorsuch wrote on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel. In this case, the government had obtained one of the defendant's messages from an Internet service provider and opened the message and photographed it. The judge wrote that at common law, homeowners could generally revoke licenses to enter their property at their pleasure. "State officials no less than private visitors could be liable for trespass when entering without the homeowner's consent," he said. containing child pornography, and forwarded the email to the government's agent. In so doing, the court noted that the "Fourth Amendment was no less protective of persons and property against governmental invasions than the common law was at the time of founding" Another area implicating the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures is the prohibition against the use of excessive force in the course of making an arrest. While Judge Gorsuch frequently relied on originalist principles in other areas of search and seizure law, Supreme Court precedent appears to be the exclusive focus. seize evidence from the defendant's car during the resulting stop. Noting a New Mexico court ruling that had concluded that the ordinance relied on by the police officer did not provide a legal basis for the stop, the majority decision held that a failure to understand the law by the "very person charged with enforcing it" was objectively unreasonable and warranted suppression of the evidence seized. Judge Gorsuch in dissent rejected the view that an officer's mistake of law " always violates the Fourth Amendment" Instead, he relied on the text of the Fourth amendment and precedent emphasizing that suppression was necessary. Gorsuch has heard many criminal cases during his tenure on the Tenth Circuit. His views view the courts as being exclusively responsible for defining the playing field on which criminal suspects and the government interact. Like Justice Scalia, the nominee has taken an originalist approach to construing the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures, focusing on how the Framers would have construed the term "unreasonable" as it is used in this context. Two notable opinions authored by him include Constitutional Rules of Criminal Procedure. His views on the Confrontation Clause and the scope of self-incrimination rights under the Fifth Amendment are less clear because he has not written on them to a significant extent. On the whole, though, his opinions are seemingly shaped by his views regarding how legal texts, particularly the Constitution and statutes, are to be construed. Consequently, it would seem that Judge Gorsuch does not view the courts as being exclusively responsible for defining the law, rather than creating it. He also seems to believe that the courts' role is to apply the law and not create it. inquiry had previously been found to be required only in cases involving allegations of overly tight handcuffing. The issue in Nicholson was whether a police officer, who mistakenly thought the defendant had violated a local traffic ordinance, could seize evidence from the defendant's car during the resulting stop. A year and a half after the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Nicholson , the Supreme Court effectively sided with Judge Gorsuch's more flexible view of the exclusionary rule. The court held in a different case that a mistake of law can "give rise to the reasonable" a mistake of law can "give rise to the reasonable suspicion necessary to uphold" a traffic stop under the Fourth Amendment. While the approach taken by Judge Gorsuch in his dissent in Nicholson eventually found favor at the Supreme Court, the nominee's dissent in a case on another often litigated issue in constitutional criminal law didn't. In Williams v. Jones , Judge Gorsuch served on a panel reviewing the ineffective assistance claim of a criminal defendant who, after receiving a full defense, was denied a lawyer. process guarantees a fair trial, not a good bargain," he said. The Supreme Court, in a pair of 5-4 decisions for which Justice Scalia wrote dissenting opinions, held that the Sixth Amendment right to adequate assistance of counsel extends to the negotiation and consideration of plea bargains. Judge Gorsuch generally brought the same textualist approach to statutory criminal law issues that he brought to other statutory issues, as is illustrated by his opinion on behalf of a unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit in United States v. Dolan. Judge Gorsuch's opinions could, in part, be seen to reflect or even expand on the precedent of the Supreme Court's decision in Heller. Judge Gorsuch has quoted or otherwise noted Heller 's language about restrictions on the possession of firearms by felons, in particular. In a few cases, such as Pope, the opinions cite to other judges who have taken a different view of Heller. But these citations by Judge Gorsuch may be intended to signal awareness of these judges' arguments, rather than agreement with them. been unremarkable. Judge Gorsuch has touched upon the Second Amendment and the constitutionality of firearms regulations briefly in his written opinions while on the Tenth Circuit. These writings suggest that Judge Gorsuch views the Second. Amendment as generally protecting an individual right to bear arms, a position that could be seen as consistent with the originalist. position. In short, if Judge. Gorsuch has any distinctive leanings with respect to questions regarding the interpretation or enforceability of international law in U.S. courts, they are not apparent in his judicial writings to date. Gorsuch's references to the Second Amendment have generally appeared in cases concerned with how to construe federal criminal statutes. The most notable of these was arguably Judge Gorsuch's dissent from the Tenth Circuit's.position that could be seen as consistent with the originalist approach often ascribed to him. The Supreme Court's decisions in District of Columbia v. Heller and McDonald v. City of Chicago were two challenges to firearms restrictions in which Justice Scalia notably participated during his time on the High Court. may be brought under Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the United States Code against a defendant who fired a single shot that hit two separate victims. The total number of charges lodged against a criminal defendant under the statute should never "exceed the number of uses, carries, or possessions" Just as you can't throw more touchdowns during the fourth quarter than the total amount of times you have thrown a touchdown, you cannot use a gun to kill two people at the same time. of the state in question exempted persons with valid licenses to carry concealed weapons, among others, from its general prohibition upon carrying loaded firearms in public. However, in the Tenth Circuit's view, the existence of this exemption did not negate law enforcement's reasonable suspicion, at the time when the defendant was detained, that the defendant's possession of the firearm was unlawful. Law enforcement had "no affirmative obligation prior to seizing Defendant—at the risk of harm to [themselves] and others—to inquire of [the defendant] whether his possession of a handgun fell within the classes excepted by the statute" Games-Perez centered on the question of whether federal statutes penalizing the possession of firearms by felons require the government to prove that a defendant knew of both his own status as a felon. The longstanding Tenth Circuit precedent is that the government need only prove knowing possession of a firearm. In his dissent, Judge Gorsuch opined that reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute as "leapfrogging over the first statutorily these was arguably Judge Gorsuch's dissent from the Tenth Circuit's denial of en banc review. times you have thrown a touchdown, you cannot use a firearm during and in relation to crimes of violence more than the total number of times you have used a firearm. Previously, in dissenting from the denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez , Judge Gorsuch had expressed similar concerns about reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute. According to Judge Gorsuch, such a reading "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic," he said in a dissent. Judge Gorsuch has made similar statements about gun possession being "often lawful" and a "matter of constitutional right" In his 2015 opinion for the majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz, he said the only statutory element separating innocent (even constitutionally protected) gun possession from criminal conduct in [the statutory provisions in question] is a prior felony conviction. He also said the statutory provision in question could not be reasonably construed to prohibit using, carrying, or possessing a gun per se. Gorsuch's focus has been his focus on the grammar of legislative language. He has diagrammed a segment of a sentence in a criminal statute to help address the underlying interpretative question. In his 2015 opinion for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz, he asked whether multiple charges may be brought under Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the U.S. Code. The specific interpretativequestion in Rentz was if multiple charges could be brought. Amendment's Petition Clause, Judge Gorsuch, writing for a three-judge panel, reversed a district court's dismissal of a claim that several county officials had violated the plaintiff's First Amendment rights. In a particularly pointed passage in Van Deelan , Judge Gorsuch wrote broadly about the underlying dangers of suppression of speech by government officials. When public officials feel free to wield the powers of their office as weapons against those who question their decisions, they do damage not merely to the citizen in their sights but also to others, he writes. the First Amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody, even when involving a private figure on a matter of private concern. In the context of public employee speech, the nominee has authored several opinions limiting or dismissing First Amendment lawsuits brought by government employees against their employers. The speech occurred pursuant to the employees' official duties and, therefore, could be regulated by the government. With regard to challenges to zoning ordinances, he authored a concurring opinion that raised the question of whether constitutionalizing the protections for such parodies was necessary or wise. Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a petition for en banc rehearing. He contended that the underlying panel decision interpreted the First Amendment too broadly. In a case raising issues similar to those in a case presently before the Court, Judge Gorsuch joined the dissent. The dissent was in Doe v. Shurtleff , in which the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the government in a First Amendment case. The decision was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. opinions over the past decade respecting the First Amendment and freedom of speech. Many of the Court's recent First Amendment rulings have been closely divided. The eight-member Court split evenly during the October 2015 term on a notable case regarding public employee unions. If confirmed, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the future direction of free speech law. The nominee has authored or co-authored a number of books on free speech and free speech rights, including "Free Speech in America" and "The First Amendment in America," among others. Gorsuch's work on the Tenth Circuit has broached the issue of campaign finance regulation and the First Amendment. The nominee has authored or joined a handful of opinions touching on free speech issues. For example, in the en banc ruling in Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion that concluded that the "logic" of Citizens United v. FEC —the First Amendment case.direction of free speech law. The Supreme Court has invalidated a number of federal and state election laws at the margins. Gorsuch rejected the county's argument that the plaintiff's tax assessment challenges did not amount to "constitutionally protected activity" He concluded that the First Amendment "extends to matters great and small, public and private" The Van Deelan decision and Judge Gorsuch's reluctance to distinguish between types of speech protected by the Constitution may align him with the majority of the Roberts Court. The First Amendment liberties and the promise of equal treatment essential to the continuity of our democratic enterprise, writes Julian Zelizer. Constitution may align him with the majority of the Roberts Court that has, in recent years, rejected the argument that the First Amendment does not protect certain "low value" speech. In Bustos v. A&E Television Network, Judge Gorsuch wrote an opinion holding that a prisoner who "merely conspired with" the Aryan Brotherhood could not sustain a defamation lawsuit resulting from a History Channel television show. In addition to Van Deelan , Judge Gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that promote the rights of the press at the expense of plaintiffs. preclude" the defense of substantial truthfulness. In two other cases brought against television stations, Judge Gorsuch joined opinions that dismissed privacy tort claims on First Amendment grounds. Nonetheless, the nominee should not be viewed as a free speech absolutist, as a number of Judge Gorsuch's opinions have recognized limits to the First Amendment's speech protections. For example, in Mink v. Knox, a 2010 case that concluded that the first Amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody, even parody. Gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that view the First Amendment as an important restriction on government activity. At the very least, the Riddle concurrence's language may signal that Judge Gorsuch disagrees with retired Justice John Paul Stevens's position that "money . . . is not speech" The Supreme Court "has yet to apply strict scrutiny to contribution limit challenges," he wrote. The Supreme court has yet to "applied strict scrutiny" to campaign finance challenges, he added. in Riddle does not go so far as to argue explicitly for subjecting contribution limits to strict scrutiny. It does cite to Justices who have made such an argument in the past, prompting some commentators to conclude that the nominee may favor subjecting campaign finance restrictions to the most stringent standard of review. On the other hand, other legal scholars have read Judge Gorsuch's opinion in Riddle to "simply highlight the confusion he saw" in the Supreme Court jurisprudence on the proper level of scrutiny to be afforded campaign contributions. disagreement between the members of the Court in Citizens United was more complex than whether the First Amendment protects a corporation's speech. In other words, Judge Gorsuch's vote in the 2013 en banc case may have limited significance with respect to his broader views on the constitutionality of campaign finance laws. Riddle v. Hickenlooper, a 2014 case that invalidated a Colorado law, may offer more insights as to his views on First Amendment and campaign finance regulation. The case involved whether the "asserted inclinations and advantages of corporations in corrupting officeholders" justified restricting corporate campaign expenditures. Hickenlooper , a 2014 case that invalidated a Colorado law allowing major party candidates to accept twice as much in contributions per individual as independent and minor party candidates. Judge Gorsuch agreed with the majority that the Colorado law violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. He attempted to allay fears that the ruling "imperiled" any attempts to regulate campaign contributions, citing federal law as a nondiscriminatory model available to the federal government. He said the law sprang from a "bald desire to help major party candidate at the expense of minor party candidate" basis that the court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. For example, in Wilderness Society v. Kane County , a majority of the en banc panel held that the plaintiffs lacked prudential standing in a challenge brought against a local government entity under the Supremacy Clause. Judge Gorsuch, however, wrote a concurring opinion concluding the court lacks subject matter jurisdiction overThe case in the first place. Similarly, in Kerr v. Hickenlooper , a suit brought by state legislators claiming that a voter initiative violated the Constitution's Guarantee Clause, the original three-judge panel rejected arguments that the Court lacked jurisdiction. In two dissents, Judge Gorsuch has criticized what he viewed as overly expansive interpretations of the reasonable observer test. In Green v. Haskell County Board of Commissioners, he dissented from the denial of a request for rehearing. In Van Orden v. Perry, he argued that the county's "inclusive display" of the Ten Commandments was indistinguishable from the display at issue in that case. He also argued that "like cases should be treated alike" in the Supreme Court's Establishment Clause cases. The Tenth Circuit should reevaluate whether the endorsement test even applies to the dispute. Judge Gorsuch's dissent is reminiscent of recent Supreme Court jurisprudence, where a majority of the Justices, including Justice Scalia, appeared to support the Ten Commandments' display. In that case, the Supreme Court had upheld a display of the decalogue among other monuments and historic markers on the grounds of the Texas state capitol. Given these perceived parallels between Green and Van Orden , the nominee's dissent concluded by noting the "long" custom of displaying the 10 Commandments in public places. The First Amendment prohibits the establishment of a national religion. The High Court has, at times, read the restriction to bar certain government actions that endorse religion. In determining what constitutes an unconstitutional endorsement of religion, the Court has in the recent past adopted Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's "reasonable observer test" Judge Gorsuch has, in two dissents, in American Atheists as merely replicating the errors from Green , stating: "[W]e will strike down laws other courts would uphold, and do so" Gorsuch similarly dissented from an order denying en banc rehearing in American Atheists, Inc. v. Davenport. In that case, the panel had relied on the reasonable observer test in holding that the display of twelve-foot high crosses on public lands to memorialize fallen Utah Highway Patrol troopers violated the Establishment Clause. Echoing his dissent in Green , Judge Gorsuch again raised concerns about the Tenth Circuit's interpretation of Justice O'Connor's test, arguing that "our observer continues to be biased, replete with foibles and prone to mistake" Gorsuch joined the majority opinion in Abdulhaseeb v. Calbone. He authored a concurring opinion reinstating several RLUIPA claims based on an Oklahoma prison's denial of an Islamic prisoner's request for a halal certified diet. In his concurrence, the nominee emphasized that the inmate's charge was that he was denied "all means of accessing food [that] he can eat consistent with his . . . sincerely held religious beliefs" But there appear to be some limits on how far statutory free exercise protections extend in his view. seen as unusual in that the opinion did not formally adjudicate the underlying dispute, perhaps reflecting the close division of the current Court on free exercise matters. Outside of litigation over the ACA's contraceptive requirement, Judge Gorsuch has emphasized the importance of accommodating religious beliefs in other statutory free exercise challenges. For instance, in Yellowbear v. Lambert , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of the state of Colorado, argued that the state should not be required to accommodate religious beliefs of its employees in the workplace. In Yellowbear v. Lambert, a Wyoming prison lacked a sufficiently compelling interest in imposing a substantial burden on the religious exercise of an inmate. The inmate was an enrolled member of the Northern Arapaho Tribe and sought access to a sweat lodge to practice his religious beliefs. In so doing, the nominee articulated two relatively pro-plaintiff interpretations of free exercise law, noting the "modest" task of the court in determining a claimant's sincerity and rejecting a conception of the compelling interest inquiry that would allow the government to impose a burden. this nation's long-held aspiration to serve as a refuge of religious tolerance," Judge Gorsuch's concurrence said. He emphasized that courts should largely defer to the assertions about the nature of religious beliefs made by those who sincerely hold these beliefs. This was out of respect for religious liberty and because of the judiciary's limited competence to scrutinize the veracity of such beliefs, he said. Judge Gorsuch emphasized that it made little difference that the burden on the plaintiffs in Hobby Lobby did not stem from the government affirmatively requiring their use of a particular drug or device. of a marijuana distribution conspiracy who claimed that the use of the drug was central to the exercise of their newly created religion. The Supreme Court has issued a number of notable opinions over the past decade respecting the First Amendment and Establishment Clause. Judge Gorsuch is apt to interpret statutory free exercise laws, much like the Establishment Clause, to embrace the role of religion in society. But there are limits to the degree to which he will defer to the purported interests suggested by claimants seeking to rely upon such laws. was Justice Scalia. If confirmed to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the jurisprudence regarding freedom of religion. In recent years, the Court has taken up a number of religious freedom cases, with Justice Scalia voting as part of five-Justice majorities cases. A central constitutional issue respecting free of religion that Judge Gorsuch has considered concerns the reach of the First Amendment's prohibition on the "establishment of religion" The nominee has expressed fairly clear views, writing or joining several notable opinions on the Tenth Circuit. Gorsuch's dissent in American Atheists expressed skepticism regarding interpretations of the First Amendment that discourage accommodation for religious views. He appears to favor an approach that is more restrained in using the power of judicial review in Establishment Clause cases. In two cases subsequently reviewed by the Supreme Court, the nominee authored or joined opinions involving challenges under the Religious Freedom Restoration. The nominee's most notable writings on freedom of religion may arise in the context of statutory free exercise claims.respect an establishment of religion," he said. or joined opinions involving challenges under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) to the contraceptive coverage requirement in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) RFRA provides that federal laws that substantially burden a person's exercise of religion are permissible only if they are the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling governmental interest. In the Tenth Circuit's 2013 en banc decision in Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the lead opinion of Judge Timothy Tymkovich and wrote a separate concurrence. Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence viewed RFRA as a "tie-breaker" that Congress designed to "override other legal mandates, including its own statutes," he said. Two years later, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion in Little Sisters of the Poor, he wrote. He said RFRA "overrides" other laws "if and when they encroach on religious liberty" and "must respect" the court's decision. The Supreme Court will hear arguments on the nominee's nomination on Tuesday. concluded that the "logic" of Citizens United v. FEC —the 2010 Supreme Court ruling that, in relevant part, stated that "First Amendment protection extends to Corporations" —compelled the conclusion that the First Amendment also protects a corporation's religious expressions. While various commentators have suggested the Hobby Lobby decision signals Judge Gorsuch's broader support for decisions like Citizens United , a lower court's reliance on Supreme Court precedent may not necessarily signal agreement with that precedent. More specifically, as noted by one of the concurring opinions in Hobby Lobby , the disagreement between the members of the Court in Citizens United was noted. Gorsuch joined an opinion in Little Sisters of the Poor v. Burwell that repeated many of the themes of his Hobby Lobby concurrence. The central issue was whether allowing religious entities that objected to the ACA requirement to fill out a form that would functionally require a third-party insurer to provide the coverage violates the free exercise rights of those religious entities. Judge Harris Hartz, joined by four other judges, including Judge Gorsuch, dissented from the decision in the case. The case involved a corollary issue to the one raised in the earlier litigation. by four other judges, including Judge Gorsuch, dissented from the decision not to rehear a case dismissing a challenge to this government accommodation policy. In particular, Judge Hartz's opinion criticized the panel's refusal "to acknowledge that [the plaintiff's] religious belief is that execution of the [accommodation] documents is sinful" In so doing, the dissent in Little Sisters of the Poor can be seen to have repeated many of the themes from Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence by describing the majority approach as "dangerous" not the least restrictive means of achieving these goals. On appeal to the Supreme Court, a five-Justice majority (including Justice Scalia) largely agreed with the Tenth Circuit's assessment and affirmed the lower court. Judge Gorsuch's concurring opinion in Hobby Lobby , while centrally focused on procedural matters tangential to the RFRA claims, did discuss the substantive claims in broader terms than the majority opinion. Noting that RFRA was enacted for the express purpose of "vindicating this nation's long-held aspiration to serve as a refuge of free exercise disputes," the nominee may have a clear preference for accommodation. RFRA and RLUIPA are "super statute[s]," "capable of mowing down inconsistent" laws, he says. For a plaintiff "to win" under the law "takes no small effort," he adds. Such laws do "not offer refuge to canny operators who seek through subterfuge to avoid laws they'd prefer to ignore," he writes. In one case, United States v. Quaintance , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a unanimous panel, rejected the argument that RFRA barred the prosecution. discussed below. However, the nominee's discussion of these concerns in Lexington Insurance is arguably notable for its relative length, particularly given that the sole legal authority cited by Judge Gorsuch is an 1892 Supreme Court decision. The two other judges on the panel would not have reached the questions regarding the absurdity doctrine, concluding instead that the plaintiff had waived the argument. Furthermore, consistent with a textualist approach, Judge Gorsuch has made limited resort to legislative history materials. Unlike the other judges, he has not used the term absurdity. The Tenth Circuit has a relatively routine caseload when compared to some of its sister circuits. More than forty percent of the cases that the Tenth Circuit hears are criminal law matters or petitions from federal or state prisoners. The Tenth Circuit also hears a number of private civil litigation disputes, such as cases on labor, insurance, contract, and tort law.on certain issues if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. The D.C. Circuit rarely has the opportunity to address certain topics, including international law and foreign affairs, terrorism and national security. The Tenth Circuit does not hear many environmental law cases because many major environmental statutes require parties challenging nationally applicable federal laws or administrative agency actions to file a petition in the D.C. Circuit. The territorial jurisdiction of the Tenth Circuit, however, does cover six western states and parts of Yellowstone National Park, which collectively contain millions of acres of land owned by the federal government. The lack of a robust record for Judge Gorsuch on environmental law matters may not be surprising. While on the Tenth circuit, he participated in a handful of otherenvironmental law cases. The Supreme Court enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases. Unlike the Supreme Court, the federal courts of appeals are required to hear many cases as a matter of law. As a result, the appellate courts consider "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted" Perhaps indicative of the nature of federal appellate work, the vast majority of cases decided by three-judge panels of federal courts are decided by federal courts. The Supreme Court is bound by Supreme Court and circuit precedent and is not normally in a position to espouse freely their views. Administrative law cases at the Supreme Court are often contentious, resulting in divided decisions on legal issues of national import. The Tenth Circuit's docket does not include as many administrative law cases as other federal courts. In the few cases that have come before the court, the justices have been split 4-4 in favor of the government. On statutory interpretation, the views of the justice he would replace would largely appear to align with those of the Justice he'd replace. On the issue of the scope of an agency's discretion to issue guidance documents to set regulatory policy, the Justice would likely side with the agency in this case. that the conduct alleged was constitutionally excessive. In reaching this conclusion, the nominee proceeded through an analysis of each of the Graham factors. Similarly, but resulting in a contrary outcome, Judge Gorsuch authored the majority opinion in Wilson v. City of Lafayette , finding qualified immunity protected an officer who used a taser on an individual fleeing arrest, resulting in the suspect's death. Perhaps responding to concerns raised by the two other panel members in their concurring and dissenting opinions, Judge Scalia noted that "no one" has ever been charged with excessive force. Gorsuch: "No one questions that the use of a taser, especially if one probe hits the head, amounts to a significant physical intrusion requiring a correspondingly significant justification" The nominee found the "physical intrusion" in Wilson was not clearly established to be excessive in light of the other Graham factors, including the arrestee actively resisting arrest. In Fisher v. City of Las Cruces, the majority found that a material factual dispute existed as to whether the plaintiff's injuries, which he sustained while being handcuffed after he had shot himself, were excessive. In Herrera v. Bernalillo County Board of County Commissioners , a case where three sheriff's deputies tackled a plaintiff who was not resisting arrest, resulted in injuries to his knee. Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion affirming the district court's holding that the deputies were not entitled to qualified immunity. In reaching this, he used the Graham factors to determine whether the deputies' conduct was excessive or not. The law at the time of the incident clearly established that the conduct alleged was constitutionally excessive. he sustained while being handcuffed after he had shot himself, were sufficient for an excessive force claim. Judge Gorsuch concurred with the majority's use of the Graham factors and its conclusion that the factors suggested the officers may not have acted reasonably. But he faulted the majority for "tak[ing] a detour, asking whether, in addition to satisfying all three Graham factors, Mr. Fisher has also shown that he suffered a 'non- de minimis injury'" Such an inquiry had previously been found to be required only in. Law, Supreme Court precedent appears to be the exclusive focus in his excessive force opinions. In such cases, the nominee has relied on what he views as the "relatively exacting 'objective reasonableness standard' articulated in Graham v. Connor" Application of this test has led Judge Gorsuch to find both excessive force and excessive force not justified. He has also found the use of excessive force to be a violation of the Constitution's guarantees of due process and the presumption of innocence in cases of self-defense. Gorsuch's most pointed critique of McDonnell Douglas came in a 2016 First Amendment retaliation case, Walton v. Powell. Rejecting the defendant's argument that the test should be applied in a free association. In Barrett v. Salt Lake County, the nominee highlighted criticism by two colleagues that thetest is not "helpful enough to justify the costs and burdens associated with its administration" The Supreme Court will vote on whether to confirm the nominee to the high court in October. The Senate is expected to vote on the nomination in the coming weeks. that the test should be applied in a free association case. The Tenth Circuit found it inapplicable outside of motions for summary judgment in cases relying on circumstantial evidence. Legal commentators have noted that because the test is "bedrock employment law doctrine" any limits Judge Gorsuch might put on it might not apply to that case. It is unclear whether the elimination of the McDonnell Douglas test would necessarily favor a particular side in employment litigation, but legal commentators have said it is a bedrock doctrine. Under the McDonnell Douglas test, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination, and then the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the plaintiff can still prevail by offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual. In Paup v. Gear Products, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch joined a per curiam opinion that, while acknowledging McDonnell Douglas was "binding on us" in the case at hand, noted criticism that its multipart, burden shifting test is unfair. historical test for substantive due process. He notes that the test is the subject of "considerable methodological disputes," including "what 'level' of historical abstraction" is needed. The book itself does not expressly reject the historical test, nor does it attempt to resolve the debate over the test's "methodological warts" Instead, Judge Gorsuch, "seeking to apply the history test faithfully," examines the "historical record broadly in terms of time and at different levels of abstraction," concluding that there is limited support for the test. vote to grant an extension of time for a party to submit a filing generally does not signal agreement with the substantive legal position proffered by that party. A vote to rehear a case en banc could signal disagreement with the legal reasoning of the panel decision, and may suggest that a judge wants the entire court to have an opportunity to correct a perceived perceived mistake. Some observers have highlighted votes by Judge Gorsuch in favor of having certain three-judge panel decisions reconsidered. These votes should be viewed with a degree of caution. entire court to have an opportunity to correct a perceived error by the panel. Most of us vote against most such petitions and suggestions even when we think the panel decision is mistaken. En banc review is extraordinary, and is generally reserved for conflicting precedent within the circuit. It makes application of the law by district courts unduly difficult, and egregious errors are more likely to be made in such a case, a judge said in a dissent from a decision denying a petition for a rehearing en banc. three-judge panel rejected arguments that the court lacked jurisdiction over the case. Judge Gorsuch dissented from a subsequent denial of rehearing en banc. He argued the case presented a nonjusticiable political question. Under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), a reviewing court must set aside agency action that is "not in accordance with law" or is "in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or short of statutory right" The case is Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council. an issue that was not part of the trial court's record in the original proceeding. The Tenth Circuit, sitting en banc, held that the deferential standard of review of state court decisions under AEDPA does not apply when the state court fails to consider material evidence. Judge Gorsuch authored a dissent arguing that a state court's decision to exclude evidence in accordance with state evidentiary rules amounted to an adjudication on the merits, thereby requiring federal courts to apply AedPA's deferential standards. a majority of the entire Tenth Circuit, concluded that the Environmental Protection Agency had incorrectly determined that certain property was "Indian land" In so holding, the nominee adopted what he characterized as a "simple and predictable" two-part test for determining what constitutes Indian land. Judge Gorsuch's en banc opinion thus rejected the government's invitation to interpret the operative statutory language according to an older, multi-factor test, which the nominee described as consisting of "multifarious and incommensurable competing factors" based on a reading of an express preemption clause within the Medical Device Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act (FDCA) This provision, however, has a complex history of statutory interpretation by the Supreme Court. Judge Gorsuch noted that one such case articulated the following test for preemption, stating: "[T]ort suits do not impose new 'requirements' on manufacturers and are not preempted so long as the duties they seek to impose 'parallel' duties" question: when exactly does a state law duty 'parallel' a federal law duty enough to evade preemption? That term doesn't appear in the statute, so its meaning was left entirely to judicial exposition," he said. The Supreme Court has twice revisited and cut back the scope of its initial decision, he added. "How are we supposed to apply all these competing instructions? It's no easy task," he asked. Ultimately, the court held that the law was clear and unambiguous. apply when an agency seeks to apply its interpretation retroactively via adjudication. As in his opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela , the nominee grounded his decision in principles of separation of powers, due process, and equal protection. Judge Gorsuch reasoned that the more an agency's decision resembles that of a judge, the stronger the case for retroactive application of the decision. But the more the decision resembles legislation, the less likely such a decision should be, he said. He noted the presumptive prospective effect of legislation compared with the retroactive effect of a judicial decision. The Board of Immigration Appeals again applied its own reinterpretation of the immigration statutes retroactively, this time to a petition submitted prior to both the re Interpretation and the subsequent subsequent ruling. The court would have thought it improbable that the Framers had envisioned that an executive branch agency could ever overrule a federal court in the first place, Judge Gorsuch said in his ruling on the case. The decision was upheld on appeal by a federal appeals court in New York. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the matter in the coming weeks. petition submitted prior to both the reinterpretation and the subsequent appellate court approval of it. Judge Gorsuch also penned a solo concurrence to take note of the "elephant in the room" He wrote that Chevron and Brand X permit executive bureaucracies to swallow huge amounts of core judicial and legislative power. "It seems more than a little difficult to square with the Constitution," he said. The case is Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, which the Supreme Court is expected to rule on soon. find agency actions arbitrary and capricious or lacking in substantial evidence, particularly where he has doubted that the parties received fair notice of applicable rules and regulations. For example, in National Labor Relations Board v. Community Health Services , the majority panel upheld the Board's decision to "exclude interim earnings from backpay calculations when the employer has wrongfully reduced employee hours" The majority noted that while the agency's decision was inconsistent with prior determinations, the agency had considerable discretion to determine how back pay should be calculated. determine how back pay should be calculated and, accordingly, ruled that its justifications were reasonable. Judge Gorsuch dissented, claiming that the agency's decision failed to explain why it treated similarly situated entities—that is, terminated employees versus reduced hours employees—differently and departed from its own preexisting rules. His views on capital punishment may be particularly important insofar as he would, if confirmed, be replacing Justice Scalia, who believed capital punishment should be reserved for the highest criminals. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in the case. A majority of the High Court voted to affirm the Tenth Circuit's decision in Dolan. Justice Scalia joined a dissenting opinion authored by Chief Justice Roberts that viewed the "clear statutory text" to preclude the court from granting restitution more than 90 days after sentencing. This difference seems to have been shaped by the different emphases that the Tenth circuit and the Chief Justice gave to different interpretations of the law. The Supreme Court will hear the case again in October. the Tenth Circuit and the Chief Justice gave to different words in the statute. The Tenth Circuit focused on the "notwithstanding" clause, viewing it as mandating restitution in every case. The dissenters on the High Court, in contrast, relied, at least in part, on the phrase "n notwithstanding any other provision of law," which they say requires restitution even if it is not made at sentencing or within 90 days thereof. The Supreme Court's ruling is expected to be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. The court ruled that the 90-day rule was a claims processing rule intended to promote speed and unconnected to the case. The defendant argued that the language was jurisdictional, which would have meant that the court lacked the authority to enter any restitution order after the 90 days had passed. The case is U.S. v. Dolan, and the ruling is published online at www.cnn.com/2013/01/16/justice/judge-gorsh-dolan-says-90-day-rule-was-claims-processing-rule. processing rule intended to promote speed and unconnected to the court's authority. In so doing, the nominee noted various factors, including the "statute's language and structure," as well as an interpretative canon. Dolan was written relatively early in Judge Gorsuch's tenure on the Tenth Circuit. It could suggest certain differences between his textualist approach and that of Justice Scalia, as the nominee is known for being textualist. The Supreme Court is expected to make a decision on the nominee in the coming weeks. for "discrimination in compensation" claims applied only to "unequal pay for equal work" claims, and not to all claims of discriminatory compensation. In another decision, A.F. ex rel. Christine B. v. Española Public Schools, the judge looked to the "language of the Act itself," the Act's structure, key canons of statutory construction, and the context in which the statute was enacted in adopting a more narrow reading of the phrase in question. He rejected the view that the phrase was used in the Act as "some Rorschach inkblot to which we may ascribe whatever meaning springs to mind" decision, A.F. ex rel. Christine B. v. Española Public Schools , Judge Gorsuch wrote for the majority in holding that a student who had previously settled a lawsuit involving alleged violations of the IDEA was barred from "seeking the same relief" under the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The nominee relied primarily on the "plain text" of the statute, which the majority construed to mean that plaintiffs attempting to bring civil actions under other federal laws must exhaust certain procedures set forth in IDEA. is "bedrock employment law doctrine" any limits Judge Gorsuch might impose on the use of this test could cause a "significant change in how employment discrimination lawsuits are prosecuted and defended" Other statutory civil rights cases can be seen to have been directly shaped by Judge Gorsuch's general approaches to statutory interpretation. For example, in Almond v. Unified School District #501 , the nominee employed a textualist approach in one of the first opinions interpreting the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, concluding that the Act's expanded accrual period for "discrimination in compensation" claims applied only to "unequal pay" on race or sex, but may be more skeptical of interpreting the Equal Protection Clause expansively to shield against previously unrecognized forms of discrimination. Judge Gorsuch also joined the unanimous decision by a panel of the Tenth Circuit in 2015 in Druley v. Patton. In 2009, in 2009, Judge Gorsuch joined a unanimous decision  in a case involving a transgendered prisoner in an all-male facility. In that case, the court ruled that the prisoner was not entitled to wear female undergarments because she was housed in a male facility. Gorsuch joined a unanimous decision by a panel of the Ninth Circuit in Kastl v. Maricopa County Community College District. The case involved a transsexual instructor whose contract was not renewed after she had been banned from using the women's restroom. In both cases, unanimous panels purported to rely on direct precedent in reaching their conclusions. For example, in Druley , the panel noted Tenth Circuit precedent holding that Tenth Circuit precedence holding that Druley was a case of equal protection violation. Druley , the panel noted Tenth Circuit precedent holding that transsexuals are not members of a class for which heightened scrutiny is required under the Equal Protection Clause. Because of this, in the panel's view, the state officials' decisions were subject to the less stringent "rational basis review," which the decisions were able to withstand. Similarly, in Kastl , the Panel noted, in a short three-page order, that the plaintiff had failed to "put forward sufficient evidence demonstrating that [the school's actions were] motivated by her gender" Gorsuch: Secsys LLC v. Vigil engages in an extended discussion of equal protection. This opinion characterizes equal protection as "the law's keystone," he says. Secsys is unusual in that it explores the differences between intentional discrimination and discriminatory applications or enforcement of "rules of general application," he adds. It also explains what types of government action may be subject to heightened scrutiny, he says, and explains how the Supreme Court will rule in the case. The ruling is expected to be delivered by the end of the month. or women may not bid for a state contract or that only those of a certain religious faith may. The nominee also described the plaintiffs as asking the court to endorse a "novel theory" of equal protection in this case. This language could suggest that Judge Gorsuch believes that the Constitution's equal protection principles play a crucial role in prohibiting certain government discrimination based on race or sex. But he may be more skeptical of the plaintiffs' claims. The case is still pending and will be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court. Secsys claimed state officials deprived it of equal protection by requiring it to award a subcontract under a state contract to a specific individual. Judge Gorsuch rejected this claim, in part, on the grounds that the state officials would have required a similar subcontracting agreement from any other contractor, making their actions distinguishable from "a rule saying that African Americans or women may not bid for a statecontract or. subject to heightened scrutiny," he said in a ruling on the case. The ruling is expected to be published soon. In United States v. Manatau, the court relied on the plain language of sentencing guidelines. The government had argued that the term "intended loss" should be construed to refer to a loss "done on purpose" The court disagreed, finding that the "plain language" of the guideline was such that "Intended" must be construed as a loss that the defendant "knew would result from his scheme" A more stringent approach to mens rea requirements, in which intention or knowledge of wrongdoing is required, is also favored. subsequent cases: "While we apply judgment and restraint before certifying, . . . we will nonetheless employ the device in circumstances where the question before us (1) may be determinative of the case at hand and (2) is sufficiently novel that we feel uncomfortable attempting to decide it without further guidance" In articulating these principles, the nominee emphasized that "[i]n making the assessment whether to certify, we also seek to give meaning and respect to the federal character of our judicial system" the principle of individual liberty in applying his formalist approach to a number of cases implicating the separation of powers. In United States v. Baldwin , he spent a portion of his majority opinion criticizing the proliferation of criminal prohibitions in the Code of Federal Regulations. After a panel of judges affirmed a conviction for failure to register as a sex offender, he said the ruling was an exercise in excessive delegation. The conviction was nevertheless affirmed. He said the decision was not a case of excessive delegation, but of overreach. Dissenting judge argued that the majority had "misread[]" the statute in question. The outcome under the majority's reading ran contrary to Congress's intent, he said. However, in perhaps a reflection on how his broader views on the role of the federal judiciary might differ, the dissent also objected to the outcome under that reading. It "harm[ed] the interests of the children that IDEA was intended to protect," the dissent said. It also objected that the outcome "run contrary to the intent" of Congress. from an Internet service provider and opened the message and its accompanying attachments, thereby discovering child pornography. The government argued, among other things, that this search was permissible pursuant to the "private search doctrine" The nominee rejected this argument because the third party in Ackerman's case had not opened the email to view its contents, but instead had ran a search that merely identified the email as possibly containing child pornography, and forwarded it to the government's office. He said the search was a warrantless search of a person's effects that had previously been searched by a private third party. a court of appeals 'may accept an appeal' from an order of remand 'if application is made not [more] than 7 days after entry of the order'" Noting that "[t]he statute doesn't place any other conditions on our discretion," the nominee allowed the interlocutory appeal. In Shook v. Board of County Commissioners of the County of El Paso , the district court denied the motion for class certification of county jail inmates. For example, the court said it would not accept a motion to certify the inmates as class members. denied the motion for class certification of county jail inmates with mental health needs. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch affirmed this conclusion based on a close examination of the "two independent but related requirements" of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23. The nominee concluded that the rule "demands a certain cohesiveness among class members with respect to their injuries, the absence of which would not be tolerated in a class action," he said. He added that the class would be unmanageable because of the difficulty of fashioning relief that would be applicable to the class. trade practices involving allegedly misleading website disclosures. The defendant sought to remove the case to federal court pursuant to the federal Class Action Fairness Act. The district court refused to exercise jurisdiction because it found the defendant failed to meet its burden of showing that over $5 million was "in controversy," as required by the statute. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion reversing the district court based on a detailed construction of the statutory term " in controversy" "In controversy" is "a term heavily encrusted with meaning," Judge Gorsuch explained. sought to remove the case to federal court as a "mass action" under the Class Action Fairness Act. The district court denied this request. In a unanimous opinion analyzing whether the Tenth Circuit had jurisdiction to hear an interlocutory appeal, Judge Gorsuch's analysis hinged largely on the plain language of the statute. "When we interpret a statute we begin, of course, with its plain terms," he said. "And here, as we've mentioned, provides that a court of appeals 'may accept an appeal' from an provide swift and definitive ends to protracted civil litigation to the extent the law allows. In Hammond v. Stamps.com, Inc. , for example, the plaintiff filed a putative class action in state court alleging unlawful trade practices involving allegedly misleading website disclosures. In keeping with his approach to statutory interpretation, in civil liability cases, Judge Gorsuch has shown a tendency to examine closely the federal statute or rule in question, especially in cases involving determinations of eligibility for class action status.. BP sought to remove the case to federal court as a state case. Judge found "federal jurisdiction here beyond doubt," thereby allowing the class action to proceed in federal court. BP Am erica , Inc. v. Oklahoma ex rel. Edmondson was a suit brought in state court alleging manipulations of propane gas prices in violation of state law. The case was settled out of court in 2010. The judge ruled that the case was a federal matter. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court. Medical device and a proposed class action alleging securities fraud. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for example, the nominee lamented: It took a titanic fifteen years for the case to reach a jury. No doubt a testament to contemporary civil litigation practices that ensure before any trial is held every stone will be overturned in discovery, even if it means forcing everyone to endure the sort of staggering delay that took 15 years to get to a jury in this case. An issue of considerable dispute on the High Court in recent years, Judge Gorsuch could have an impact should he be elevated to the Court. In determining whether federal law preempts common law tort claims, the nominee's approach, as in other areas, is centrally grounded in the words of the federal statute at issue. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for instance, property owners filed a class action under the federal Price-Anderson Act and state tort law against each other. among class members with respect to their injuries, as he found the rule did in Shook. In 2005, the nominee, then in private practice, coauthored two articles critical of securities fraud class actions. Should he be elevated to the High Court, Judge Gorsuch could also be influential in the area of enforcement of arbitration provisions, writes Julian Zelizer, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says the nominee could have a major impact on the way arbitration is enforced in the future. means forcing everyone to endure the sort of staggering delay and (no doubt) equally staggering expense the parties endured here. Somehow, though, this case managed to survive the usually lethal gauntlet of pretrial proceedings and stagger its way to trial. From this sentiment, it might be surmised that Judge Gorsuch may be particularly receptive to curtailing the costly litigation process through strict readings of statutes that create private rights of action and provide for procedural devices, such as class action suits, broad enforcement of arbitration clauses. Claim of a criminal defendant who, after receiving a full and fair trial, was sentenced to a harsher sentence than he otherwise would have received under an offered plea bargain. The defendant argued that his trial counsel had unduly pressured him into rejecting the plea. A majority of the court agreed that the defendant had established that the trial counsel rendered deficient performance that prejudiced his client. Judge Gorsuch, however, dissented, arguing that there is no constitutionally protected entitlement to accept and enforce a pretrial plea offer. unlikely to interpret the substantive component of the Due Process Clause expansively. Relative to Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch has said little on the subject and does not appear to have significantly addressed the merits of a takings claim in a judicial opinion. This is unsurprising, as the Tenth Circuit does not hear many takings claims because the Tucker Act vests the U.S. Court of Federal Claims with jurisdiction over such claims when the plaintiff seeks more than $10,000 in compensation from the federal government. If Judge Gorsuch is elevated, he could very well hear takings issues on the Court's docket. v. Kemp , he wrote a unanimous opinion reversing a district court's dismissal of certain counts against a state official on Eleventh Amendment grounds. In reaching this outcome, the nominee reviewed extensively the Supreme Court'sEleventh Amendment jurisprudence. Namely, Judge Gorsuch described Hans v. Louisiana , which interpreted the Amendment as precluding suits by citizens in federal court against their own states, and Ex parte Young , which specified circumstances under which the Amendment does not bar suits against a states. rather than monetary damages and is brought against state officers acting in their official capacities, rather than against the state itself. In reviewing further additions to the "rococo quality" of this Eleventh Amendment jurisprudence, Judge Gorsuch noted that "the Supreme Court has in recent years added a new gloss on Young 's gloss on Hans' gloss on theEleventh Amendment" Ultimately, he found the case could be decided on the sole question of whether the relief was prospective in nature. Having found that it was, under the federal Price-Anderson Act and state tort law against operators of a nuclear weapons manufacturing plant to recover for damages caused by releases of plutonium and other hazardous substances. After the federal claims failed, the district court disallowed the case to proceed on the state law claims, holding that they were preempted by federal law. Judge Gorsuch disagreed, saying: "Where does any of this language—expressly—preempt and preclude all state law tort recoveries for plaintiffs who plead but do not prove nuclear incidents? We just don't see it" just don't see it," Judge Gorsuch said. In Caplinger v. Medtronic, Inc. , a case in which the plaintiff asserted a variety of state tort claims, Judge Gorsuch authored an opinion for the majority. Ca Plinger affirmed the district court's dismissal of the complaint as preempted by federal law based on a reading of an express preemption clause within the statute. The majority also looked to the "larger statutory structure" and the statute's legislative history to buttress his conclusion. The Supreme Court has long warned against this sort of regime. The parties in Browder were not properly raised by the parties inBrowder , Judge says. Judge: "Make of the Fourteenth Amendment a font of tort law" needlessly superimposed on perfectly adequate existing state tort law systems. He says the case should be decided in state courts where rights can be vindicated adequately. The case should not be heard in federal court as a matter of routine, he says, and the parties should have raised the issue. The themes highlighted in his 2016 lecture on Justice Scalia's legacy previously appeared in several of Judge Gorsuch's opinions on the Tenth Circuit. Rejecting the view of the judge as a "pragmatic social-welfare maximizer," Judge Gorsuch, quoting Justice Scalia, argued for a more limited role for judges in the American political system. In a number of cases, the nominee rejected more flexible approaches to interpreting the Constitution in favor of originalism. The nominee examined the time of the events in question would have understood the law to be. Gorsuch's respect for the decisions, interpretations, and rules of state courts is evident in the majority and concurring opinions in Browder v. City of Albuquerque. This case involved a claim against an off-duty police officer who killed one person and injured another while speeding through a red light. Although Judge Gorsuch affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity for the police officer in his majority opinion, he wrote separately to explain his views on when federal courts should abstain, for reasons of federalism, from deciding cases. most notable substantive due process opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch—is Browder v. City of Albuquerque. In Browder , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel, upheld a district court order that declined to dismiss the substantive dueprocess claims brought against the officer by the victims of the crash. One of the victims was a man who was injured when a police officer raced through the city streets of Albuquerque in his police cruiser after finishing his shift. The judge ruled that the officer's actions violated the plaintiffs' substantive due due process rights. In 2009 in Strickland v. United Parcel Service, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch agreed with two colleagues that the plaintiff should be able to proceed to trial on a FMLA retaliation claim. But he differed from his colleagues as to the plaintiff's Title VII case based on the factual record before the court. While the other two judges voted to reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment to the defendant on the Title VII claim, Judge Gorsuch would have affirmed the lower court's decision. VII claim, Judge Gorsuch would have affirmed the lower court's decision. In particular, he construed two key depositions relied on by the plaintiff as simply showing that the plaintiff's supervisor "harassed male employees in very much the same manner he harassed Ms. Strickland" In another fact-intensive civil rights case resulting in a different outcome—a ruling for the plaintiffs— Orr v. City of Albuquerque , Judge Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion. He engaged in a "thorough review of the record," which examined official policies and testimony. sustain a defamation lawsuit resulting from a History Channel television series describing the plaintiff as a member of that gang. Noting that the First Amendment requires a plaintiff pursuing a defamation claim to prove the underlying falsehood of the statement at issue, the Bustos decision held that the plaintiff had failed to show the History Channel's statement had a significant impact on his reputation. Likewise, Judge Gorsuch joined a panel opinion in Cory v. Allstate Insurance , which dismissed a defamation suit on the ground that "minor inaccuracies will not preclude" the defense of substantial truthfulness. Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah & Ouray Reservation v. Utah , the nominee wrote a unanimous opinion that granted an injunction. In that case, the tribe had prevailed in federal court four decades earlier on its claims that Utah and several local governments were unlawfully trying to displace tribal authority. Judge Gorsuch acknowledged that the federal Anti-Injunction Act "usually precludes federal courts from enjoining ongoing state court proceedings" "out of respect for comity and federalism," he relied upon "an Supreme Court decisions about arbitration were closely split by 5-4 margins. In Howard v. Ferrellgas, Judge Gorsuch characterized the FAA as having a "heavy hand in favor of arbitration" In Ragab v. Howard, the nominee disagreed with the panel majority's conclusion that a collection of conflicting arbitration provisions in the parties' contracts was unenforceable. The Supreme Court has generally viewed federal law as encouraging alternative dispute resolution in this area of law, writes Julian Zelizer. "I just don't see any doubt that the parties before us did intend to arbitrate," he says. Gorsuch: The panel's "holding represents a significant new federal intrusion into state judicial functions" In another habeas case, Wood v. Milyard, the nominee's unanimous opinion held that a state procedural default did not bar federal habea review. He noted that federal courts must respect state court rules when appropriate, stating: "As a matter of comity and federalism, it's a federalism issue" The Supreme Court will hear arguments in the case in October. should be decided when possible by state, not federal, courts. Judge Gorsuch's preference for leaving novel questions of state law to the state courts also informed a dissent he authored in a habeas case. In Wilson v. Workman , the nominee faulted the majority for "ventur[ing] a guess about the meaning ofState law" He asserted that "[a]sking the [state court] to interpret its own rule . . . would have had the benefit . . ." of 'help[ing to build a cooperative federalism' interpretations. His support for the broader concept of a cooperative federalism between state and federal courts figures prominently elsewhere in his federalism jurisprudence. Such themes are evident in his dissent from a denial of a request for a rehearing en banc in Williams v. Jones. In that case, the majority declined to review a panel opinion that required a district court to craft a remedy for what the panel determined to have been ineffective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations in a criminal case. Gorsuch says deference to state courts is vital to a system of cooperative federalism. But he has also recognized limits to such deference, particularly when actions of a state or its subdivisions are in clear conflict with federal court judgments. For example, in Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah & Ouray Reservation v. Ute, he said: "As a matter of comity and federalism, . . . we will usually hold our tongues about any potential federal law violation" federal character of our judicial system,'" he writes. At the center of Judge Gorsuch's argument for sending questions of state law to the state is "certification's useful role in promoting a cooperative federalism" A related aspect of federalism is the doctrine of state sovereign immunity, which the Supreme Court has recognized underlies the Eleventh Amendment, and is a fundamental aspect of sovereignty retained by the states. In Hill v. Kemp, he wrote a unanimous opinion reversing a unanimous decision in favor of the state in that case. Nomination shows respect for state court decisions, interpretations, and rules, writes Julian Zelizer. He says it's unclear to what degree nominee's conclusions reflect his approach to federalism. Zelizer: One discernible limit on the nominee's general deference to state courts is the need for finality in federal court judgments. The nominee's respect for the decisions and interpretations appears to be grounded in his support for the of respect for comity and federalism, Zelizer says. The Senate is expected to vote on whether to confirm the nominee on Friday. Gorsuch has expressed a preference for state courts to decide novel matters of state law. In Pino v. United States, he laid out certain principles to guide the determination of when certification is appropriate. "While we apply judgment and restraint before certifying, we are equally aware of our obligation to defend the law's promise of finality," he says. "We are also aware of ... that we have a duty to respect and deference to state proceedings," he adds. The Supreme Court will hear arguments on the case on September 26. In December 2016, the Supreme Court split 4-4 over whether to stay (i.e., suspend pending further review) the execution of an Alabama man who had challenged the state's method of administering the death penalty. The tie vote resulted in the denial of the inmate's application for a stay and left in place a decision by the Eleventh Circuit that had rejected as untimely and unmeritorious the prisoner's Eighth Amendment challenge to the drug protocol that the State of Alabama uses. Amendment challenge to the drug protocol that the State of Alabama used in its lethal injections. Judge Gorsuch's votes in support of two Tenth Circuit opinions rejecting similar challenges to the method in which a state carried out executions suggests that, if confirmed, he might provide a fifth vote against such challenges. In Warner v. Gross , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion holding that the use of the drug midazolam in executions by lethal injection was unlikely to violate the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. Gorsuch could be influential regarding the future of the death penalty. He has authored or joined opinions reviewing the manner in which states carry out executions, as well as opinions reviewing state court convictions and executions. If confirmed, he would replace Justice Scalia, who believed the death Penalty was fully consistent with the Eighth Amendment. He would replace two Justices currently on the Court who have argued openly that the practice is unconstitutional in all its forms, and with the Court remaining closely divided on many issues relating to capital punishment. Supreme Court later affirmed that decision by a vote of 5-4, with Justice Scalia in the majority. Similarly, in Estate of Lockett v. Fallin , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion affirming the dismissal of an Eighth Amendment claim brought by an executed prisoner's estate. The court, relying on recent guidance from the Supreme Court, held that an accidental and "isolated mishap" that occurs during an execution does not violate the Eighth Amendment even if it causes some pain to the inmate. Trammel , Judge Gorsuch agreed that the court should deny the petitioner's claim for relief. But he expressed concerns with the state court's apparent willingness to impose capital punishment on an accomplice. The judge wrote that the Eighth Amendment phrase "cruel and unusual punishment" would likely bar such a concept of punishment. He wrote that such a punishment would likely be illegal under the First Amendment's Eighth Amendment clause, which protects the right to a fair trial and the presumption of innocence in a criminal case. State prisoners sentenced to death pursuant to a judgment of a state court may challenge their convictions and sentences in federal court. Such prisoners may file a petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus. That is, generally, a judicial determination as to whether the prisoner should receive a new trial, new sentence, or be released. Notably, the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 2002 provides for such a petition. Also find expression in opinions he has authored or joined reviewing federal district court decisions on ha beas corpus petitions. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) requires federal courts to accord a large degree of deference to state court decisions when reviewing a prisoner's conviction or sentence. This deferential standard of review, which is designed to avoid friction between the federal government and the states, typically makes it difficult for an inmate to prevail in a federal habeas case. Like Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined majority opinions denying such relief in a number of cases. executions, as well as opinions reviewing state court convictions and sentences in capital cases. These votes and opinions suggest that, while the nominee is not wholly opposed to scrutinizing a state's imposition of the death penalty, in line with his general views on judicial restraint, he generally accords a large degree of deference to decisions by state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials on matters relating to the states' imposition and administration of capital punishment. For example, in December 2016, the Court has remained divided concerns the manner in which states carry out the death Penalty. prisoner's convictions should be affirmed, and two judges (including Judge Gorsuch) agreed. Judge Gorsuch disagreed with the other two judges on the panel on the question of whether the state court of appeals had neglected to apply controlling Supreme Court precedent properly in assessing the petitioner's claim of juror bias during sentencing. He argued that the court should defer to the state appeals court's statements in its opinion, which indicated that the state trial court had applied the correct standard. He asserted that the Tenth Circuit owed "double deference" to the appeals court. asserted that the Tenth Circuit owed "double deference" to the state criminal appeals court's decision that the state trial court did not improperly fail to exclude the jurors from sentencing proceedings. Judge Gorsuch's opinions in these cases suggest he will largely defer to the states on matters related to capital punishment. In one capital case in which the majority denied the petition for habeas relief, he said he may question the state's imposition of the death penalty. In Williams v. Trammel, he agreed that the court should deny the petition. majority opinions denying such relief in a number of cases, emphasizing AEDPA's deferential standard of review. In a few cases, the judge has dissented from majority opinions granting such relief, arguing that the court should have accorded more deference to the state court's decision to reject the inmate's challenges to his sentence or conviction. For example, in Wilson v. Workman , the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals had rejected two death row inmates' claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. courts to apply AEDPA's deferential standard in reviewing the state court's decision. A further example of his tendency to defer to the states on capital punishment issues is his opinion in Eizember v. Trammel. The prisoner argued that the state trial court should have excluded jurors because of their alleged bias in favor of capital punishment. All three judges on the panel agreed that the prisoner's convictions should be affirmed, and two judges (including Judge T.S. Ellis) agreed with the prisoner. or how he would approach these issues if he were a Supreme Court Justice. Even in closely contested cases where concurring or dissenting opinions are filed, it still may be difficult to determine the preferences of the nominated judge. The act of joining an opinion authored by another judge does not necessarily reflect full agreement with the underlying opinion. For example, in an effort to promote consensus on a court, some judges will decline to dissent unless the underlying issue is particularly contentious. As one commentator notes, "[T]he nominated judge did not actually write an opinion in the case" In a number of opinions the nominee expressly limited the scope of the majority opinions he authored. He has also frequently concurred or dissented to take issue with majority opinions that, in his view, reached issues that were unnecessary to the court's ultimate purpose. In a 2009 concurrence, the nominee wrote that "[j]udicial restraint usually means answering the questions we must, not those we can" For more on this story, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. The fact that a judge joins in a majority opinion may not be taken as indicating complete agreement. Using caution when interpreting a judge's vote isolated from a written opinion may be particularly important with votes on procedural matters. For example, aJudge's vote to grant an extension of time for a party may be seen as a vote on the outcome of the case, rather than a vote to agree with the majority opinion on the underlying issue. A judge's silent acquiescence may be understood to mean something more like 'I accept the outcome in this case, and I accept that the reasoning in the majority opinions reflects what a majority of my colleagues has agreed on' as a "progressive" legal scholar prior to his appointment to the Court in 1939. Justice Harry Blackmun disappointed some early supporters by becoming a voice for judicial restraint and caution when the Court reviewed laws that restricted civil liberties during World War II and the early Cold War era. Justice Blackmun was originally considered by President Richard Nixon to be a "strict constructionist," in the sense that he viewed the judge's role as interpreting the law, rather than applying it to a specific case. Justice Blackmun authored the majority opinion in Roe v. Wade recognizing a constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy. He was generally considered one of the more liberal voices on the Court when he retired in 1994. The difficulty in attempting to predict how a nominee will approach the job of being a Justice remains even when the nominee has had a lengthy federal judicial career prior to nomination. Federal appellate judges are bound by Supreme Court and circuit precedent and, therefore, must adhere to the precedents set by the Supreme Court. owners chose to "run their business to reflect their religious values," challenged the contraceptive requirement. They argued that it violated their religious beliefs for their businesses to "facilitate any act that causes the death of a human embryo" The opinion for the majority of the Tenth Circuit concluded that the ACA contraceptive coverage requirement likely created a substantial burden on the organization's free exercise rights. The Tenth Circuit deferred to the plaintiff's conception of its religious beliefs, and, viewing the dilemma posed by the contraceptive. religious beliefs, and, viewing the dilemma posed by the contraceptive policy as a "Hobson's choice" Judge Tymkovich concluded that the policy amounted to a substantial burden. While acknowledging the "importance" of the government's proffered compelling interests in promoting public health and gender equality, he said the existence of a wide range of exemptions to the requirement undermined the justifications for the policy and demonstrated the policy was not the least restrictive means of achieving these goals. On. describing the majority approach as "dangerous . . . to religious liberty" because it is "not the job of the judiciary to tell people what their religious beliefs are" On appeal, the High Court agreed to hear multiple lower court decisions on this issue. In the consolidated case, Zubik v. Burwell , ordered the respective circuit courts to reconsider the cases after affording the parties time to reach a compromise that would provide contraceptive coverage without imposing the alleged burden on the challenging entities. a divided Court appears to have moved toward such an approach. The book does question the reach of Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. In particular, the controlling plurality opinion in Casey reaffirming Roe v. Wade 's central holding respecting the right to an abortion, grounded the decision partly on the moral argument that "choices should be made for the sake of the child" and not for the benefit of the mother or the fetus. It asks open questions that "one might" ask about the efficacy of such an interpretation. grounded the decision partly on the moral argument that "choices central to personal dignity and autonomy" "are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment" The Casey plurality also concluded that the doctrine of stare decisis—or respect for long settled law—required upholding Roe. Relying on this second holding to respond to autonomy based arguments for a right to assisted suicide, Judge Gorsuch contended that Casey should be viewed as based on its "narrowest rationale" He took the view that the alternative of recognizing new rights based on broad libertarian concepts like individual autonomy like autonomy was not worth it. or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified" when identifying what "liberty" interests are protected under the Fourteenth Amendment. Judge Gorsuch questioned "whether Justices O'Connor and Kennedy meant to suggest in Michael H. Baird that a court actually may disregard an on-point specific tradition . . . in favor of a more generally analogous, but less directly applicable one" The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue in the next few months, and the case is likely to be closely watched. O'Connor's Michael H. concurrence, Eisenstadt v. Baird , as "an equal protection decision," rather than a due process one. Judge Gorsuch appears to be somewhat skeptical of more expansive views of the historical test to determine what constitutes a fundamental right. In recent years, a divided Court appears to have moved toward such an approach, Judge Gorsuch says. He also examines what he calls the "reasoned judgment" approach whereby "moral reasoning" and "critical discourse"dictate what is a right. levels of abstraction," concluding that there is limited support for a historical right to assisted suicide. In Michael H. v. Gerald D. , Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion, joined by Justice Kennedy, had rejected the conclusion in Justice Scalia's plurality opinion that courts should look to the "most specific level at which a relevant tradition protecting, or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified" Judge Gorsuch challenges the views of Justices O' Connor and Kennedy respecting the historical test and the level of abstraction needed to recognize a historically based fundamental right. court of appeals. Report highlights Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings, many of which address assisted suicide and euthanasia. Report focuses particularly on cases in which the sitting panel was divided, as these cases arguably best showcase how he might approach a legal controversy. During his 2006 confirmation hearing, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the argument that his writings on euthanasia and assisted suicide had nothing to do with the case before me. The book does not purport to provide a conclusive view of the author's understandings of the underlying constitutional issues. do with the case before me," as the "litigants deserve better than that" and "the law demands more than that," he says. In fact, much of the book has little to do with the law. At its heart, the book explores the various ethical arguments regarding assisted suicide and euthanasia, ultimately lodging an argument against their legalization "based on secular moral theory" He argues that "the intentional taking of a human life by private persons is always wrong" But his book does not address "publicly authorized forms of assisted suicide" The nominee addressed key legal doctrines implicating the right to die, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: The writings of a nominee to the Supreme Court may not fully represent the nominee's current views. He says Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings on substantive due process suggest that the nominee is unlikely to interpret the substantive component of the Due Process doctrine, if elevated to the court. The nominee's book does not address "publicly authorized forms of killing like capital punishment and war," Zelizer says. The book centers on two Supreme Court cases from 1997, Washington v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill. Judge Gorsuch devotes a chapter to questions related to determining whether a right to assisted suicide can be justified by looking at past historical practices. In evaluating the historical test for substantive due process, he notes that the Supreme Court has ruled against assisted suicide in the past. Some insight into the nominee's views on such issues can be found in the book's chapter on assisted suicide and euthanasia. Court as constitutionally protected, including right to privacy, right to an abortion, and the right to marry. Justice Scalia was a vocal critic of the substantive due process doctrine. While serving on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined a few opinions that touch on the substantiveDue process doctrine, and he has never squarely ruled on the right of an abortion or the rightto marry. In a 2011 case, Kerns v. Bader , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a divided panel, dismissed the substantivedue process claims brought by a plaintiff. against the officer by the victims of the crash, one of whom died and the other of whom suffered serious injuries. In so holding, Judge Gorsuch broadly discussed the substantive due process doctrine. He noted the doctrine as having a "paradoxical name" and being a "murky area" of law. The extensive concerns raised by Judge Gorsuch in his Browder opinions may signal the nominee's skepticism toward the application of the doctrine in cases presenting less egregious fact patterns, says Julian Zelizer. rights to informational privacy by asking for and obtaining his psychiatric records from a local hospital. Judge Gorsuch dismissed the claim on qualified immunity grounds after concluding that the plaintiff had failed to demonstrate that his rights were clearly established at the time of the alleged violation. The dissent, however, called the majority's conclusion on the privacy issue "dismaying" and argued that it was "patently clear" that "individuals have a constitutional right to have their medical records kept private from law enforcement officers pursuing general investigative ends" noting the dangers of '"unchecked disregard of the restrictions' imposed by the Constitution." Judge Gorsuch's Gutierrez-Brizuela concurrence may suggest that if he is elevated to the High Court, he may embrace a more formalist approach to separation-of-powers questions. The Supreme Court has been divided in recent years in cases involving the substantive component of the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. The source for various unenumerated rights that have been recognized by the Court as constitutionally protected. New rights based on broad libertarian concepts like individual autonomy could "prove too much," he says. In this sense, paralleling Chief Justice Roberts's reasoning with regard to the scope of substantive due process protections, the views may question broader conceptions of the Due Process Clause. There are, however, limits on what can be gleaned from Judge Gorsuch's book with respect to his broader views on unenumerated, he writes. The views in his 2006 book are based on abstract notions of morality. expected to reject "functionalist" approaches that weigh the extent to which a challenged law or action upsets the equilibrium of powers the Framers hoped to achieve. His formalist approach seems to guide his views on both the limited and exclusive nature of judicial power. For example, he wrote the panel opinion in Loveridge v. Hall overturning a district court decision allowing malpractice and breach of fiduciary duty claims to be resolved in a non-Article III bankruptcy court without the consent of the parties. Gorsuch described the purpose of Article III of the Constitution as crafted by the Framers to be "the cure for their complaint [against the crown]" The nominee also exhibited some doubt regarding the continued viability of the longstanding distinction between public rights and private rights as a governing principle for determining the types of claims Article I. Article I of the U.S. Constitution protects the right of the people to sue the government for violations of their civil rights. The Constitution also protects the rights of the public to have a say in what happens to their property. governing principle for determining the types of claims Article I courts (like bankruptcy courts) can hear. Judge Gorsuch has repeatedly stressed that he believes that the division of legislative and judicial powers is not a mere "formality dictated by the Constitution" Rather, he views the separation of powers as essential to the preservation of liberty. To the founders, the legislative andjudicial powers were distinct by nature and their separation was among the most important liberty-protecting devices of the constitutional design, he says. among the most important liberty-protecting devices of the constitutional design," he wrote. The right of the people is essential to the preservation of all other rights later enumerated in the Constitution and its amendments, he added. According to Judge Gorsuch, the combination of legislative and judicial functions poses a threat to the people's liberty. The U.S. legal system is predicated on the notion that good borders make for good government, he said. "Dividing government into separate pieces bounded both in their powers and geographic reach is of irreplaceable value when it comes to securing the liberty of thepeople," he said in his dissent. The Tenth Circuit docket does not appear to have afforded Judge Gorsuch an opportunity to evaluate any rifts between the President and Congress. But a review of his written opinions suggests misgivings when Congress assigns legislative or judicial responsibilities to be carried out by the executive branch. His writings indicate he is a proponent of reinvigorating the non-delegation doctrine to police overly broad statutory delegations of legislative functions to the other branches. He seems to view vagueness problems with criminal statutes at least partially through a separation-of-powers lens. Gorsuch says combination of legislative and judicial functions poses a grave threat to liberty, fair notice, and equal protection. He has taken exception to the executive branch engaging in activities he regards as judicial functions, even where Congress has delegated the authority. Judge Gorsuch has emphasized the principle of individual liberty in applying his formalist approach to the issue of criminal proscriptions, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: By restricting lawmaking to one branch, the framers sought to make the task of lawmaking more arduous still. leave it to the courts to step inside and say who could be rightfully detained, and who should be set at large. His writings from the bench suggest he prefers to apply what scholars frequently term a "formalist" approach to separation of powers. Based on these writings, if elevated to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could be expected to reject "functionalist" approaches that weigh the extent to the extent of government's powers in a given case. The Supreme Court is the highest court in the U.S. and has the power to overturn lower court decisions. concurring opinion calling into the question the wisdom and constitutionality of the doctrines created by both cases. Emphasizing the concept of separated powers envisioned by the Founders, Judge Gorsuch's concurring opinion distinguished between the elected legislature's task of setting policy prospectively and the judiciary's duty of neutrally interpreting the law in retroactively adjudicating disputes. This assignment of responsibilities ensures liberty by protecting parties who cannot alter their past conduct to the changes in majoritarian politics and bars unelected judges from setting policy for the nation. passed by both chambers of Congress and signed by the President. Judge Gorsuch has similarly expressed concerns, akin to those voiced by Justice Scalia, about invocations of alleged congressional or statutory purposes that are untethered from or contrary to the express statutory text. As a result, if Judge Gorsuch were to serve on the Supreme Court, his views on statutory interpretation would largely appear to align with those of Justice Scalia. Much like Justice Scalia,. Judge Scalia has opined that courts should interpret the law, not create it. Gorsuch has made limited resort to legislative history materials. He has expressed concerns about the use of such materials similar to those voiced by Justice Scalia. Such materials are not subject to the same bicameralism and presentment requirements as statutes because they are not passed by both chambers of Congress and signed by the speaker of the House. The nominee has expressed skepticism about a jurist's ability to discern a single legislative "intent" beyond that embodied in the express terms of the statute. Gorsuch wrote an opinion for a three-judge panel of the Tenth Circuit in Lexington Insurance Co. v. Precision Drilling Co., L.P. He contrasted canons that he viewed as "finely honed and consistent with the judicial function" with the so called "absurdity canon" He expressed concern that broad application of this canon could enable judges to disregard clear statutory text in favor of the jurists' perceived view of Congress's purpose in enacting the statute. Gorsuch has an arguably high affirmance rate given that the Supreme Court in recent years has reversed the lower courts in roughly seventy percent of all cases it heard. As several commentators have noted, Judge Gorsuch can be seen to employ the same general approach to questions of statutory interpretation that Justice Scalia did. This approach—known as textualism —looks to the statutory text, context, and structure when construing laws, rather than to extrinsic evidence of the intent or purpose of the Congress. an agency's interpretation of its own statutory authority. Given the breadth and scope of federal agency power, the nominee has also raised "questions like whether and how people can be fairly treated" Judge has said the number of regulations issued by agencies has "grown so exuberantly it's hard to keep up" "No one seems sure how many more hundreds of thousands (or maybe millions) of pages of less formal [guidance] might be found floating around these days," he said. on the doctrine of judicial deference to agency statutory interpretations. He does not appear to have expressed strong objections to the mechanics of discretionary or factual review. The nominee has joined or written several unanimous decisions upholding agency actions under the arbitrary and capricious standard. However, he has sometimes departed from his colleagues and written separately to find agency actions arbitrary or lacking in substantial merit. He has not said he would rule out the possibility of a Supreme Court hearing on the issue in the future, however. Gorsuch: "Powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies . . . warrant less deference from other branches, not more" Citing to Justice Felix Frankfurter's concurrence in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, he dismissed more functionalist arguments in favor of a "titanic administrative state" He noted the dangers of '"unchecked disregard of the restrictions' imposed by the state. The time has come to face the behemoth, he said. Gorsuch joined an opinion holding that a Utah law requiring registered sex offenders to provide the government with their usernames and online identifiers for certain websites was a permissible content-neutral regulation of speech. Justice Scalia's written work and public speeches reflected distinct attitudes toward the use of contemporary foreign law and practice to inform understanding of the U.S. Constitution and federal statutes. In contrast, due in part to the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket, Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence offers comparatively little guidance as to his likely approach. Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a petition for rehearing en banc based on his view that Congress had foisted too much of its authority on the executive branch. By separating the lawmaking and law enforcement functions, the framers sought to thwart the ability of an individual or group to exercise lawmaking power, he said. He explained his view in United States v. Nichols, in which the Supreme Court denied a rehearing for a case involving a sex offender who failed to register. The nominee has authored few opinions involving environmental law issues. If confirmed, he could serve as a critical vote on such matters if confirmed to the Court. He has previously cited a separation-of-powers rationale for the rule of lenity. The Supreme Court has been closely divided on various aspects of environmental law in recent years. The nominee has also participated in a handful of other environmental law cases, including one in which he was part of the panel majority in United States v. Smith. The Senate is expected to vote on the nominee's nomination on Friday. The nominee examined the Fourth Amendment's text along with scholarly works on its historical underpinnings to conclude that the Amendment does not include a right against malicious prosecution. In several opinions, Judge Gorsuch voiced sentiments similar to those of Justice Scalia about the need for the "rule of law" be "a law of rules" For example, in Hydro Resources, Inc. v. EPA , Judge Gorsuch, on behalf of a majority of the entire Tenth Circuit, concluded that the Tenth Circuit's ruling was correct. Gorsuch has criticized overcriminalization in much the same way Justice Scalia did. He resorts to the rule of lenity in construing criminal statutes that are seen to be ambiguous. In its standard formulation, the rule "insists that courts side with the defendant 'when the ordinary canons of the law are not clear'," he says. The rule "is not a rule of law," he adds, but a "rule of law" that is meant to be "defendant-friendly" courts side with the defendant 'when the ordinary canons of statutory construction have revealed no satisfactory construction,'" he writes. Much as Justice Scalia did, Judge Gorsuch invoked the rule of lenity in several criminal cases, including his 2015 opinion for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz. Here, he asserts that "[t]o the extent any ambiguity remains about the meaning of § 924(c)(1)(A)—after we have exhausted all the evidence of congressional meaning identified by the parties—we don't default" on the High Court, in contrast, relied, at least in part, on the phrase "when sentencing," which they would have construed to mean that a district court has no power to act after sentencing. On the question of the mens rea—or mental state—requirements of criminal statutes, Judge Gorsuch's textualist approach is sometimes said to have led to "defendant-friendly" results, as illustrated by his opinion dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc in United States v Games-Perez. majority of cases decided by three-judge panels of federal courts of appeals are decided without dissent. The Tenth Circuit is no exception to this general trend, with the overwhelming majority of opinions issued by that court being unanimous. While Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions garnered few dissents, he has displayed relatively more willingness to dissent from others' majority opinions than some colleagues on the Tenth Circuit. On the other hand, there may be some insight into his general approach to particular legal issues, as Table 2 below shows. Gorsuch's majority opinions were accompanied by separate opinions roughly 3.3 percent of the time. By comparison, only one of the six active judges serving on the Tenth Circuit at the exact same time as the nominee had a lower rate of drawing a separate opinion when writing for the majority. The relative infrequency with which fellow judges dissented or otherwise wrote separately may suggest the nominee places a high value on reaching consensus in the opinions he writes or has the ability to persuade others to join his opinions. approximately 180 published majority opinions authored by the nominee. Only one has been reviewed in a formal opinion by the Supreme Court, wherein the Court ultimately affirmed the Tenth Circuit decision by a 5-4 vote. One opinion that Judge Gorsuch joined, Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl , was reversed by the Court in a substantive opinion. As a result, Judge Gorsuch has an arguably high affirmance rate given that the majority opinions he has authored have been reviewed by the High Court. Five additional opinions that Judge Neil Gorsuch joined have been the subject of a formal opinions by theSupreme Court. Of these five opinions, four were affirmed by the high Court. then addresses fourteen separate areas of law, arranged in alphabetical order, from "administrative law" to "takings" Within each section, the report reviews whether and how Judge Gorsuch has addressed particular issues in opinions he authored or joined. The report analyzes majority, concurring, and dissenting opinions, including decisions that Judge Gorsuch participated in while serving by designation on another federal court of appeals. Where relevant, theReport also notes Judge may contrast with those of some of his colleagues. But because separate opinions are infrequent on the Tenth Circuit, the dataset is relatively small. the D.C. Circuit. On the other hand, there may be limits to what can be gleaned from this data. The choice to write separately is one that stems from various factors, and may simply depend on the personality and preferences of an individual judge. For instance, the fact that Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions garnered relatively few dissents may be a product of the cases on which he wrote, which, in turn, are assigned by the most senior active judge on each panel. Unlike Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's views on constitutional civil rights questions are less well known because he has had relatively few occasions to address such questions directly in cases before the Tenth Circuit. He has not, for example, had occasion to write on the constitutional limits on affirmative action or the equal protection rights of sexual minorities. Most of the civil rights decisions in which the nominee has participated have centered upon statutory civil rights claims and, in particular, statutory employment discrimination claims. The nominee's opinions in these cases to date have resulted in a variety of outcomes—some favorable to individual plaintiffs, some unfavorable. panel's view, caused her claims to fail. More commonly, instead of assessing constitutional civil rights claims, Judge Gorsuch's opinions have addressed claims arising under one or more federal civil rights statutes. Such statutes include Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended; the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA); the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA); the Americans with Disability Act (ADA); and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Examining Judge Gorsuch’s various rulings interpreting these various statutes, it appears that his jurisprudence is largely a product of his preferences. review of the record," which examined official policies and testimony from several officers to conclude that the plaintiffs had provided sufficient evidence to proceed to trial on their claims of illicit discrimination. And Orr is not the only case in which Judge Gorsuch has ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in a statutory civil rights case, which could suggest that the ultimate outcomes of particular cases are driven by Judge Gorsuch's general judicial philosophy as opposed to a general preference to reach a business or government friendly outcome. Nonetheless, while evaluating Judge Neil Gorsuch's record on civil rights cases, it's important to keep in mind that he has also ruled against plaintiffs in other cases. government friendly outcome. Judge Gorsuch has written multiple opinions questioning the efficacy of a central—but complicated—doctrine in federal employment discrimination litigation, the McDonnell Douglas test. For instance, in keeping with his preference for clear rules and his general critique of "needless" complexities in the law, he has questioned the effectiveness of the McDonnell-Douglas test in antidiscrimination cases. The substance of several of the nominee's opinions on federal antidiscdiscrimination law is, at times, telling and may suggest that his general views on adjudication shape his approach. plain text throughout his analysis. Ultimately, the court held that the state law claims were preempted because the plaintiff failed to identify a parallel federal requirement based on off-label promotion of a medical device. Justice Scalia's views regarding the scope of constitutional and statutory civil rights protections were established in a number of judicial opinions. However, unlike a reflection on how his broader views on the role of the judge influence his civil rights jurisprudence, Judge Gorsuch's opinion took a different view of this argument based on perceived congressional intent. to be confirmed to the Court. Some commentators suggest that Judge Gorsuch would limit the exposure of civil defendants. Through his judicial and nonjudicial writings, Judge Gorsuch has expressed an interest in issues related to civil liability. While Judge Neil Gorsuch has authored or joined some rulings that were unfavorable to such individuals, this fact may be of limited effect. The judge's jurisprudence is largely a product of his preferences for textualism and rules based adjudication, as opposed to a preference to rule for a particular side. the Supreme Court, would likely bar such a concept of accessory liability. Judge Gorsuch has generally demonstrated a propensity to defer to the decisions of state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials in matters relating to capital punishment. He appears willing to scrutinize state court decisions that appear to contravene existing constitutional protections for capital defendants if those protections are clearly articulated in Supreme Court decisions. Nevertheless, Judge Gorsuch may be reluctant to engage in a broad reading of the Constitution and Supreme Court precedent that would expand the rights of such defendants beyond existing precedent. Justice Scalia cast critical votes in cases that read federal law relatively expansively to restrict the ability of plaintiffs to use class action litigation. In other cases, Justice Scalia cast important votes that more narrowly interpreted the scope of federal law to limit corporate defendants' potential civil liability. Given Justice Scalia's decisions, commentators have considered how Judge Gorsuch might affect the Roberts Court's perceived "warmth" toward businesses on civil liability matters if the nominee were to be confirmed to the Court. Pointing to his writings, they say Judge Gorsuch could succeed on the Supreme Court. "penchant for . . . high pleading and procedural standards for civil litigants" This interest is evident in several pointed critiques that he has authored on what he perceives as the misuses or excesses of litigation. In addition, when asked to identify "the 10 most significant cases over which you presided" on the Senate Judiciary Committee's "Questionnaire for Nominee to the Supreme Court," two of the ten cases Judge Gorsuch selected were opinions that affirmed the dismissal of civil claims by the district court. In the few cases that have come before him, Judge Gorsuch has articulated distinct views that may signal how he would approach administrative law matters if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. In cases both arising in the context of a challenge to a federal agency policy and outside of that context, the nominee sided with the majority of the appellate panel in most cases. In the few judicial access cases in which Judge Gorsuch wrote a separate opinion, he has tended to do so on the basis that the court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. Gorsuch responded affirmatively to a written question about whether his courtroom "would be open to intervention in litigation by those concerned with the administration of . . . public lands" He wrote that "Judges owe the same obligation of fidelity to the record and the law in all cases and to all of liberty" In many key areas of the law related to issues of federalism, he has written little, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: Gleaning any general trends respecting the nominee's views in this area of law is difficult. the law by district courts unduly difficult, and egregious errors in important cases. A vote for or against rehearing a case en banc or on other procedural matters does not necessarily equate to an endorsement or repudiation of a particular legal position. Despite having served on the federal appellate bench for a decade, Judge Gorsuch has said little about some areas of law because of the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket. It may be difficult to predict how he might rule on certain issues if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. Gorsuch's jurisprudence offers comparatively little guidance as to his likely approach on such matters if appointed to the Supreme Court. The Tenth Circuit docket involves few cases touching upon international law issues, and the handful of cases considered by Judge Gorsuch in this area has been unremarkable. In short, if Judge Gorsuch has any distinctive approach to interpreting the Constitution, he has not shown it in the cases that have come before him. He would likely follow the originalist judicial philosophy ascribed to Justice Scalia. yielded "unpredictable results" and "left the law and litigants confused" The nominee has suggested a number of attorney-initiated reforms aimed at making the civil justice system more accessible and affordable for both plaintiffs and defendants. A number of the nominee's opinions have noted his personal sympathies for particular parties in the case, but distinguished these sympathies from what he viewed the law to require. In a similar vein, while the nominee has occasionally questioned precedent that he viewed as inconsistent with the rule of law. Justice Scalia and Judge Gorsuch reject results-oriented judging. Both have emphasized that judges must render decisions that do not necessarily conform to their personal preferences. Scalia often pointed to his vote to strike down a law prohibiting flag burning as an example of how his judicial philosophy could yield results that did not align with his own inclinations. Similarly, in a 2016 dissent, Judge Gorsuch emphasized that the role of the judge is to "apply, not rewrite, the law enacted by the people's representatives," noting that a judge's role is to apply the law. accordance with their ordinary meaning at the time of drafting, or resulted in too much ambiguity in the meaning of the law. Many commentators opined that Judge Gorsuch would, if confirmed, follow in Justice Scalia's footsteps as an originalist, and largely "preserve the ideological balance that existed on the court when [Justice] Scalia died" These conclusions were echoed by academic studies. For example, following President Trump's election, several studies by political scientists suggested that Judge Scalia's judging style would replicate that of Judge Gorsuch if elevated to the Supreme Court. to be elevated to the Supreme Court. Such an outcome would be in keeping with the reported intentions of President Trump. On the other hand, during Judge Gorsuch's confirmation hearings for his seat on the Tenth Circuit in 2006, the nominee explicitly rejected the view that he had any particular "philosophy" toward judging. He noted that he "resist[ed]" being "pigeon-hole[d]" because "people do unexpected things and pigeon holes ignore gray areas in the law" Justice Scalia and Judge Gorsuch, there are also discernible differences in their views on the role of the judiciary. Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging can be seen to differ in tone and tenor from that of Justice Scalia. During his career on the High Court, Justice Scalia frequently authored fairly broad and uncompromising opinions that did not garner the votes of a majority of the majority. The differences in Justice Scalia's and Judge Scalia's writing styles may indicate broader contrasts between the two jurists. The nominee may be more focused on collegiality and consensus-building than the Justice he could replace. that of Justice Scalia. In contrast to the oft quoted sentiment that "if it is not necessary to decide more, it is necessary not to decidemore," Justice Scalia regularly criticized majority opinions that, in his view, failed to provide broader or clearer guidance to the lower courts. While the nominee has not been immune from criticism that particular majority opinions he wrote swept too broadly, in contrast to Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's writings have generally espoused a more minimalist role for courts. For example, he noted in a 2012 dissent that In a lecture delivered in April 2016 at Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Judge Gorsuch commended Justice Scalia's approach toward judging. He described the late Justice's "vision" of what a "good and faithful judge" entails to be a "worthy one" Judge David Sentelle and Justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy have also been compared to Judge Gorsuch, as well as other jurists. The judicial and nonjudicial writings of Judge Gorsuch may provide another—perhaps richer and more nuanced—basis for evaluating how his approach to judging compares to that of Justice Scalia or any other jurist. Many commentators have likened the nominee to Justice Scalia. During the nearly thirty years that Justice Scalia served on the Supreme Court, the late Justice was a well-known proponent of originalism, textualism, and the view that clear rules should guide the work of the lower courts. Accordingly, Justice Scalia vigorously dissented from opinions that, in his view, failed to construe legal texts in accordance with their ordinary meaning at the time of drafting, writes John Avlon, a former Supreme Court justice. things and pigeon holes ignore gray areas in the law, of which there are many," Judge Gorsuch said. The nominee also noted the influence of "three significant but quite different judges" Judge David Sentelle and Justices Byron White and Byron White were among the judges who "brought him up in theLaw," he said. Judge Gorsuch is expected to be confirmed to the Supreme Court in the coming weeks. He will replace Justice Antonin Scalia, who was nominated to the court by President Barack Obama. judging, the findings in Table 1 and Table 2 may be noteworthy. Professor Michael McConnell of Stanford University described Judge Gorsuch as "unfailingly cordial and collegial" Another former colleague, Robert Henry, now the President of Oklahoma City University, described Judge Neil Gorsuch's "judicial temperament" as "superb" Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging may also differ in substance from that of Justice Scalia. In contrast to the oft quoted "common ground," Judge Gorsuch aims to "find[] common ground" while being "scrupulously respectful" President Donald J. Trump announced the nomination of Judge Neil M. Gorsuch of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (Tenth Circuit) to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court of the United States created by the 2016 death of Justice Antonin Scalia. Judge Gorsuch was appointed to the Tenth circuit by President George W. Bush in 2006. Immediately prior to his appointment to the bench, the nominee served as the Principal Deputy to the Associate Attorney General, the third-ranking official at the Department of Justice. U.S. Department of Justice, assistin g the Associate Attorney General with oversight of the Department's various civil litigation components. Before serving in the Justice Department, the nominee worked in private practice as a civil litigator at the Washington, D.C. firm of Kellogg, Huber, Hansen, Todd, Evans & Figel. Judge Gorsuch began his legal career clerking for federal judges. He served two Supreme Court Justices, newly retired Justice Byron White and Justice Anthony Kennedy, during the October 1993 term. during the October 1993 term. This report provides an overview of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence and discusses how the Supreme Court might be affected if he were to succeed Justice Scalia. It is important to note that, for various reasons, it is difficult to predict accurately an individual's likely contributions to the Court based on their prior experience. The report begins by discussing the nominee's views on two cross-cutting issues—the role of the judiciary and statutory interpretation. It then addresses fourteen separate areas of law, arranged in alphabetical. and briefly describes each opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch during his tenure on the federal bench. Other CRS products discuss various issues related to the vacancy on the Court. At least as a historical matter, attempting to predict how Supreme Court nominees may approach their work on the High Court is a task fraught with uncertainty. For an overview of available products, see CRS Legal Sidebar WSLG1526, Supreme Court Nomination: CRS Products, by [author name scrubbed] and [authorname scrubbed]. Consumers comes from renewable sources. Justice Scalia viewed federalism as "one of the Constitution's structural protections of liberty," writes Julian Zelizer. If confirmed to the Court, he might be willing to entertain arguments opposing the Court's use of the dormant Commerce Clause doctrine to strike down state environmental laws, he says. Zelizer: The limited number of cases in which the nominee has ruled on other aspects of federalism and the scope of federal power vis-à-vis the states makes it difficult to conclude with certainty that he would. Gorsuch's writings have been with respect to the dormant Commerce Clause. In one case, he wrote that the case fell "within the scope of Ex parte Young and was not barred by the Eleventh Amendment" In another, he described the doctrine as "another pocket of federal jurisprudence characterized by a long and evolving history of almost common-law-like judicial decision making" The nominee's clear views appear to align closely with those of Justice Scalia, who called the doctrine a "judicial fraud" and a "judge-invented rule" In Epel , Judge Gorsuch ultimately upheld a state law that required electricity generators to ensure that twenty percent of electricity sold to state consumers came from renewable resources. This conclusion was based on a strict reading of one line of dormant Commerce Clause cases. Detractors find dormant commerce clause doctrine absent from the Constitution's text and incompatible with its structure. He went on to note, however, that "as an inferior court we take Supreme Court precedent as we find it and dormant commerce Clause jurisprudence remains very much alive today" Supreme Court, in a series of decisions, has held that the Commerce Clause represents not only a grant of authority to Congress, but also a prohibition on states "imposing excessive burdens on interstate commerce without congressional approval" This implied "negative command" is known as the dormant or negative Commerce Clause. In Energy and Environmental Legal Institute v. Epel , Judge Gorsuch reviewed a dormant Commerce Clause challenge to Colorado's renewable energy standard (RES), which requires many electric utilities in Colorado to ensure that twenty percent of electricity sold to state consumers comes from renewable sources. The Supreme Court has read the clause as embodying a sort of judicial free trade policy. Employing what's sometimes called "dormant" or "negative" commerce clause jurisprudence, judges have claimed the authority to strike down state laws that, in their judgment, unduly interfere with interstate commerce. Detractors find dormant commerce clause doctrine absent in this case. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks. The case is expected in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. In De Niz Robles , a precursor to the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela , Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous panel, rejected the retroactive application of an agency's adjudication that upset the affected party's reliance interests. The Tenth Circuit had previously deferred to an agency’s interpretation of an ambiguous statute under Chevron and Brand X when the agency prospectively applied a statutory interpretation at odds with the court's prior reading. In this case, the agency retroactively applied an interpretation against a party who had significant reliance interests on the prior contrary Tenth Circuit decision. generally applicable rules—the less likely such a decision should be granted retroactive force. De Niz Robles concluded that when an agency issues an interpretation of an ambiguous statutory provision under Chevron via an adjudication that displaces a contrary judicial decision, it is operating like legislators setting new policies. In TransAm Trucking, Inc. v. Department of Labor, he has tended to be more skeptical of deferring to agencies on legal questions. For example, he ruled that such decisions should presumptively apply only prospectively. Congress has delegated the authority. In a pair of cases interpreting two statutory provisions, one permitting the Attorney General to grant relief from removal to aliens and the other prohibiting it, he applied—but objected to—the Supreme Court's precedent in Chevron and Brand X. In De Niz Robles v. Lynch, he established for the majority that there is a presumption of prospectivity to agency exercises of delegated legislative authority unless Congress has clearly authorized retroactivity, he said. He said agency decisions generally permit agency decisions to override judicial decisions where statutory ambiguity is identified. Gorsuch has taken a narrow view of the situations in which Chevron deference is due. In Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, the nominee wrote a separate concurring opinion calling into the question the wisdom and constitutionality of Chevron. He has critiqued Chevron and Brand X and has questioned the wisdom of deference to an agency's determination under Chevron andBrand X. The nominee has been nominated to the U.S. Supreme Court by President Barack Obama, who is up for re-election in 2016. If he were to succeed Justice Scalia, the nominee's opinions in De Niz Robles and Gutierrez-Brizuela could suggest that he might favor a narrowing of the scope of Chevron deference in future cases. On the other hand, while Justice Scalia supported Chevrondeference in cases of perceived statutory ambiguity, he nevertheless frequently found that statutory text was unambiguous, and, thus, there was no need for deference to Chevron. The nominee's views on the doctrine are discussed below. Court in Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. A court will generally defer to an agency's interpretation of a statute that is seen to be silent or ambiguous on a particular issue. In National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services, the Supreme Court interpreted Chevro n to extend to agency's interpretation even if a court had previously interpreted the statute in question. As a statistical matter, under the Chevron doctrine, courts have often deferred to an agencies interpretation of its own statutory authority. The panel majority upheld a determination by the Department of Labor that a truck driver was terminated in violation of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act. At issue was whether the truck driver engaged in protected activity under the Act by "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" The court deferred under Chevron to the Department's determination that the driver's decision to drive his truck away from his trailer in freezing conditions qualified as protected activity. Judge Gorsuch wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that the decision to terminate the driver was wrong. that statutory text was unambiguous, and, thus, there was no need to consider whether deference to the agency was appropriate. Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in that case, objecting to the majority's decision on pragmatic and constitutional grounds. In Justice Scalia's view, and in a view similar to the nominee's, Brand X impermissibly permits "[j]udgments within the powers vested in courts by the Judiciary Article of the Constitution" to be overruled by executive branch officers. Concurrence further noted that the Founders provided that "judicial judgments 'may not lawfully be revised, overturned or refused faith and credit by' the elected branches of government" In the views of the nominee, however, Brand X runs contrary to this constitutional alignment by permitting executive branch agencies to displace the judiciary's legal determinations. As a consequence, Judge Gorsuch suggested that under Brand X , judicial declarations of what the law means are no longer authoritative. Such decisions are "subject to revision by a politically motivated agency," he said. Justice Scalia in invoking the "rule of lenity" when construing language that is seen to be ambiguous in favor of criminal defendants. On the other hand, the nominee's recently expressed concerns about " Chevron deference" —judicial deference to the reasonable interpretations by executive branch agencies of ambiguous or silent statutes. These last two facets of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence are discussed in more detail later in this report.. Consistent with a textualist approach to statutory interpretation, Judge Gorsuch in a number of his deference. to the agency's view, allowing regulated parties to rely on consistent agency interpretations. Gorsuch wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that the statute's meaning was plain. For him, "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" simply did not include actually driving a vehicle. He rejected extending Chevron deference to the agency's interpretation, noting that, in contrast to the majority's reasoning, the absence of a statutory definition did not create ambiguity. Instead, Judge Gorsuch thought the statute was clear and unambiguous, and therefore would have ruled against thegency's interpretation at Chevron 's first step. The Gutierrez-Brizuela concurrence also critiqued a prominent justification for the Chevron doctrine. The application of Chevron deference violates the non-delegation doctrine, the concurrence said. The Chevron doctrine gives an agency authority to interpret the scope of its own jurisdictional power, it said. It also gives the agency the ability to reverse itself on short notice, it added. The concurrence questioned the propriety of consolidating power in the hands of a single branch of government. Under Brand X , Judge Gorsuch has argued, the executive branch is empowered to render decisions on the meaning of the law. Under Chevron deference, in Judge Gorsuch's view, operates as an "abdication" of the courts' duty to say what the law is. For the nominee, the constitutional remedy when the political branches disagree with the judiciary's interpretation of theLaw is legislation. Because such decisions are "subject to revision by a politically accountable branch of government," the nominee argues. deference effectively "invests the power to decide the meaning of the law . . . in the very entity charged with enforcing the law," he argued. Given the "vast power" of the executive branch and the lack of effective oversight of political appointees, he argued, "[u]nder any conception of our separation of powers, I would have thought powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies would have warranted less deference from other branches, not more," he said. Instead, he said, courts should examine the law's meaning de novo, or without deference to the agency's view. Engineers promulgated a rule defining the scope of waters protected under the Clean Water Act. Judge Gorsuch has expressed skepticism regarding the extent to which judges should defer to an administrative agency's reasonable interpretation of silent or ambiguous language in a statute it administers. Some commentators have suggested that a judge's refusal to defer to agency interpretations would impede efforts by federal agencies to regulate activities that would negatively impact the environment. If applied consistently, this could lead to a lack of deference to EPA interpretations of environmental statutes. also implied that he might have voted in favor of the groups joining the litigation if the government had abandoned its efforts to enforce the law at issue. Once a plaintiff in an environmental case has satisfied any jurisdictional and procedural requirements to bringing a lawsuit, a court might review the substance of the federal agency action. Sometimes, an action by an environmental agency may be based on that agency's interpretation of a statute that it administers, such as in 2015 when EPA and Army Corps of Engineers promulgated a rule defining the scope of waters protected. he wrote a majority opinion upholding EPA's reinterpretation of its Resource Conservation and Recovery Act regulations governing mineral processing waste. The court held that EPA was not required to provide notice and comment to change a "tentative" interpretation of its own. Neither the agency's original interpretation of the regulations nor the subsequent re interpretation was made in accordance with the APA's notice and comments rulemaking procedures, the court said. The ruling was published in the Federal Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Gorsuch notes potential statutory and constitutional concerns regarding agency action that would uproot nontentative interpretations of law. Environmental cases may also implicate other constitutional issues, including the relationship between federal and state authorities. One question that may arise is whether the Constitution's Commerce Clause should render invalid certain state environmental laws. The Supreme Court, in a series of decisions, has held that it owed deference to the Bureau's interpretation of the order because that interpretation was consistent with the circumstances surrounding the order and its subsequent conduct. Judge Neil Gorsuch joined a majority opinion determining that an environmental group had standing to challenge the Bureau of Land Management's interpretation of its own prior order. The majority opinion concluded that the environmental group would suffer injury from the company beginning mining operations by impairing "the ability of its members to continue enjoyment of the aesthetic and scientific aspects of the Lila Canyon," the opinion said. The decision was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, which is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. record and the law in all cases and to all persons appearing before them—regardless of who the litigant is or what the nature of the claim may be," he says. Judge Gorsuch has had limited opportunities to evaluate intervention matters in environmental cases. In 2013, he dissented from a majority opinion holding that environmental groups were entitled to intervene as of right in a lawsuit challenging a Forest Service plan in New Mexico's Santa Fe National Forest. Although his dissent in Backcountry argued that the environmental groups should not have been allowed to intervene in the case, the opinion also implied that he might have voted in favor of them. The outcome of an environmental case often depends on the court's resolution of threshold procedural issues. If such lawsuits are filed, to proceed an ongoing lawsuit, a plaintiff will need to establish standing. The limited number of cases on standing in the environmental context makes it difficult to discern any broad tendencies of Judge Gorsuch on the subject, says Julian Zelizer, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says there is no discernible trend in his environmental standing jurisprudence. The plaintiffs challenged a temporary U.S. Forest Service order that allowed motorcycles but prohibited all-terrain vehicles on certain forest trails. Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous court, determined that the appellants lacked a genuine stake in the outcome of the proceedings. In dismissing the case, the nominee wrote that a victory for the appellant "would seem to do" for the plaintiffs. The case was dismissed because the plaintiffs lacked standing, the judge wrote in his decision. The decision was unanimous.

ROUGE-1: 83.10, ROUGE-2: 74.65, ROUGE-L: 20.29
BERTScore: 51.66

==============================================
==================== [27/100] ====================
Summary:
Under the ACA, restaurants and similar retail food establishments (SRFE) that are part of a chain of 20 or more (regardless of the type of ownership of the locations) are subject to the requirements of Section 4205 of the ACA. The meaning of SRFE was not defined in the ACA and the FDA has proposed two options for the definition of "restaurants" to be covered by the rule. The scope of covered establishments, variation among establishments, the cost of providing the required information, and the accessibility of calorie and nutrition information to consumers could influence the impact on affected restaurants. Some Members of Congress propose legislation directing the FDA to narrowly interpret the law by excluding primarily retail entities. The state and local menu labeling regulations that have been enacted in the United States generally do not apply to grocery stores. Some have argued that the perceived burden of including those entities outweighs the perceived potential benefits. The FDA has acknowledged that the narrower definition of the term that does not include supermarkets as SRFE is less burdensome, and that congressional intent was to Institute, feel that the FDA has overstepped its statutory authority. Some Members of Congress, with support from the grocery industry, have expressed concern over Option 1. They have introduced legislation that would define SRFE as establishments that derive more than 50% of their revenue from restaurant-type food, similar to the proposed Option 2 in Table 1. Some members of Congress who advocate for a broader definition of SRFE note that Congress intended the law to include all establishments that sell restaurant-like food to consumers. They argue that Option 1 is too narrow, and that congressional intent was to encompass grocery and convenience stores, as well as movie theaters, bowling alleys, and bookstore cafes. exempt movie theaters, amusement parks, general merchandise stores with in-house concession stands, hotels, and transportation carriers such as trains and airplanes. The alternate definition (see Option 2 in Table 1 ) would also generally exempt these entities, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Other restaurants and SRFE that are not regulated under the proposed definitions may voluntarily register with an "authorized official" to be subject to the requirements of this regulation and would also be considered "covered establishments," according to the proposed rule. Under the FFDCA, FDA may deem foods misbranded unless health and nutrition claims are made according to FDA regulations. FDA relies on food companies to voluntarily recall misbranded products. FDA does not have mandatory recall authority for food that is deemed misbranded due to nutrition labeling. Although the FDA was allowed to enforce certain provisions in Section 4205 upon enactment of the ACA, it has proposed to refrain from enforcement until it has completed rulemaking. The FFD CA requires all food regulated by the FDA to bear labeling with the serving size, total calories per serving.  nutrition labeling requirements in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) were established by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 (NLEA). The ACA provision required nutrition labeling for foods sold in chain restaurants and vending machines. Both were previously exempt from the FDA's nutrition labeling authority. The provision also has a section on federal preemption of state and local laws regarding nutrition labeling in restaurants and SRFE. The ACA required the FDA to promulgate regulations to carry out this new section of the FFDCA within one year of enactment. Under ACA Section 4205, now FFDCA Section 403(q)(5)(H), foods that do not require labeling in restaurants and SRFE are custom orders. Custom orders are prepared in a specific manner at the customer's request. Daily specials are foods that are not routinely listed on the menu. Temporary menu items are foods that appear on a menu or menu board for less than 60 days per calendar year. Part of a customary market test is foods offered for fewer than 90 consecutive days to test consumer acceptance. fast food company in the United States, announced in September 2012 that it would list calorie information on all restaurant and drive-thru menu boards. Federal responsibility for food safety and food labeling rests primarily with the FDA and the Department of Agriculture (USDA) The 1938 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) granted FDA the authority to regulate food products and their ingredients. FDA's authority over nutrition labeling of those products was created by the FFDCA. FDA is responsible for ensuring that all domestic and imported food products, except for most meats and poultry, are safe, nutritious, and accurately labeled. The FDA has the authority to further specify requirements for the layout and design of the label to assist consumers. Infant formula and medical foods, which are subject to other labeling requirements, are exempt from the nutrition labeling requirements. The FFDCA has provisions regarding its preemption of state and local nutrition labeling laws. It also provides the Secretary the Authority to remove or otherwise change nutrient information requirements by regulation. It provides several exemptions from nutritionlabeling requirements, such as the exemption for infant formula. The proposed rule included definitions for a number of terms that were not defined in the law. It also listed the requirements of Section 4205 of the ACA. The proposed rule was available for public comment through July 5, 2011, and a final rule is expected by the end of the year. It set requirements for covered restaurants and SRFE to implement the rule, provided detail for voluntary registration of establishments that are not covered by the law but that elect to be subject to the requirements. It outlined enforcement mechanisms for establishments that fail to comply. public comment through July 5, 2011, and a final rule is expected by the end of 2012. The following sections present many of the terms that were defined in the statute and the proposed rule, and then provide a discussion of the issues raised regarding these terms. While some definitions are clear and straightforward, others have generated debate, including the FDA's determination of the scope of covered establishments, variation among establishments, and the cost of the rule. The report also describes the components of the proposedRule that have invoked concern or debate. The FDA published the preliminary regulatory impact analyses (PRIA) for restaurant menu nutrition labeling and vending machine calorie labeling in March 2011. The PRIA and proposed rules generated hundreds of comments from industry, Members of Congress, and the public. The FDA was further instructed to consider certain factors in rulemaking, including the standardization of recipes and preparation methods, variation in ingredients, serving size, and formulation of menu items. It also listed the requirements of Section 4205 of the Food and Drug Act. by human hands, and thereby subject to greater variation in preparation, making it more challenging to adhere to the 80-120 rule. Critics note that wide variation due to individual order preparation was one of the reasons the FDA exempted restaurant food from the NLEA regulations in 1993. The restaurant industry has argued that adhering to a stricter standard of "reasonable basis" may discourage smaller independent operators from participating voluntarily in the menu labeling program. Calorie counts may also be difficult to determine due to varying portion sizes. the food misbranded. If the language regarding the 80-120 rule is included in the final rule, the accuracy of restaurant calorie information would be determined using the same standards as packaged foods. The restaurant industry has argued that the six-month window for compliance is not enough time for their constituents to fully comply. Faced with the possibility of budget cuts, it is unclear if the FDA will have the funding to enforce a strict interpretation of calorie and other nutrition information. The FDA's final determination on these definitions and the timeline for compliance and enforcement activities will be made. The FDA relies on food companies to voluntarily recall adulterated, misbranded, or otherwise unsafe products. In the proposed rule, the FDA provides a six-month window for restaurants and SRFE to comply with the final rule, once published. Industry representatives have requested a longer timeline of one year for full compliance. If the language regarding the 80-120 rule is finalized, the food will be deemed misbranded under allergen labeling regulations, according to the FDA. The FDA has the authority to order a recall of a misbranded food. uniform national policy) could have been much greater. FDA estimated that 27% of chain restaurants have already obtained nutrition information to comply with those state and local regulations. The Office of Management (OMB) is to review the regulations promulgated under the law to ensure, among other considerations, that they are consistent with Executive Orders 12866 and 13563. These executive orders require agencies to tailor their regulations to impose the least burden on society and to select approaches that maximize net net benefit to society. Obesity accounts for approximately 1% to 10% of a country's total health care costs. Obese individuals have medical costs that are 30% higher than individuals of normal weight. A recent study estimated that the annual medical cost of obesity was as high as $78.5 billion in 1998. Of that amount, about 10% was spent on medical care for the obese, according to the study. The study was conducted by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1998, or about 10% of medical spending. Of that amount, roughly half of the cost was financed by Medicare and Medicaid. The authors estimated that cost may have risen to as much as $147 billion in 2008. In order to determine the effectiveness of an intervention such as menu labeling, researchers and policy makers may review the impact of these policies on individuals' behavior. The true cost and savings from any obesity prevention policy is challenging to determine, the authors say. They say researchers cannot isolate the effect of one specific policy relative to other interventions. burden on society and to select approaches that maximize net benefits. Researchers have projected that more than half of Americans will be obese by 2030. Increases in weight are linked to increased risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, osteoarthritis, and several forms of cancer. obesity leads to decreased productivity, in terms of increased absenteeism as well as what researchers deem "presenteeism" (decreased outputs while at work). The estimated societal cost of obesity has been estimated in multiple studies; however, these estimates are not accurate.  obesity is associated with a number of other health problems, including diabetes and high blood pressure. These health issues disproportionately affect low-income individuals and certain minorities. At the population level, this has been reflected in indicators of decreased physical activity and increased calorie consumption. The federal government has sought to address these health concerns using a variety of approaches, including programs (e.g., the "Let's Move" campaign) and legislation that promote nutrition, healthy weight, and physical activity. The state and local level, lawmakers have also proposed a variety. of approaches. may review the impact of these policies on individuals' behavior and monitor changes in the obesity rate over time. Other factors that may also account for those changes, including the time needed for weight loss and obesity prevention programs to yield an effect, particularly on chronic disease costs, may also play a role in the decision to implement a policy. The government may also take into account other factors such as the cost of health care to the taxpayer, as well as the effect of the policy on the economy. definitions and the timeline for compliance and enforcement activities will affect the regulation's scope and cost. Concerns about the cost of implementing this rule were raised before, during, and after the proposed rule was published. The eventual public health benefit to society may also be weighed; quantification of this benefit can be challenging. The FDA's PRIA points to three elements of cost for this rule: (1) collecting and managing nutritional analysis records; (2) revising or replacing existing menus and menu boards; FDA estimates the initial cost of compliance at $315 million and ongoing annual cost of the provision at $44 million. Industry estimates the cost will exceed $1 billion in the first year. FDA also notes that the potential cost to industry of complying with an increasing number of state and local regulations (in the absence of a uniform national policy) could have been much greater. The proposed rule would require revising or replacing existing menus and menu boards; and employee training. It would also require the creation of a national database of restaurant records. The law requires that all nutrient content disclosures must have a reasonable basis. Estimates of the per item cost of determining nutrition information vary widely. Some Members of Congress and the restaurant industry have asserted that the FDA has misinterpreted the "reasonable basis" that restaurants and SRFE must have for nutrient disclosures in the proposed rule. The FDA estimates a cost of $269 per item to determine this information, while some industry groups have determined it will cost as much as $500 to $1,000 per item. stores have argued that posting calorie and other nutrition information on the Internet should be voluntary. Expecting all entities to comply in the same manner could impose the highest burden, the FDA says. The FDA and industry also differ on the estimated cost burden of providing the required information on menus and menu boards. Industry estimates range as high as $1,500 per menu board, according to the FDA, while the FDA estimates the cost of a menu board at $550. It's unclear whether the FDA will issue a ruling on the issue by the end of the year. Studies have shown that the number of calories consumed by individuals in the United States has risen concurrent with rising rates of obesity. The number of overall calories consumed has increased from a daily average of 1,875 calories during 1977-1978 to 2,067 calories during 2005-2008. Increasingly, these calories are consumed outside the home. Calorie labeling on menus has been adopted as one approach to making consumers aware of the amount of calories they are consuming. In one study, lunchtime customers at a fast food restaurant underestimated the calorie content of their lunch by 23%. State and local regulations have resulted in variable and sometimes conflicting requirements. The restaurant industry has made it clear that complying with varying local laws and regulations is more burdensome than complying with uniform national standards would be. New research on nutrition labeling of menus and menu boards suggests this approach may be successful in helping consumers lower their overall calorie intake. In one study in New York City, one in six fast food consumers reported using the posted calorie information, and those customers also purchased 106 fewer calories of food than those who didn't use the information. Public health stakeholders have successfully advocated for policies on restaurant nutrition labeling at the state and local level. Businesses that must comply with these laws and regulations have grown supportive of a consistent national policy on restaurant menu labeling requirements. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have deemed menu labeling a "winnable battle" McDonald's, the largest fast food company in the United States, announced in September that it would begin menu nutrition labeling in the U.S. under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) are required to disclose the number of calories in each item "as usually prepared and offered for sale," and provide a statement on suggested total daily caloric intake "in a clear and conspicuous manner" The law also requires restaurants and SRFE to provide calorie information adjacent to self-service food. According to the proposed rule, calorie information must be provided adjacent to the name of the menu item so that it is clearly associated with that item. Menu boards must also have a prominent, clear, and conspicuous estimates range as high as $1,500 per menu board. The proposed rule would require that covered establishments declare calories on menus and menu boards to the nearest 5-calorie increment up to and including 50 calories. The FDA proposes use of the "80-120 rule" that is currently the standard for prepackaged food. In the proposed rule, the FDA requested comment and consumer research on five different options for disclosing the calorie and nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations. Using an average or a range; using slashes to separate calorie disclosure when there are only two varieties; and either a range or an average. The FDA proposes that the term "primary writing" be interpreted from a customer's vantage point. This would include drive-through menus, take-out and delivery menus, and information posted on the Internet. The nature and use of primary writing may vary depending on the type of restaurant or SRFE. The written nutrition information must include the same nutrition information that is currently required by law on food package labeling. For example, pizza companies have argued against in-store menu and menu board labeling, as 90% of their business is driven by phone and online ordering. Foods with insignificant amounts of more than one-half the required nutrients may use a simplified labeling format. Foods offered by an individual who has grossed less than $500,000 from food sales are exempt from the nutrition labeling requirements. Foods in packaging that is too small to comply with the required information are also exempt. Food with insignificant amount of all the nutrients required to be listed is exempt. Foods with insignificant Amounts of All The Nutrients required to Be Listed are exempt, as well as foods that contain less than half of the required amount of nutrients. to determine due to varying portion sizes. In grocery stores, foods that are "packaged and prepared for immediate consumption" are not always pre-portioned. Pizza companies have argued against "whole pie" labeling, because they feel it is not an accurate representation of what an individual would typically eat in one sitting. In restaurants, SRFE, and other establishments, are served as a whole (e.g., pizza, buckets of fried chicken) Some feel that these should be labeled as per portion, rather than whole item. information adjacent to self-service food (i.e., salad bars, buffet lines, and cafeteria lines) Section 4205 required that nutrient content disclosures have a "reasonable basis," such as nutrient databases, cookbooks, or laboratory analyses. The law specifically required the FDA to promulgate regulations for the following issues: standards for determining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations, that are listed as a single menu item. Rules for registration of establishments that are not otherwise subject to the law's requirements to voluntarily provide nutrition information. use a simplified labeling format. Prior to passage of the ACA, two other categories of food were also exempt from nutrition labeling requirements. These categories were (1) food "which is served in restaurants or other establishments in which food is served for immediate human consumption or which is sold for sale or used in such establishments," and (2) food which is processed and prepared primarily in a retail establishment. The ACA requires that food be labeled as "ready for human consumption" and "of the type described" do not apply to grocery stores. Some have argued that congressional intent in drafting the provision that was eventually enacted as part of the ACA was not to broaden the scope of those laws. However, as many grocers and other business owners have increased their share of the market in sales of restaurant-type food, one question for policymakers is whether the inclusion of supermarkets and convenience stores is instrumental to the effectiveness of the menu labeling law. If congressional intent was to regulate all restaurant- type food, regardless of location, so that consumers have. consumer acceptance; and condiments available for general use, such as salt, pepper, and ketchup, that every customer has access to. The proposed rule further specifies the foods that would require labeling and food that would be exempt under the proposed rule. It proposed definitions for restaurant food and restaurant-type food, standard menu items, and combination meals. Under its proposed rule, the FDA also tentatively concluded that the new menu labeling requirements do not apply to alcoholic beverages. The FDA has estimated that grocery stores and supermarkets have approximately 40 items requiring nutrition labeling. all restaurant-type food, regardless of location, so that consumers have full information. Convenience stores, supermarkets, and movie theaters could generally be included. In anticipation of the final rule, some establishments have moved forward with menu labeling. McDonald's, the largest fast food company in the United States, announced in September 2012 that it would list calorie information on all restaurant and drive-thru menu boards. Under the ACA, covered establishments are required to provide calorie and nutrition information for "food that is a standard menu item" These items include combination meals, variable menu items, self-service food, and food FDA's estimate would be accurate if the rule only applied to restaurant food. If it applies to restaurant-type food, which would include many self-serve and deli items, then the affected number of items would be closer to 500 to 15,000 items. The proposed rule includes clarification of several concepts that were noted but not defined in the ACA, including the medium (i.e., menu, table tent, place mat) and placement. Under the law, covered establishments must provide calorie information on menus and menu boards.

ROUGE-1: 75.78, ROUGE-2: 69.39, ROUGE-L: 22.95
BERTScore: 59.45

==============================================
==================== [28/100] ====================
Summary:
Rebates for volume discounts on governmentwide total quality training costs Fees for over 80 types of applications, statements, and reports filed pursuant to each of the statutes the Commission administers. User fees charged to cover the costs of materials, brochures, and space rental for seminars, workshops, business award events, and others (continued) Ad valorem fees for cargo on vessels going into U.S. ports; interest on Minority Bank investments; fees for observation decks and viewing machines at Eisenhower Lock. pleasure craft and noncommercial tolls for use of the seaway Civil penalties, sale of test tires and vehicles, royalties, FOIA requests, Corporate Average Fuel Economy fine (CAFE) penalties, and user fees. User fees for processing applications to sell ships; operating the computer-aided Operations Research Facility at the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy; making copies of agency rulings, orders, and economic data. Assessment of all federally chartered national banks, corporate applications, examinations, and security filings. Proceedings and compliant and compliant-type declaratory order proceedings (49 C.F.R. 1002) Registration fees from handlers of authorized drugs (doctors, pharmacies, and others) Collection of initial and supplemental registrations for foreign principals. Sale of utilities (electricity, steam, water, and sewage treatment) to Federal Prison Industries, Inc. (Trade name-UNICOR) Sale of meal tickets; rental income from staff housing located at various federal prisons; sale of farm by-products. federal prisons; sale of farm by-products; fees from the care and custody of state prisoners from various states Gift shop sales, tickets, and tours National Archives and Records Management Reproduction services, the sale of reference material, over-the-counter sales (museum and presidential library shops), publication sales, audiovisual sales and rentals, and Presidential library admissions. File search and copying services in association with FOIA and requests made to the Research Division. Duplicating costs under FOIA and thesale of Board publications reports License and inspection fees, annual fees, and other regulatory costs. Law receipts Filing fee from persons acquiring voting securities or assets who are required to file pre-merger notifications (15 U.S.C. 18a) Entrance fees, commodity revenues from grazing, oil and gas, sand and gravel, and other special use fees Tours of Hoover Dam, site rentals of cabins, trailers, and camping and group-use sites, and land-use fees. Public Information products, the review and approval of pipeline rights-of-way, Cenozoic Publication. For the purpose of this assignment, we defined “concessions’ as private or public entities using federally owned/leased property. We excluded day care centers, employee association stores, and services provided by the visually impaired under the Randolph-Sheppard Act. State governments manage Randolph- sheppard concessions that are on federal property. All 75 agencies responded. GSA agreed to include these concessions in its response. We asked agencies not to include concessions services in an agency that were provided under an agreement with GSA. Further, if concessions services were provided by private parties, such as services to either the general public or specific individuals. by state agencies. Total (fees + special accounts) Rate of return (percent) Transportation (including ferry, cruise, tourmobile) Food service operations, lodging, campgrounds, vending machines, retail sales, river running, big game hunting, marinas, ski resorts, transportation, cruise boats, boat docks, coin-operated copiers, and others. Retail sales, marina, beaches, golf courses. Lodging, food service operations,. pools, horseback riding, and firewood sales. and firewood sales Lodging, food service operations, swimming pools, snack bars, marinas, boat docks, horseback riding, and golf courses. Application fees and the sale of patent information Fees for rule reviews, designations, Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), leverage audits, registration, reparations, photocopying, and publications. User fees for the disposal of high-level radioactive waste; timber sales; public hunting; recycling; procurement seminars and procurement solicitation fees; occasional rights-of-way and easement. needed, but they also said it can not always be used. They said some operations could not be competed, such as ski areas where major portions of the operations are located on private land. In such situations, the federal government’s land is usually needed to complete a service, they said. However, they noted that other activities such as river running, jeep tours through scenic areas, and hunting trips, were very profitable to concessioners and the federalgovernment. They also said that some operations were not commercially viable. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. Fifty components from 29 of the 75 federal agencies we surveyed said they received income of $20.5 billion in 1994 from activities that were not concessions. Activities varied and included the sale of hydroelectric power, audiovisual products, coins, medals, and commemorative items; tours of the Hoover Dam; operation of gift shops. New agreements with preferential right of contract renewal resulted in a 3.8 percent rate of return, and those without the preference resulted in 6.4 percent. Most of the $20.5 billion was to be either deposited in Treasury’s special account or retained by the agency for its use. Because of such issues as security and privacy concerns, most of the activities were not conducive to concessions operations. Agency officials estimated that activities generating $175 million, or about 1 percent of the money, could be converted into concession operations. These activities included the sale of hydroelectric power, tours of the Hoover Dam and admission to presidential libraries. The money was intended to be used for a variety of purposes, agency officials said. procurement seminars and procurement solicitation fees; occasional rights-of-way and easement and grazing fees; and sale of crude oil and natural gas. Sale of wholesale power to customers who redistribute to retail customers. Power from 21 multipurpose water resource projects of the Army Corps of Engineers and 9 of the Bureau of Reclamation, plus power from nonfederal generating plants. More than 10,000 megawatts of power (electricity) from 54 hydro power plants. Power generated at 22 U.S. Army bases. Sale of power generated at 22 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers projects located in a 10-state southeastern region (continued) Revenue and fees obtained from contractor parking, fitness dues, interest earned on investments, telecommunications income from billings, earned assessments, provision for assessment credit, exit/ entrance fees, recoverable expenses from the Uniformed Bank Performance Report (UBPR) collections, miscellaneous income from seminars, rents, and others. Collection of civil penalties, the sale of federal campaign disclosure reports and records, and revenues from FOIA. We did our review from January 1995 to November 1995, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Because it was impractical for us to obtain comments from all 75 agencies, we provided copies of a draft of this report to the heads of the departments of the six land management agencies for comment. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of the concessions. On March 25, 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. Their comments are discussed on pages 16 and 17. concessions operations. These activities included the sale of hydroelectric power, tours of Hoover Dam, the sale. of commemorative items and coins, and collection of user or entrance fees. We did not ask for comments from all 75 agencies in our survey because to do so would have been impractical. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of total concessions. On March 25, 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the land management agencies. The report was released on March 21, 1996. 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. The officials said they generally agreed with the facts as presented in the draft. Officials from four of the agencies—National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Reclamation—said they agreed with draft report. The report was published in 1996 and is available on the National Park Service website and on the Internet at http://www.nps.gov/nps/nr/nr-nr/npr/nr.html. we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the agencies included in our review, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IX. Please contact me on (202) 512-8387 if you have any questions concerning this report. The Department of the Army Corps of Engineers is listed as a major contributor to the report. It is followed by the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service and the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board. Twenty-seven of the 75 departments and agencies we surveyed reported that they had concessions operations during fiscal year 1994. The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (continued) operations in 1994? National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Archives and Records Administration National Endowment for the Arts. Thrift Deposit Protection Oversight Board U.S. Trade and Development Agency (continuing) operations during 1994? Department of Health and Human Services Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of Social Services. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965 gives National Park Service concessioners the right to be compensated for improvements they construct on federal lands. The legislation specifies that unless otherwise provided by agreement, the compensation must be based on “sound value,” which is generally defined as reconstruction cost less depreciation, not to exceed fair market value. The National Park Hospitality Association is challenging the new policy in the courts. Officials from the four states and Canada said their regulations do not allow concessioners to acquire possessory interests. The National Park Service said that between 1985 and 1989, 28 of 29 contracts up for renewal were awarded to the incumbent concessioner. The National they said they consider the amount of a concessioner’s investment when deciding the length of the contract. According to the officials, concessioners are given enough time to make a profit and amortize their investments, but the maximum term of contracts is 20 years. New and extended agreements granting possessory interest resulted in a rate of return of 3.8 percent. The preferential right for contract renewal is the right of incumbent concessioners to match or better the best offer received from firms competing for the concessions contract. The existing concessioner must have performed satisfactorily and must have been under the existing contract for 2 years. This preference reduces competition because it may limit the number of prospective concessioners. Businesses are reluctant to expend time and money preparing bids in a process where the award is decided by a panel of three people rather than a public vote. No overall federal concessions policy exists. In exchange for use of federal property, concessioners pay the government a concessions, franchise, permit, or license fee. The primary purpose of the land management agencies’ concessions programs is to provide a service to the public, not to maximize the rate of return. Officials from the Forest Service and the Bureau of Reclamation noted that high investments made by some concessioners also affect the government’s rates of return, which our report recognizes. We revised the questionnaires on the basis of their detailed feedback. land management agencies generally have discretion whether to compete concessions agreements. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965, governing National Park Service concessions, is the only law covering concessions in land management agencies that specifically requires competition. About 70 percent of the 42 agencies or agency components responding to our survey said retaining fees is or would be beneficial to them. An official from one of the agencies that retained fees said that since the fees support agency operations, staff put forth extra effort to obtain a high rate of return on concessions. Concessions services include food service, retail sales, ski resorts, lodging, and marinas. Nonland management agencies such as the General Services Administration and U.S. Postal Service provide concessions services either for all federal employees or their individual employees. The primary purpose of their concessions programs is to provide high-quality merchandise and convenient services at reasonable prices. Since the mid 1970s, we have had a public-private partnership to provide recreation for visitors to national parks, forests, and other public lands and waters. Each year, millions of people use the services made possible through these agreements. A long-term agreement, which generally involves a large financial investment by the concessioner for construction or capital improvements, may last up to 50 years. A short-term permit or license, which usually requires little or no financial investment in facilities by the concessionser, mayLast up to 5 years. Each agency is responsible for the services provided on federal property to the public. The federal government provides many of the services and accommodations provided on its property. Parks and Recreation: Park Service Managers Report Shortfalls in Maintenance Funding (GAO/RCED-88-91BR, Mar. 21, 1988). Maintenance Needs of the National Park Service (GAo/T-RCED -88-27, Mar., 23, 1988) Parks and Recreation. Documenting and Mitigating Threats to the Parks (GAE/RCed-87-36, Feb. 9, 1987). Parks and. Recreation: Recreational Fee Authorizations, Prohibitions, and Limitations (GAA/RCeds-86-149, May 8, 1986). Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation’s Recreation and Construction Backlogs (GAW/RCEd-84-54, Nov. 25, 1984). The National Park. Service Has Improved Facilities at 12 Park Service Areas (GAB/RED-80-102, July 31, 1980). Concession Operations in the National Parks—Improvements Needed in Administration. Federal Lands: Views on Reform of Recreation Concessioners. Forest Service: Little Assurance That Fair Market Value Fees Are Collected From Ski Areas. National Park Service: Policies and Practices for Determining Concessioner’s Building Use Fees. Federal Lands: Oversight of Long-Term Concessiones. Forest service: Difficult Choices Face the Future of the Recreation Program. Federal lands: Improvements Needed in Managing Concessioning. Federal land: Little Progress Made in Improving Oversight of Concessionering. required by legislation. The National Park Service’s periodic operational reviews of concessioners, which may increase maintenance costs. The legislatively required rate control of concessiones’ prices for goods and services. The expense for financial audits to concessioners grossing over 1 million dollars annually that the Park Service requires. It is likely that all larger concessioners would incur the costs of financial and routine maintenance audits, regardless of the agencies’ requirements, the authors say. The review was not designed to measure what impact, if any, that operational reviews or rate controls have on a concessioners’ profitability. to those of similar services and facilities under similar circumstances. Nothing seems to suggest that National Park Service concessioners have been directed to set prices at rates below those that one would normally expect to find in the surrounding localities. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies of this. report to interested congressional members. The Department of the Army Corps of Engineers said they had no comments on the draft report. dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees and special accounts. To determine how the federal government’s rate of return compared with that of other governments, we also sent a questionnaire to five state governments and Canada. We selected the five states—California, Maryland, Michigan, Missouri, and Tennessee. The information showed that these five states had relatively high rates of return. We also visited two of the states—Maryland and Tennessee—and met with their key concessions managers. vending machines, and coin-operated photocopiers. Since the mid 1970s, we have conducted several reviews of the concessions programs in the land management agencies. (See the list of Related GAO Products on pp. 43 and 44.) The objectives of our review were to determine the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, and the rate of return received by the government from concessions. (4) The extent of agencies’ nonconcessions activities that generated income in the U.S. in U.S. Treasury securities) Harbor maintenance fees; commissions on pay telephone stations; charges for testing, inspecting and grading services; fees and other charges for miscellaneous services and Consolidated Omnibus Budget and Reconciliation Act (COBRA) The objectives of our review were to determine (1) the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, (2) the rate of return the federalGovernment received from concessions, and (3) how the government’s rate ofreturn compared to other governments’ rates of return. of 2 percent to a high rate of 47 percent for the 15 service categories. Food service operations averaged the lowest rate of return (2 percent) and coin-operated copiers in U.S. Postal Service facilities averaged the highest rate (47 percent) Other governments reported receiving higher rates of return from concessions operations than the overall federal rate. Four states and Canada reported on average a 12.7 percent rate ofreturn. The states were California, Maryland, Michigan, and Missouri. The National Parks and Conservation Association noted the states as having high rates ofreturn from concessions. They reported that they had contracting officers to set policies but delegated concessions management to park managers. As shown in appendix VI, concessions agreements entered into on a competitive basis had higher rates of return than those that were not competed. For campground permits where agencies reported both revenue and fee data, agencies reported they competed 82 percent of the permits issued in fiscal year 1994. Campground permits that agencies reported competing averaged a 7.1 percent rate of return compared to a 4.1-percent rate ofreturn for campground permit agencies said they issued noncompetitively. amount of fees generated for the government and bidders’ experience and financial status. According to state officials, agreements exempted from competition included short-term permits expecting to gross a low level of revenue, generally $5,000 or less. Officials for one state said the state would enter into a noncompetitive agreement with a business that initiated a proposal for a concession. If the operation proved lucrative after 1 year, the state said it would renegotiate the concessions agreement through a competitive process. having high rates of return from concessions reported obtaining rates ofreturn ranging from 11 to 17 percent. Canada reported receiving a 9.8 percent rate of return on its concessions operations. Canada and the four states reported that their concessions services included marinas, food service operations, campgrounds, and retail sales. All four states and Canada said they generally compete concessions agreements. They said that key factors for selecting concessioners were the amount of fees generated for the government and bidders’ experience. revenues and fees against our prior reports, and followed up with agency staff in selected cases to clarify their responses. Because agencies did not collect revenue data on all concessions, we could calculate the rate of return only for those agreements where agencies reported both the revenues and fees. On the basis of questionnaire data, we determined that 6 of these types of concessions were among the 50 concessions with the highest reported gross revenues to the concessioners in our survey and were initiated in fiscal year 1994. The reported information showed that the agreements were initiated on a noncompetitive basis. government property for various reasons, including the difficulty of distinguishing between maintenance costs for federal property and concessioners’ property. We calculated the rate of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees and the amount concessioners deposited into special accounts for improvements. Rates of return ranged from a low rate of 2 percent to a high rate of 47 percent. The rate represents the percentage of reported concessioners' gross revenues that the federal government is to receive. We excluded questionnaires that did not contain both gross revenue and concessions fee data. In response to our questionnaires, we received information on 5,000 concessions agreements. Our information about the agreements comes from only the agencies’ questionnaire responses. To check whether the questionnaires were filled out completely and accurately, we (1) checked selected responses against copies of the concessions agreements that agencies sent to us. We (2) checked agency totals for concessions revenues and fees against prior GAO reports; (3) followed up with agency staff in selected cases to clarify their responses; (4) manually reviewed all pages of each form. had specially trained staff convert the data to computer-readable format and verify their entries. (6) manually checked computerized data against the original forms, including all data on concessions revenues and fees. (7) conducted computerized checks for data consistency. We analyzed the information using standard software for tabulating and analyzing data. To calculate the rate of return from concessions, we used questionnaire financial data for concessions agreements either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994. From this reported information, we calculated the rates of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees. 27 of the 75 federal departments and agencies surveyed reported having concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. Fifteen of the 27 agencies either initiated or extended at least 1 concession agreement. The Central Intelligence Agency provided an oral briefing on its concessions program and did not provide any details. In response to our questionnaires, we received information on 5,000 concessions. For over 92 percent of the concessions, the Department of the Interior had more than one component managing concessions. include these concessions in its response. To accomplish objectives one, two, and four, we used three questionnaires to request data from 75 federal executive departments and agencies listed in the 1993/94 U.S. Government Manual. The first questionnaire requested summary information on all concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994, such as the total number of agreements, concessioners’ revenues, and concessions fees. The second questionnaire asked for detailed agreement-specific information on each concessions agreements either initiated or extended during fiscal Year 1994. Details included the details of each agreement that was either initiated and extended during the fiscal year. initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994. Details included the amount of revenues and fees, information on whether competition was used to select the concessioner. The third questionnaire asked for information on agencies’ income-generating activities that were not concessions. We pretested the questionnaires at six federal agencies or agency components: the Department of Agriculture’s Forest Service, the Department of the California Department of Agriculture and the State Department. components also estimated that concessioners provided an additional $4.7 million in nonfee compensation by maintaining government property. Table II.1 contains overall information reported by the 27 departments and agencies. Data on all concessioners’ revenues were not available. Central Intelligence Agency did not provide details on its concessions agreements. Agency responded that concessions fees were sometimes waived because of the following reasons: (1) reduced prices on vended items, (2) difficulty in obtaining contractors, (3) a more attractive procurement was needed because of a lack of offerors. The rate of return on agreements where agencies reported that they were authorized to retain over 50 percent of the fees was 3.3 times the rate on agreements with agencies that did not. Most concessions fees are to be deposited into the Department of the Treasury as general miscellaneous receipts. Since agencies that collect concessions fees generally are not able to use them, they have less incentive to maximize fees. Therefore, agenciesauthorized to retain fees reported obtaining more fees in proportion to their concessioners’ gross revenues. Information on 2,234 concessions agreements reporting both revenue and fee data detailed how they were entered into during fiscal year 1994. Nonland management agencies entered into 101 of the agreements and competed 96 percent of them. The land management agencies initiated 2,133 of these concessions agreements and Competition 8.6 percent. Five nonland agencies (with authority to retain fees) reported 5 percent of the total agreements and 3 percent of concessioners’ gross revenues but reported 18 percent of concessions fees. In contrast, the six landmanagement agencies (without authority to retaining their fees), reported 93 percent of total agreements but reported 73 percent of fees. the Interior, had more than 1 component managing concessions agreements. The 42 agencies or agency components reported that they had 11,263 concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. The agencies reported concessioners’ gross revenues of $2.2 billion in fiscal year1994. The National Park Service and the Forest Service concessions operations accounted for about 90 percent of the six land management agencies’ reported concessioner’s gross revenues. Some agency officials said they had no requirement to track concessioners' revenues when concessioners paid a flat concessions fee. and nonprofit organizations interested in concessions issues; and (3) obtained and reviewed the laws, regulations, and policies for each federal entity’s concessions operations. If concessions services in agencies were provided under agreements with GSA, we requested agencies not to include these operations in their responses. GSA agreed to includeThese concessions in its response. Our information on the concessions agreements comes from only the agency's questionnaire responses for the agreements. However, we checked selected responses against copies of concessions agreements sent to us, checked agency totals for concessions revenues and fees against our prior reports. either returned to the government or put back into the food service operation, (5) concessioners make it possible to market Native Americans arts and crafts. Agency responded that some revenue data were not available mainly because concessioners were not required to report revenues for certain concessions where they generally paid a flat concessions fee. According to the Bureau of Reclamation, the 37 concessioners represent only a portion of the agency’s concessioners. Survey information was not available for the 225 concessions agreements that are managed by state agencies.

ROUGE-1: 74.73, ROUGE-2: 69.62, ROUGE-L: 22.49
BERTScore: 54.30

==============================================
==================== [29/100] ====================
Summary:
Army Guard members enlist for 8 years and are entitled to a number of benefits while serving in the Army Guard. Nonfederalized Army Guard members’ pay and allowances are paid with state funds while federalized Army Guards pay is paid with federal funds. After their enlistment periods, former Army Guards are eligible for veterans’ benefits, such as health care and burial benefits. The Army Guard is required to attend one drill weekend each month and one annual training period (usually 2 weeks) each month and one annual training period (usually 2 weeks in the summer) each year. The Army Guard has armories and training facilities in more than 2,800 communities. The Guard is a partner with the active Army and the Army Reserves in fulfilling its mission to protect and defend the U.S. Constitution and the nation's sovereignty. It is a volunteer organization that is part of the Army National Guard system. It was formed in 1863 and has been in existence ever since. It has its own headquarters in Fort Leavenworth. We focused on 14 basic types of pays and allowances applicable to Army Guard units we selected for case studies. We categorized these 14 pay and allowance types into two groups: (1) pays, including basic pay, special duty assignment pay, parachute jumping and foreign language proficiency skill-based pays, and location-based hostile fire and hardship duty pays. (2) allowances, including allowances for housing, subsistence, family separation, and cost of living for the continental United States. In this case study, we focused on the basic pay and allowances. Army Guard soldiers may be eligible for tax advantages associated with their mobilization to active duty. mobilized Army Guard soldiers assigned to or working in a combat zone are entitled to exclude from taxable income certain military pay that would otherwise be taxable. As shown in figure 1, there are three key phases associated with starting and stopping relevant pays and allowances for mobilized Army Guards. These include initial mobilization (primarily through the Soldier Readiness Processing), deployment, and carrying out assigned mission operations while on duty.and cost of living for the continental United States. Army Guard soldiers earn various statutorily authorized pays and allowances while on active duty. The types of pay and allowances Army Guard soldiers are eligible to receive vary depending upon rank and length of service, dependency status, skills and certifications acquired, duty location, and the difficulty of the assignment. The Army Guard also supported federal peacekeeping operations in Southwest Asia with Operation Desert Spring and in Kosovo with Operation Joint Guardian under various other military operations. While Army GuardSoldiers mobilized to active duty may be eligible for certain types of allowances. Each adjutant general reports to the governor of the state, or in the case of the District of Columbia, the mayor. The Army Guard’s state mission is perhaps the most visible and well known. Army Guard units battle fires or help communities deal with floods, tornadoes, hurricanes, snowstorms, or other emergency situations. In times of civil unrest, the citizens of a state can call up members of the Army Guard in times of domestic emergency or need. For more information, visit the U.S. Army National Guard website. During national emergencies, the President has the authority to mobilize the Army Guard. While federalized, the units answer to the Combatant Commander of the theatre in which they are operating and, ultimately, to the President. The Army Guard has a federal mission to maintain properly trained and equipped units, available for prompt mobilization for war, national emergency, or as otherwise needed. Nonfederalized Army Guard members’ pay and allowances are paid, and the Guard is funded through state and local sources. The Army Guard is the oldest component of any of the uniformed services. It traces its roots to the colonial militia, and claims a “birth”of 1636. Today, the Army Guard exists in 54 locations that include all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and three territories: Guam, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. During peacetime, Army Guard units report to the adjutant generals of their states or territories, or in the case of the District, to the Commanding General. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) assists the Army Guard in this partnership. NGB is a joint bureau of the Departments of the Army and the Air Force and is charged with overseeing the federal functions of theArmy Guard and Air Guard. All Army forces are integrated under DOD’s “total Army forces’ ‘total Army’ policy. N GB also acts as a liaison between the Department of the. Army and Air Force, and the states. It helps the Army. Guard and the. Air Guard procure funding and administer policies. The Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company was called to active duty in support of Operation Noble Eagle on December 27, 2001. The unit mobilized in Clinton, Mississippi, and departed for Fort Campbell, Kentucky, on January 6, 2002. On June 10, 2002, the unit deployed to Guantanamo pay records and reported the error. Following his discharge, this soldier continued to receive active duty pay until August 31, resulting in an overpayment. The majority of soldiers from the company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more phases of the three phases of their active duty. Police units mobilized to active duty in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom during the period from October 2001 through March 2003. We chose California, Colorado, Maryland, Mississippi, Virginia, and West Virginia. From these six states, we selected three special forces and three military police units that had a variety of deployment locations and missions. We also identified and performed a limited review of the pay experiences of a unit still deployed during the time of our review; Colorado’s 220th Military Police Company. The purpose of our limited review was to assess the effectiveness of the controls over active duty pays in place for those units. Six units were deployed to various locations in the United States and overseas in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. In addition, we conducted a limited review of the pay experiences of a seventh unit mobilized more recently and deployed to Iraq in April 2003. The Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company was one of the six case study units. These case studies are presented to provide a more detailed view of the problems faced by the units in our study. The study was conducted from October 1, 2001 through March 31, 2003. immediate threat of further attacks on the United States. At that time, Army Guard soldiers accounted for 34 percent of the total reserve components mobilized in response to the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. The Secretary of Defense delegated to the Secretary of the Army the authority to order Army Guard soldier to active duty as part of the overall mobilization effort. Approximately 93,000 Army Guard troops were activated as of March 2003. The active duty component of the U.S. Army National Guard is known as the Army Reserve. Missions to fight terrorism outside the U.S. were categorized under Operation Enduring Freedom, while missions to provide domestic defense were categorized as Operation Noble Eagle. For example, Army Guard soldiers participated in direct combat in Afghanistan under OperationEnduring Freedom. U.s. homeland security missions, such as guarding the Pentagon, airports, nuclear power plants, domestic water supplies, bridges, tunnels, and other military assets were conducted under OperationNoble Eagle. The active duty federal missions established in response to the September 2001 national emergency were categorized into two operations. DOD’s total force concept is based on the premise that it is not practically feasible to maintain active duty forces sufficient to meet all possible war contingencies. On September 14, 2001, the President declared a national emergency as a result of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon and the continuing and immediate threat of further attacks. Under this concept, DOD's active and reserve components are to be blended into a cohesive total force to meet a given mission.the states. All Army forces are integrated under the “total force” concept. reported unpaid debt balance was $26,806, but the actual amount of his debt remained unresolved. On January 2, 2002, the Virginia Army National Guard’s B Company, 3rd Battalion, 20th Special Forces, was called to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom for a 1-year tour. The unit in-processed at Fort Pickett, Virginia, and departed for Fort Bragg, North Carolina, in May 2002. In early May 2002, B Company deployed to Afghanistan to perform search and destroy missions against al Qaeda and Taliban terrorists. The 19th Special Forces Group, 2nd Battalion, C Company, was called to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom for a 1-year tour. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for possible Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists. A timeline of the unit’s actions associated with its mobilization under Operation Endured Freedom is summarized in figure 12. As summarized in table 12, the majority of the family members involved were from West Virginia. The 114th Military Police Company deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to perform base security and guard duties for Taliban and al Qaeda prisoners. After guarding detainees in Cuba for approximately 6 months, the unit returned to Fort Campbell in late November 2002. At Fort Campbell the unit out-processed and returned to Clinton, Mississippi, and was released from active duty on January 5, 2003. At every stage of the unit’s 1-year tour of active duty, soldiers experienced some sort of pay problem. Colorado Army National Guard’s B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces was mobilized to active duty on orders for a 2-year period. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for Taliban and al Qaeda. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9505. Overall, all 62 soldiers with the company had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization. These pay problems included not receiving entitled pays and allowances at all; not receiving some entitled pay and allowances within 30 days; and for some, overpayments of pays and allowance. As summarized in table 12, the majority of soldiers from C Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, 86 of the 94 soldiers in the company experienced at least a pay problem. Of 119 soldiers of the Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company, 105 experienced at least one pay problem associated with mobilization in support of Operation Noble Eagle. Pay problems included not receiving pays and allowances at all (underpayments), receiving some pay and allowances over 30 days after entitlement (late payments), and the overpayment of allowances. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $74,000, underpayments, and late payments of $10,000. Almost all soldiers from the 49th Military Police Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more phases of the active duty mobilization. Overall, 50 of the 51 soldiers with the unit had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization to active duty and the Fort Lewis Finance Office. In total, 48 out of 51 soldiers did not receive certain pay and allowances and incentive pays at all, or did not received them within 30 days after being mobilized on October 2, 2001. The unit was demobilized from active duty at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002. Sixty-two soldiers from the unit were overpaid their entitled subsistence allowance by active Army finance personnel. The soldiers were stationed at Fort Stewart and were not provided lodging or mess and properly received the full subsistence allowance. When the unit was redeployed to.and pay the soldier a “catch-up” housing allowance payment. As summarized in table 22, we identified a number of pay problems associated with five different types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment. soldiers who were released from active duty on September 30, 2002 (the original date for the unit’s demobilization, designated on the mobilization orders). However, as shown in table 23, we did identify three soldiers who continued to receive active duty pay after their early release. Specifically, the three soldiers from the unit returned from Cuba, demobilized at Fort Stewart, and were released on July 10, 2002, while their original orders showed a September 30,. 2002, release date. Enlisted soldiers are not entitled to the full subsistence allowance when mess facilities are provided. In January 2002, three soldiers who received mobilization orders from the 200th MP Company left Fort Stewart and traveled with the 115th Military Police Company to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to assist with base security and guard duties. While in Cuba, the soldiers received the full allowance. The unit was redeployed to the Pentagon, and mess facilities became available. However, active Army finance personnel did not reduce the unit’s subsistence allowance rate to reflect the available mess facilities. The unit performed general military police guard duties at Fort Stewart until December 15, 2001, when 87 of the soldiers in the unit were deployed to guard the Pentagon. The company arrived at Ft. Eustis, Virginia, in late August 2002 and was released from active duty on September 30, 2002. In addition, 3 of the 90 soldiers who received orders from the 200th Military Police Company were discharged from the Army in September 2002. The unit is now based at Fort Campbell, Kentucky. The 49th Military Police Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment (HHD) was mobilized to active duty for a period not to exceed 24 months. The unit performed its active duty mission at Fort Lewis, where it provided base security as part of the military police force. The 49th MP HHD mobilized at its home station, Pittsburg, California, and then proceeded to its designated mobilization station, Fort Lewis on October 12, 2001. Fort Stewart did not provide the amended orders with the earlier release date in time to stop the pay.and allowances through July 15, 2002. Only two knowledgeable military pay officials were present to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers mobilized for his unit. The assigned pay technician initially failed to enter transactions to start pay and allowances for a significant number of the unit’s soldiers because the supporting documentation was misplaced. The Fort Lewis finance office asked the California USPFO to supply additional personnel and temporarily reassigned soldiers from other units stationed at Fort Lewis to assist in the pay processing. The company commander for the unit said he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received as it moved through the initial mobilization process. We identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit’s mobilization to active duty. Failures to enter transactions or late entry of transactions needed to start active duty pays were the initial cause of the pay problems. We also found that the underlying cause was a lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable personnel at the California USPFO and the Fort Lewis Finance Office. The Fort Lewis finance office lacked sufficient number of knowledgeable military pay staff to expeditiously enter the large volume of transactions necessary to begin active duty pay. USPFO officials were unable to provide sufficient documentation to explain why 3 soldiers appeared not to have received cost of living allowance payments due them for a 2-month period. An Army pay technician at the Fort Lewis finance office entered the incorrect code, thereby paying a soldier the wrong type of allowance. California’s 49th Military Police Company demobilized at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002, and returned to its home station in Pittsburg, California. We did not identify any pay problems for this unit in the demobilization. unit’s initial mobilization included basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence,basic allowance for housing, family separation allowance, and the continental United States cost of living allowance. The late payments during the mobilization phase primarily resulted from California USPFO military pay personnel’S lack of understanding of their responsibility for initiating active duty pays. According to DFAS reserve component mobilization procedures; the California US PFO was responsible for initiating these pays. However, a USPfo military pay official mistakenly instructed the unit to take its pay data to the mobilization station to enter transactions to start active duty pay. In 1995, the Army decided to process pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers from the DJMS-RC system rather than the active Army payroll system. At this time, the supporting USPFO is responsible for discontinuing monthly input of all nonautomated pays and allowances. If the demobilization station did not take action to return a soldier to a demobilized status, the state USPfo has this responsibility. The Army decided in 1995 to process pay to mobilized soldiers from a different system than the one used to pay mobilized soldiers previously. Each of these soldiers to receive active duty pay for 10 days. Several other soldiers received promotions at the time of their mobilization. State military pay personnel at the USPFO did not enter transactions for the promotions until several months later, resulting in late promotion pay to the affected soldiers. Delays by the unit in submitting the promotion paperwork or by the state personnel office in entering the promotion papers into the personnel system caused these problems. However, supporting documents were not available to enable us to determine the specific cause of the delays. for subsistence, basic allowance for housing, family separation allowance, and location-based pays such as hardship duty pay. 3 soldiers experienced pay problems during their demobilization from Fort Stewart related to continuation of active duty pay entitlements after they were released early from active duty. We identified a number of causes associated with these pay problems, including delays in submitting documents, incorrect data entry, and limited personnel to process the mass mobilizations. Maryland’s USPFO officials told us they had not experienced a large-scale mobilization to active duty in more than 10 years. Colorado’s B Company demobilization was complicated by the fact that the unit did not demobilize through the same active Army location used to mobilize the unit. Some soldiers in the unit told us that upon their return from overseas deployments, they were informed that they should have corrected these problems while in- theater, despite the fact these problems were not detected until the demobilized phase. Fort Campbell finance office personnel we interviewed were not present during B Company’S demobilizations. soldiers, the finance office inadvertently overlooked entering one or more monthly hardship duty payments. Five soldiers continued to receive active duty pay and allowances after being discharged or returned from active duty. Instead of demobilizing on schedule with their unit, these five soldiers demobilized individually earlier due to various reasons. 85 of 88 soldiers of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers continued receiving the incorrect certain places payments through their last day of active duty, according to DFAS guidance. The 114th Military Police Company returned to Fort Campbell on November 23, 2002, to begin the demobilization process. C Company returned to Fort Campbell during the fall of 2002 to begin the demobilization process. By October 2002, all of the unit had returned from overseas and was demobilized on December 4, 2002. 66 of C Company’s 94 soldiers experienced pay problems associated with their demobilizing from active duty. In October 2002,. eligible soldiers in the unit were entitled to a special duty assignment pay increase from $110 per month to $220 per month. To initiate this higher pay rate, the. specific cause of the delays. After leaving the unit’s home station, the 114th Military Police Company traveled to Fort Campbell, its active Army mobilization station. At this point, because the soldiers had only recently mobilized and had not received their first paychecks, they were unaware of pay problems. Failure to follow requirements for finance verification at Fort Campbell caused pay problems to persist past the mobilization stage. In addition, we were unable to determine specific causes for certain pay problems associated with the unit's mobilization because the unit remobilized in February 2003. 39 of the unit’s 62 soldiers continued to receive active duty pay and allowances, some until February 14, 2003. One of these soldiers was discharged early because of drug-related charges. However, his pay continued for 3 months past his discharge date. In at least one case in which documentation was available, state USPFO military pay personnel did not immediately detect the overpayments in monthly pay system mismatch reports. For these five soldiers, overpayment continued for up to 3 months. Campbell finance personnel were either unaware of their capability or unwilling to take the actions needed to address the unit's active duty pay concerns. Colorado’s B Company soldiers turned back to the USPFO for assistance. In one case, a soldier's spouse had to obtain a $500 grant from the Colorado National Guard in order to pay bills while her husband was on active duty. Such pays were started more than 30 days after the date they were entitled to receive such pays, according to the report. associated with four types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment while on active duty. While at Fort Campbell, eight soldiers experienced problems resulting from delays in entering changes in the family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions. For example, one soldier was promoted to the rank of Private First Class at the end of May, but the pay system did not reflect the promotion until October. Although the soldier eventually received retroactive promotion pay, the delay caused the soldier to be paid at her old rank for 5 The Mississippi Army National Guard was mobilized in January 2002. The unit stayed at Fort Campbell to perform post security duties until June 2002. On June 14, 2002, the E-4 specialist received a "general" discharge order for a drug-related offense. He continued to receive active duty pay, totaling approximately $9,400, until September 2002. Although the discharge information was promptly entered into the soldier's personnel records, it was not entered in the pay system for almost 4 years.. $220 per month. To initiate this higher pay rate, the West Virginia Army National Guard military personnel office was required to cut new special duty assignment pay orders for all eligible C Company soldiers. USPFO officials stated that they could not pay the increased amount until they received a copy of the new orders. However, the orders for the soldiers were not received received for several months, which created a delay in the payment of the soldiers’ special duty assignments pay. 63 soldiers received their last 3 months of specialduty assignment pay over 30 days late. Virginia’s B Company attended a soldier readiness program at the USPFO at Fort Pickett, Virginia. According to U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, these 1996. problems should have been corrected. Some of these long-standing pay problems had been resolved. For example, over $22,500 was processed for 52 B Company soldiers' and included in soldiers’ pay distributions from October 2001 to March 2003, the report says. The Army says it has been working with a sergeant from B Company who performed a detailed analysis. Soldiers not submitting the correct paperwork at the time of the Soldier Readiness Program caused some payments to be late. For example, according to the USPFO, one soldier did not submit the proper paperwork for his family separation allowance. The delay caused the soldier's pay to be paid late. This program was intended to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents and were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. The program was conducted by the U.S. Army Pay Office. as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. The purpose of this review was to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents and were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. Mississippi USPFO personnel, who conducted the finance portion of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldier readiness program, were required to verify soldiers’ supporting financial documentation. Not submitting the complete and current paperwork at the time of the mobilization was a violation of the FMR. In May 2002, Virginia’s B Company left Fort Bragg and traveled to Afghanistan to assist in missions against al Qaeda and Taliban forces. While in Afghanistan, the soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to hardship duty pay, special duty assignment pay, and, to a lesser extent, hostile fire pay and basic pay. Table 10 summarizes the pay problems we identified for the unit while it was deployed. Once the soldiers arrive in-theater, of pay were made when B Company returned in October 2002. hostile fire and hardship duty overpayments were occurring and took action to terminate the payments. Four members of Virginia’s B Company, who were injured while deployed in Afghanistan, returned to Fort Bragg and requested medical extensions to their active duty tours. One of the soldiers told us, “People did not know who was responsible for what. No one knew who to contact or what paperwork was needed.” To support themselves and their families, these four soldiers needed the active duty military pay they needed. detailed analysis of soldiers’ long-standing pay problems. This sergeant performed these pay-related tasks in addition to his mission- related duties as a professional engineer. After leaving the unit’s home station, B Company traveled to Fort Bragg, its active Army mobilization station. According to USPFO officials and active Army finance office officials, problems with jump pay have been a problem for the unit since January 2002 for the majority of their mobilization. The unit is currently deployed in Afghanistan. not for the remaining months of his deployment. Some soldiers in B Company left Afghanistan during August and September 2002. Most of the unit returned to Fort Bragg in October 2002 to begin the demobilization process. 57 soldiers continued to receive pays to which they were no longer entitled because they left Afghanistan. According to DOD mobilization procedures, the finance office at the servicing demobilized station is to conduct a finance out-processing. The finance office is responsible for inputting transactions to stop certain location-based payments. the more accurate list continued to receive HALO pay. Problems with HALO and family separation pay were not resolved for several months after the mobilization. As a result, the soldiers’ pay problems persisted into their deployment overseas. The unit’s soldiers were confused about whether they were receiving all their entitled active duty pays while mobilized. It does not appear that the active Army finance office at Fort Knox carried out its responsibility to review and validate all of C Company soldiers' active duty pay and allowance support records. C Company soldiers traveled to Uzbekistan and Afghanistan to perform special forces missions. Soldiers consistently experienced problems related to specific location-based payments such as hostile fire pay and hardship duty pay. In 78 cases, the payments were not started within 30 days from when the soldiers left the U.S. C Company soldiers consistently experienced issues with location- based payments. In 58 cases, they experienced problems with hostile firepay and hardshipduty pay. The problems were related to three different types of active duty pays related to the unit's deployment. the payments were not started within 30 days from when the soldiers were entitled to the payments. In 22 other cases, we determined that soldiers had not received all location-based pays as of March 31, 2003. In 60 cases, the Soldiers were overpaid or payments werenot stopped when they left the combat zones. Due to the lack of supporting documents at the state, unit, and battalion-levels, dates for when each soldier entered and left combat zones were not always available. Consequently, there may have been other deployment-related pay problems for C Company that we were not able to address. A West Virginia soldier took several days away from his unit to get location-based pay started for both the West Virginia and Colorado special forces units. We were also told that some members of the unit used their satellite radios to attempt to resolve their pay problems while deployed in Afghanistan. In addition, several of the units’ soldiers told us their ability to identify and correct pay problems was impaired by time away from their units. The U.S. military has more than 100,000 troops in Afghanistan and the region surrounding the country. around Afghanistan at that time and the dates they arrived in country with him as support for starting the unit’s in theater-based pays. Finally, at Kuwait the appropriate in-theater pays were activated and the two soldiers returned to Afghanistan. The entire trip required interim stops at eight locations because of limited air transportation and took about a week. Despite this costly, time-consuming, and risky procedure to start location- based pays for the unit, 63 of Virginia's B Company soldiers, who became eligible for hardship duty pay in May 2002, did not receive their location-based pay entitlements. Guard in order to pay bills while her husband was on active duty. Some soldiers in Colorado’s B Company received these pays sporadically, were not paid at all, were paid but for inexplicable dollar amounts, or were overpaid their entitled active duty pays. Soldiers told us they spent significant amounts of time and effort trying to correct the pay problems while deployed on critical mission operations in Afghanistan and surrounding areas. A frequent complaint we received from soldiers concerned the circular nature of any attempts to get assistance on pay issues while deployed overseas. Soldiers from Colorado’s B Company say recurring pay problems play a major role in their decision whether to reenlist. Having two-thirds of their monthly training paychecks garnished to pay off often erroneous payroll-related debts, and receiving poor payroll customer service during their active duty tours adversely affects morale. For example, a unit official advised us that as of September 30, 2003, three soldiers had left B Company primarily due to frustration, he said. The U.S. Army National Guard is the second-largest military service in the world. pay in May 2002, not receive their location-based pay entitlements until July 2002. Problems with special duty assignment pay also occurred during the unit’s deployment. We found that both underpayments and overpayments of this type of pay were made as a result of confusion about who was responsible for making the manual monthly transactions necessary for entitled soldiers in the unit to receive these pays. For example, 10 soldiers in B Company did not receive at least 1 month of entitled special duty assignments pay. B Company submitted the necessary documentation certifying that the unit’s soldiers were entitled to receive back pay for missed special assignment duty pays. USPFO officials told us that special duty assignment pay was processed because, having received this certification from the unit, they assumed that payments had not yet been made. We identified 11 B Company soldiers eligible for HALO pay who did not receive 1 or more months of 1/2 to 1/3 of their regular pay for special duty duty duty. The pay problems experienced by Virginia’s B Company were the result of a number of factors, including late submission of required pay support documents, incorrect pay inputs by Army personnel, and an active Army in-theater finance office. Several B Company soldiers we interviewed expressed dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses, were required to spend attempting to identify and correct problems with their pay. Another complaint concerned the circular nature of any attempts to correct the problems with the soldiers’ pay. case study unit, 34 soldiers received pay for several months past their official discharge dates. Although records were not available to confirm that these overpayments were reported as discrepancies on monthly mismatch reports, the USPFO military pay supervisor told us that at the time the mismatch reports were not being used to identify and correct pay-affecting errors. As discussed later, a mobilized soldier was released from active duty and discharged from the Army in June 2002, earlier than his planned release date. But, the soldier continuied to involvement in drug- related activities. for 3 months past his discharge date. By the time the USPFO stopped the active duty pay, the former soldier had received overpayments of about $9,400. Another 114th Military Police soldier was returned in an overpayment. Another soldier, facing disciplinary proceedings related to a domestic violence incident, agreed to an early discharge on May 22, 2002. The unit administrative officer, while deployed in Cuba, reviewed the unit commander’s finance report and discovered the soldier still on company pay records. was not entered into the pay system for almost 4 months. This problem was caused by weaknesses in the processes designed to work around the lack of integrated pay and personnel systems. It was not until over 3 months after the soldier's discharge, through its September 2002 end-of-month reconciliation, that the Mississippi Army National Guard USPFO identified the overpayment and took action to stop the individual's pay. However, collection efforts on the $9,400 overpayment did not begin until October 2, 2002. A USPFO pay technician incorrectly coded a soldier’s account to receive a family separation allowance when the soldier had only been on active duty for 2 weeks. This overpayment problem had not been resolved as of March 31, 2003. Five soldiers were unable to provide supporting documentation explaining why they continued to receive an allowance after their active duty tours had officially ended. We identified the payments made to these five soldiers as overpayments. Late, under- and over payments of foreign language proficiency pays resulted from delayed or inadequate data entry. we found. Of the estimated $50,000 in overpayments, we identified about $13,000 that was subsequently collected from the unit’s soldiers. Seventy-five of 90 soldiers from the 200thth Military Police Company did not receive the correct or timely entitlements related to basic pay, basic allowance for housing, and family separation allowance when called to active duty. Thirteen soldiers received over pay because they continued to receive pay after they were released early from active duty, and then received pay again. the complete and current paperwork at the time of the soldier readiness program contributed to some of the late payments we identified. Some soldiers did not receive their family separation allowance because they did not provide documentation supporting custody arrangements. confusion at the USPFO over the eligibility of single parents contributed to these late pays. It was later in the unit’s active duty tour that finance officers initiated action for 11 of the 114th Military Police unit's soldiers to receive retroactive payments, some for as much as 7-months of back pay. Five soldiers improperly received active duty pay and allowances even though they did not mobilize with the unit. In another case, a former Special Forces soldier improperly received jump pay even though his assignment to this military police unit did not require that special skill. For as much as 7-months of back pay, a soldier could receive up to $10,000. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/military/military-pay-pay/stories/stories-military-paid-pay. 30 days, the hostile fire pay or other “high-risk location” pays they were entitled to receive based on their deployment in Uzbekistan and Afghanistan. 53 soldiers either improperly continued to receive hostile fire. pay after leaving high-risk locations overseas or continued to. receive paychecks, as if they were still on active duty status, for over 2 months beyond their release from active duty. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $494,000, underpayments. of $28,000 and late payments of $64,000. period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003. For one unit, these pay problems resulted in largely erroneous debts totaling $1.6 million. 450 of the 481 soldiers from our case study units had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization to active duty. Of the estimated $74,000 in identified overpayments, we identified about $32,000 that was subsequently collected from the unit’s soldiers. 64 soldiers experienced pay problems during their tour of active duty related to the proper payment of basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and family separation allowance. For purposes of characterizing pay problems for this report, we defined over- and underpayments as those pays or allowances for mobilized Army Guard soldiers during the period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003. We did not include any erroneous debts associated with these payments as pay problems. We provided the support for the pay problems we identified to appropriate officials, at each of our case study locations so that they could fully develop and resolve any additional amounts owed to the government or to the Army Guard. pay who did not receive 1 or more months of this pay as of March 31, 2003. We determined that these problems occurred because such pays require manual monthly input, and the pay technicians inadvertently did not make the required entries each month. We also identified 40 soldiers who received hostile fire pay after they had left the country and were no longer entitled to receive such pays. Although some Company’s soldiers received retroactive payments over 2 months after they should have received their pay, we determined that 18 soldiers from the unit were not yet paid for 1 and more months that they were in the hostile fire zone. Soldiers who perform duty in hostile fire zones are entitled to hostile fire pay as soon as they enter the zone. 45 soldiers in C Company did not have their hostileFire pay started until over 30 days after they were entitled to receive it. Some of C Company’s soldiers received retroactive payments over 2 months after they entered the hostile fire zone. One soldier was put in harm's way by the delay in starting location-based pays for the unit. The U.S. military says the delay put the soldier in danger. Army Guard soldiers had difficulty using the leave and earnings statements to determine if they received all entitled active duty pays and allowances. Soldiers’ pays may appear as lump sum payments under “other credits” on their leave and Earnings statements. Without such basic customer service, the soldiers cannot readily verify that they got all the active duty pay and allowances to which they were entitled, the report says. The Army Guard review found that some of the sergeant’s pays were started up to 2 months late, but others had been paid properly. 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. The Army National Guard Special Forces sergeant believed that he was not receiving certain active duty pays and allowances during his mobilization to active duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. The sergeant wrote a letter from Afghanistan to a fellow battalion soldier back in his home state, discussing his pay problems. In the letter, the sergeant stated that he wasn't receiving what he thought he was receiving. The sergeant was killed in action in Afghanistan on April 15, 2002, before he knew if his pay problems were resolved. His letter concluded, “Are they really fixing pay issues or are they putting them off till we return? If they are waiting, then what happens to those who (god forbid) don’t make it back?” The sergeant’s letter also stated he was not receiving his hostile fire pay and combat zone tax exclusion. Our review determined that some of the sergeant's pay problems had been resolved. Soldier did not receive the correct housing allowance amount for the first 2 months of active duty. Soldier attempted to get various unit and military pay officials to take action to initiate back pay for these housing allowance underpayments, including forwarding copies of the lease agreement as proof for payment on three different occasions. Soldier was told that he should have taken care of this issue while he was deployed and that it was now too late to receive in documents. As of March 30, 2003, the soldier had not received the correcthousing allowance for October and November 2001. Finance officials at the active duty station in Fort Belvoir, Virginia, inadvertently entered a transaction to collect the entire amount of the housing allowance previously paid to the soldier. The soldier received the correct housing allowance for October and November 2001. The transaction was reversed and the soldier received a “catch-up” payment. The incident occurred seven months after his initial mobilization to active duty, when the soldier complained to the unit administrator. As a result of the error, the soldier was not paid the correct amount of housing allowance after his mobilization. 42 soldiers from the unit were underpaid their entitled family separation allowance when they mobilized. Soldiers are entitled to receive this allowance after they have been deployed away from home for more than 30 days. Maryland USPFO military pay officials entered the incorrect date for the tour and therefore shortened the unit’s soldiers’ allowance by 1 day. Other soldiers did not receive the correct amount for this allowance as a result of different interpretations of how to enter “dependent” information provided on housing allowance application forms. allowance for housing after being mobilized as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. We were unable to determine specific causes and amounts of all the unit’s problems associated with the basic allowance for housing because the unit had remobilized in July 2003. Some of the historical records relating to housing entitlements applicable to the prior mobilization could not be located. Based on our inquiries, we determined that some soldiers were underpaid their housing allowance because the Maryland unit had been mobilized in 2003. A number of Maryland soldiers were not paid the correct amount. Existing guidance did not clearly specify that simply checking the box indicating that they are married is not sufficient support to receive the higher housing allowance (with dependents) rate. As a result, several soldiers’ dependent information was not loaded into the personnel system correctly. Other soldiers did not receive the correct housing allowance because they did not turn in complete forms and documentation to initiate the correct allowance rate or were late in turning in documents. her unit, or how the USPFO was to take action to validate the status of such soldiers. Data input and eligibility requirements for housing and family separation allowances were not clear, the audit found. A soldier returned early from a deployment when the soldier appeared at a weekend drill while his unit was still deployed. The audit found that procedural guidance was not clear with respect to transaction entry and eligibility requirement for the basic allowance for Housing and Family Separation Allowance (HFCA) for soldiers returning from deployment. Soldiers mobilized on October 1, 2001, and then received amended orders to be released from active duty around October 13, 2001. Many continued to receive basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, basic allowances for housing, and family separation allowance payments through the end of November 2001. The overpayments occurred because the Maryland Army Guard command was not informed by either unit personnel or the active component that individuals (1) did not deploy or (2) were released fromactive duty early. The Maryland Army Guards command generated an amendment on August 21, 2003, to reinstate the original order to avoid future questions. Extension status, soldiers are entitled to continue to receive active duty pays, allowances, and medical benefits while under a physician’s care. At the Virginia 20th Special Forces, B Company, 3rd Battalion, four soldiers were eligible for continued active duty pay and associated medical benefits due to their involvement in Operation Enduring Freedom. Although these injuries precluded them from resuming their civilian jobs, they experienced significant pay problems as well as problems in receiving needed medical care, in part, as a result of the lack of clearly defined implementing procedures. of the lack of clearly defined implementing procedures in this area. All four soldiers experienced pay disruptions because existing guidance was not clear on actions needed to ensure that these soldiers were retained on active duty medical extensions. One of the soldiers told us, “People did not know who was responsible for what. No one knew who to contact or what paperwork was needed….” As a result, all four have experienced gaps in receiving active duty pay and associated medical benefits while they remained under a physician’s care. received while on their original active duty tour. These problems resulted in numerous personal and financial difficulties for these soldiers. “Not having this resolved means that my family has had to make greater sacrifices and it leaves them in an unstable environment,” one soldier said. ‘This has caused great stress on my family that may lead to divorce.’ ‘I feel like no one is really looking after their interest or even cared about them,’ said another soldier who was injured in Afghanistan for Operation Enduring Freedom. Army Regulation 135-381 provides that Army Guard soldiers who are incapacited as a result of injury, illness, or disease that occured while on active duty for more than 30 consecutive days are eligible for continued health benefits. Officials at those active Army locations directed the soldiers back to the USPFO because they were Army Guard. We also found procedures were not clear on how to ensure timely processing of active duty medical extensions for injured Army GuardSoldiers. The finance office at Fort Campbell was not available for comment. wait for them before I went back to work. The whole mess was blamed on the ‘state’ and nothing was ever done to fix it.” One sergeant was required to stay at Womack, the medical facility at Fort Bragg, while on medical extension. His home was in New Jersey. He had not been home for about 20 months, since his call to active duty. While he was recovering from his injuries, his wife was experiencing a high-risk pregnancy and depended upon her husband’s medical coverage. available while he remained in active duty status. Even though she lived in New Jersey, she scheduled her medical appointments near Fort Bragg to be with her husband. Lapses in obtaining approvals for continued active duty medical extension status caused the sergeant’s military medical benefits and his active duty pay to be stopped several times. He told us that because of gaps in his medical extension orders, he was denied medical coverage, resulting in three delays in scheduling a surgery. He said he has since been able to get back on his feet. great stress on my family that may lead to divorce. “My orders ran out while awaiting surgery and the care center tried to deny me care. I called the Inspector General at Walter Reed and my congressman. My orders were finally cut. In the end, I was discharged 2 weeks before my care should have been completed because the second amendment to my orders never came and I couldn’t afford to wait for them before I went back to work.” “I couldn't afford to waiting until I was back at work to get the care I was supposed to get.’ Under current procedures, if a soldier is determined to owe the government money while on active duty, he is assessed a debt. This debt assessment notification procedure is even more egregious when debts, particularly large debts, are assessed in error and up to two-thirds of the soldier’s pay may be garnished to begin repaying the erroneous debt. For example, at our case study units, we found that the only notice several soldiers received when they were erroneously assessed payroll debts was an “Unpaid Debt Balance” buried in the remarks section of his Leave and Earnings Statement. date consistent with the date on the Release from Active Duty Order. In May 2003, DFAS-Indianapolis erroneously processed a payment transaction instead of a debt correction transaction in DJMS-RC. This created a payment of $20,111, which was electronically deposited to the sergeant’s bank account without explanation, while a debt of $30,454 still appeared on his Leave and Earnings Statement. In addition, we found that current procedures used to notify soldiers of large payroll-related debts did not work. of $48,000 per soldier, for a total debt of $1.6 million. Some of the soldiers wanted to settle the debt by writing a check to DFAS. They were told not to because the exact amount of each soldier’s debt could not be readily determined. Some soldiers now returned from active duty, resumed participation in monthly training, and began having two-thirds of their drill pay withheld and applied to offset their largely erroneous debt balances. We were told that it would take approximately 4 to 5 years for the soldiers to pay off these debts using this approach. Pay technicians at either a USPFO or an active Army finance office made errors in amending existing orders. These errors resulted in establishing virtually all prior pays made under the original orders as debts. We identified over $1 million in largely erroneous debt transactions as a result of breakdowns in this area. We found instances at two of our case study locations in which military pay technicians made errors. At the Colorado case study location, we found instances in which pay technicians at both a US PFO and active Army Finance Office made Errors in Amending active duty orders. system edits to prevent large debts from being assessed without review and approval prior to being processed. Our case studies identified individuals who received debt notices in excess of $30,000 with no explanation. At five of the 6 units audited, we identified 86 individuals who had total pay and allowance debts of approximately $300,000 as of March 31, 2003. A sergeant with the Colorado Army National Guard, Special Forces, encountered numerous severe pay problems associated with his mobilization. The sergeant was able to return to his unit. As of the end of our audit fieldwork in September 2003, the problems at the Colorado Special Forces unit had not been resolved. DOD officials did advise us that, as a result of our work, they implemented a software change on September 18, 2003, intended to help avoid such problems in the future. New warning messages have been added to JUSTIS that will appear when a transaction is entered to cancel or amend a tour of duty. The new warnings will advise of the $1.6 million debt. finding resulting from the further investigation of improper payments found in our 1993 audit of Army military payroll. The inaccurate, late, and missing pays and associated erroneous debts found during our current audit had a profound financial impact on individual soldiers and their families. DOD erroneously billed 34 soldiers in a Colorado National Guard Special Forces unit an average of $48,000 each. Some soldiers did not receive payments for up to 6 months after mobilization and others still had not received certain payments by the conclusion of our audit work. As a result of confusion over responsibility for entering transactions associated with a Colorado soldier's promotion, the soldier’s spouse had to obtain a grant to pay bills while her husband was in Afghanistan. 34 soldiers received notice on their Leave and Earnings Statements that they owed the government an average of approximately $48,000 per soldier, for a total largely erroneous debt of $1.6 million. Personnel at the Colorado USPFO inadvertently revoked the soldiers’ original mobilization orders when attempting to amend the orders to reflect the unit’s actual release date of December 4, 2002. Although we informed DOD of this, we were not informed that the soldiers were actually released 1 year before the original date. estimated $494,000 in overpayments, we identified about $88,000 that was subsequently collected from the soldiers of Colorado’s B Company. Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) billed 34 of the unit's soldiers an average of $48,000 each, for a largely erroneous total debt of over $1.6 million. Many soldiers with the company characterized the service they received from the state United States Property and Fiscal Office (USPFO) and the active Army finance offices while deployed in Afghanistan. failure to stop location-based and other active duty pays and allowances for the unit’s soldiers resulted in overpayments. Colorado USPFO inadvertently revoked the soldiers’ pay and allowances. As a result of the errors made, large debts were created for many soldiers in the unit. We interviewed soldiers who were not present during B Company's demobilization and had no knowledge of why pay was not stopped during the demobilized process. We also interviewed members of the unit who were present but did not know why pay wasn’t stopped. The unit commander for C Company did not provide the USPFO with a list of the unit members who were eligible to receive HALO pay. The error caused debts on soldiers’ accounts but was corrected immediately after a pay supervisor detected the error in February. The delay in submission caused his first payment to be over 3 months late. In addition to the 7 soldiers who were actually on the HALO team, 10 other soldiers were on the initial list given to the U.S. Pay Office. did not receive certain types of pay at all, were not paid in a timely manner, or were overpaid after being activated on January 2, 2002. Problems with jump pay and foreign language pay occurred because the necessary documentation to support jump pay eligibility or language proficiency for a number of soldiers was not always provided to the USPFO or the mobilization station. For example, of the 8 soldiers in the unit who were underpaid for jump pay, 4 did not receive jump pay until mid- February 2002. In another instance, we identified 10 soldiers who were eligible to receive foreign language proficiency pay in January 2002. pay, foreign language proficiency pay, and high altitude low opening (HALO) pay. Army area servicing finance offices are responsible for entering into DMO hardship duty pay, for deployed soldiers entitled to these types of pays. However, because pay transactions must be manually entered every month soldiers are entitled to receive these pays, it is often difficult to ensure that mobilized soldiers receive their entitled nonautomated pays and allowances. For example, we found a number of instances in which soldiers were underpaid. eligible to receive foreign language proficiency pay in January 2002, but did not receive payments for 1 or more months after they became eligible. Seven of the nine soldiers eligible for HALO pay received both jump pay as well as HALo pay during January 2002. These overpayments occurred because Fort Bragg, unaware that the USPFO had previously processed HALO. pay for these soldiers, processed HAL O pay a second time, based on supporting documentation received from the unit. Documentation was not available to the unit’s soldiers. Also, we found that two soldiers, who were not eligible to receive HALOPay, received HALO Pay for 3 months. 56 out of 62 soldiers did not receive certain pays and allowances at all, or in a timely manner, after being activated on December 5, 2001. We found that some soldiers received payments over 5 months late and other soldiers had been overpaid. We also found that these pay problems were exacerbated by breakdowns in customer service. Prior to being mobilized, the soldiers in C Company attended a soldier readiness program at their unit armory. This program was intended to ensure that the soldiers were ready for active duty. dates, or (3) being paid twice during a pay period. Each month, DFAS Indianapolis pay personnel receive an Electronic Fund Transfer Excess Dollar Listing after the electronic fund transfer payment has been processed. DJMS-RC does not contain edit checks to reject payments over the threshold amounts or to require review and approval of payments over these amounts prior to their final processing. In addition, our analysis showed 76 other payroll-related payments during the period October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, of over $7,000 (net) each. DJMS-RC lacks effective edits to reject large proposed net pays over $4,000 at midmonth and over $7,000 before their final processing. DOD established these thresholds to monitor and detect abnormally large payments. The lack of preventive controls over large payments poses an increased risk of fraudulent payments. We found several instances in our case studies in which soldiers received large lump sum payments, probably related to previous underpayments or other pay errors, with no explanation. As a result of the weaknesses detect abnormality large payments, we found. USPFO pay technicians failed to enter transactions into DJMS-RC in a timely manner for four soldiers resulting in late foreign language proficiency payments. USPFO officials were unable to provide sufficient documentation to explain why five other soldiers continued to receive basic pay after their active duty tours had ended. Late payment, underpayment, and overpayment of cost of living allowances resulted from the inability of DJ MS-RC to pay certain active duty pays and allowances automatically, inaccurate data entry, and inadequate documentation retention practices. duty, but would remain on the DJMS-RC system. Maintaining such outdated references in current policies may have contributed to confusion by USPFO and active Army finance personnel. The lack of sufficient numbers of well-trained, competent military pay professionals can undermine the effectiveness of even a world-class integrated pay and personnel system. We found weaknesses, including (1) insufficient resources allocated to pay processing, (2) inadequate training related to existing policies and procedures, and (3) poor customer service. Lacking sufficient numbers of personnel undermines the ability of the USPFO pay functions to carry out established control procedures. No independent reviews of proposed pay transactions before they were submitted to DJMS-RC for processing. A USPfo official told us that because of the limited number of pay technicians available to process, the review process was not carried out as required by operating procedures. The report was published by the Institute for Fiscal Studies and Democracy, a think tank based in Washington, D.C. DJMS-RC pay records at least monthly. Lacking specific written policies and procedural requirements for such reconciliations, several of the case study locations we audited established a standard, but undocumented, practice of SIDPERS and DJMS- RC mismatch reports. We found that although all the USPFOs. told us they received monthly SIDpERS and. DJ MS-RC mismatch reports, they did not always fully reconcile and. make all necessary system corrections each month. The Master Military Pay Account (MMPA) is the central pay record repository in DJMS-RC for each soldier. While deployed on active duty, there are several Army Guard (USPFO), active Army, and DFAS components involved in paying mobilized Army Guard personnel. The active Army servicing finance office, which may be within the United States or in a foreign country, is responsible for initiating pays earned while the soldier is deployed, such as hostile fire pay and hardship duty pay. Upon completion of an active duty tour, soldiers normally return to the same Army. payments to soldiers beyond their authorized active duty status. Human intervention is required when a pay or allowance error is detected or an event occurs that requires a change in the soldier’s pay and personnel file. A change in dependent status, such as marriage or divorce, a promotion, jump pay disqualification, or being demobilized before an active duty tour ends would change or eliminate some of the pays and allowances a soldier would be entitled to receive. All pays and allowance and subsequent changes are documented in the Master Military Pay Account (MMPA)—the central pay record repository. or revoked orders that were entered into SIDPERS but were not entered into DJMS-RC. We also found instances in which personnel pay-affecting changes such as changes in family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions, weren't entered into the pay system promptly. Consequently, these soldiers either received active duty pays they were not entitled to receive—some for several months—or did not timely receiveactive duty pays to which they were entitled. A soldier with the Mississippi Army National Guard was overpaid due to a lack of Integrated Pay and Personnel Systems. DJMS-RC was originally designed to process payroll payments to Army Reserve and Army Guard personnel on weekend drills or on short periods of annual active duty. DFAS officials told us that the system is now stretched because it is being used to make payments and allowances that it was not designed for. Army Guard pay technicians relied primarily on on-the-job-training and phone calls to pay technicians are required to manually enter transactions for nonautomated pay and allowances every month. While the Army Guard offers training for their military pay technicians, we found that there was no overall monitoring of Army Guardpay personnel training. We used DJMS-RC pay transaction extracts to identify pay problems associated with our case study units. We did not perform an exact calculation of the net pay soldiers should have received. Rather, we used available documentation and follow-up follow-ups. The information provides further insight into some of the pay experiences of selected Army Guard soldiers who were mobilized under Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. These data collection instruments is not representative of the views of the Army Guard members in these units nor of those of Army Guard member overall. observed and documented procedures and practices followed by the various DOD components involved in providing active duty pays to Army Guard soldiers. We interviewed officials from the National Guard Bureau, State USPFOs, Army and DOD military pay offices, as well as unit commanders to obtain an understanding of their experiences. In addition, as part of our audit, we performed a review of certain edit and validation checks in DJMS-RC. We also obtained documentation on and walk-throughs of the personnel-to-pay system interface process. Army Regulation 37-104-4, dated September 1994, provides that mobilized Army Guard soldiers are to be paid through the active Army pay system. This procedure, in effect during the mobilizations to support Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, was changed in 1995. In 1995, it was agreed that Army Guard personnel would no longer be moved to the active duty pay system, DJMS-AC, when mobilized to active duty, but would remain on theDJMS-RC system. Maintaining such such a system would be difficult. system workaround procedures at the case study units we audited. For example, for the special forces units weAudited, our analysis disclosed a workaround used to exclude soldiers’ pay from federal taxes while in combat. DJMS-RC was not designed to make active duty pays and exclude federal taxes applicable to those pays in a single pay transaction. To compensate for this system constraint, DFAS established a workaround that requires two payment transactions over a 2-month payroll cycle to properly exempt soldiers' pay for the combat zone tax exclusion. For those soldiers entitled to this exclusion, DJMS-RC withholds federal taxes the first month, identifies the taxes to be refunded during end- of-month pay processing, and then makes a separate payment during the first pay update the following month to refund the taxes that should not have been withheld. Soldiers’ taxes could not be refunding the same month because the DJ MS refund process occurs only one time a month. Army Guard USPFO and in-theatre active Army area servicing finance office pay technicians are required to manually enter transactions for nonautomated transactions. DJMS-RC is an aging, COBOL/mainframe-based system. DFAS established a number of “workarounds’ to compensate for existing DJMS- RC processing limitations. Such manual workarounds are inefficient and create additional labor-intensive, error- prone transaction processing. We observed a number. of such system workaround procedures at the case study units we audited. to expeditiously enter the large volume of transactions necessary to start active duty pay entitlements for the 49th Military Police Company’s soldiers. Also, the. mobilization station finance office assigned an insufficient number of personnel to the task of starting active duty pays. Pay technicians did not understand how to properly code data on the soldiers’ dependents status into the pay system. As a result, we identified cases in which soldiers were underpaid housing allowances to which they were entitled. 16 of the 62 soldiers in B Company received the wrong type of hardship duty pay, formerly called Foreign Duty Pay, in addition to the correct hardship duty location pay while they were deployed in Afghanistan. An Army finance office official told us that handling amounts, or were overpaid their entitled active duty pays and allowances while deployed. DJMS-RC is not programmed to generate automatic payment of certain other types of pay and allowances. Some pays, such as basic active duty pay and jump pay, can be generated automatically. High altitude, low opening jump pay requires manual computation and input of a transaction for payment. Hardship duty pay is scheduled for implementation for April 2004. The small volume of members entitled to this pay has not justified nor provided an adequate return on investment for this automation. A study was conducted of improvement alternatives in the fall. After soldiers complete their initial SRP and receive individual mobilization orders, they travel as a unit to a mobilization station. At the mobilization station, mobilized Army Guard personnel undergo a second SRP review. Mobilization pay technicians are required to promptly initiate pays that were not initiated during the first SRP. If entered correctly, the stop date in DJMS-RC will be the end of active duty tour date documented on the soldier’s mobilization orders. This automated feature is intended to prevent erroneous payments to soldiers beyond their authorized active duty status. USPFO pay technicians use JUSTIS to access and record data in DJMS-RC. Unit commander is responsible for ensuring that all personnel data for each soldier under their command are current. If documentation, such as birth certificates for dependents or parachute jumping certifications, is missing, soldiers have a few days to obtain the necessary documents. If done correctly, soldiers will start to receive basic pay, basic allowances for housing, basic allowance for subsistence, and jump pay automatically based on the start date. Army Guard soldiers’ active duty pays continued after their demobilization. Available documentation showed only one instance in the six case study units we visited in which a reconciliation of the unit commander’s finance report resulted in action to stop improper active duty pay and allowances. The unit was mobilized in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and an administrative clerk reviewed the finance report while the unit was there. The review resulted in the unit stopping the soldier who was previously demobilized from its active duty program. pay is not an automated pay, the active Army finance office at Guantanamo Bay was required to manually enter the “designated areas” payment each month for each soldier. While they were in Cuba, the three soldiers did not receive all their entitled hardship duty pays. The 200th Military Police Company returned to Fort Eustis around the end of August 2002 to begin the demobilization process. We did not identify any pay issues associated with the unit’s soldiers who were released from active duty on September 30. Bay finance office correctly entered transactions to start hardship duty pay for designated areas for the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers into DJMS-RC. However, unknown to Guantanamo finance personnel, Fort Campbell finance personnel incorrectly initiated recurring certain places hardship duty payments for the soldiers. These payments of both types of hardship duty pays resulted in overpayments to 88 enlisted soldiers. For 11 soldiers, the finance office inadvertently overlooked entering one or more payments. As a result, several soldiers in the unit did not receive one or one monthly hardship duty payment. Most of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers were mistakenly provided both types of hardship duty pay while deployed to Cuba. While in Cuba, the soldiers were either underpaid, or were late in receiving their entitled hardship duty pays. Soldiers who perform duties in “designated areas” for over 30 days are entitled to hardshipduty pay. The FMR specifies Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as a designated area and provides payment of $50 a month to soldiers serving there. The local Guantanamo Bay finance office correctly entered transactions to start hardship duty base security and guard duties. soldier to be paid at her old rank for 5 months. According to DFAS guidance, when a change occurs in a soldier’s pay, the on-site Army finance office should input the change. In cases where personnel changes occurred that affected pay, either the soldiers failed to submit documents or personnel at Fort Campbell failed to input the changes. Due to the lack of documentation, we could not determine the origin of the delays. During the unit's deployment to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to hardship duty pay. the variable housing allowance. The act also replaced foreign duty pay with hardship duty pay. Yet, chapter 8 of Army Regulation 37-104-4 (Military Pay and Allowances Policy and Procedures – Active Component) still refers to foreign dutypay. Further, current DFAS and Army mobilization procedural guidance directs active Army finance units to use transaction codes to start soldiers’ hardship duty pays that are incorrect. However, DOD amended FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, to establish a new “designated area” hardshipduty pay with rates of $50, $100, or $150 per month, depending on the area. per month, depending on the area. DFAS guidance dated December 19, 2002, directed mobilization site finance offices to use transaction codes that resulted in soldiers receiving a prior type of hardship duty pay that was eliminated in the December 2001 revisions. 91 of 100 Mississippi military police unit soldiers deployed to Cuba to guard al Qaeda prisoners were paid incorrect amounts of hardshipduty pay. In addition, Army Regulation 37-104-4, dated September 1994, was used to start hardship duty pays for soldiers deployed in Cuba. The FMR provides for two mutually exclusive types of hardship duty pay for identified locations. The regulation specified Afghanistan and Uzbekistan as designated areas and provided for paying $100 a month to each soldier serving there. Some soldiers received extra hardship duty payments, while others were only paid sporadically. In total, only 9 of the 100 soldiers who deployed to Guantanamo Bay with the 114th Military Police Company received the correctly computed hardshipduty pay. The local finance duty pay, a location-based payment for soldiers located at designated hardship duty locations. total of 5 soldiers who missed one or more monthly payments of entitled hardship duty designated area pay. Other soldiers received entitled payments over 9 months late. Still others were paid more than once for the same month or paid after leaving the designated area, resulting in overpayments to 12 soldiers. The mix of erroneous certain places hardship duty payments along with sporadic payments of the correct type of designated area hardship duty pay caused confusion for the soldiers of C Company and their families regarding what types of pay they were entitled to receive. Virginia’s B Company soldiers became concerned that they were not receiving pays they were entitled to while deployed. After attempts to initiate location-based pays at the battalion finance unit in Afghanistan were unsuccessful. Two soldiers were ordered to travel to Camp Snoopy, Qatar, where another Army finance office was located. One of the soldiers told us that they flew to Kuwait because they were advised that the finance unit at that active Army Finance office was more knowledgeable about how to enter the necessary transactions into DJMS-RC. unit while it was deployed. An active Army finance office assigned to the unit is responsible for initiating assignment and location-based pays. The in- theater finance office for Virginia’s B Company, located in Kuwait, did not start these pays as required. We were told that this occurred because finance personnel in Kuwait did not know that B Company had arrived in Afghanistan. We found that the active Army in-theater finance offices did not always know which units they were responsible for servicing or their location. Soldier was ordered to travel to Camp Doha, Kuwait, to have the unit's location-based pays started. DFAS policy clearly states that it is the active Army in-theater finance office’s responsibility to start and maintain monthly payments. This trip proved to be not only a major inconvenience to the sergeant, but was also life-threatening. The soldier stated that he traveled to Camp. Doha because he was told that the finance unit at that active Army. finance location was responsible. The sergeant left Uzbekistan for the 4-day trip to Kuwait. He first flew from Uzbekistan to Oman in a C-130 ambulatory aircraft (carrying wounded soldiers). From Oman, he flew to Masirah Island. The total travel time was 16 hours. At Camp Doha, a reserve pay finance unit was sent from the United States to deal with the reserve component soldiers’ pay issues. The sergeant delivered a box of supporting documents used to input data into the finance office. The sergeant worked with the finance office personnel at Camp Doha to enter the pertinent data on each member of his battalion into DJMS-RC. On his flight between Oman and Uzbekistan, the sergeant’s plane took enemy fire and was forced to return to Oman. No injuries were reported. The next day, he left Oman and returned safely to Uzbekistan. The sergeant returned to the Kuwait International Airport, flew to Camp Snoopy in Qatar, and from there to Oman to return home. entitled automated pays when they were demobilized from active duty. This occurred because pay technicians did not update the stop date in DJMS-RC. For example, the military finance office in Kuwait, which was responsible for paying Virginia 20th Special Forces soldiers in the fall of 2002, did not stop hostile fire and hardship duty pays as required when these soldiers left Afghanistan in October 2002. We found that 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for automated pays were not paid when they left active duty early. stop date for the soldier’s mobilization entered into DJMS-RC. The active Army finance office in Uzbekistan did not amend the stop dates for automated active duty pays. The failure to follow prescribed procedures resulted in overpayment of this pay to 40 soldiers. Per DOD FMR, volume 7A, chapter 17, soldiers who perform duties in designated areas for over 30 days are entitled to the hardship duty pay incentive. The FMR provides for two mutually agreed upon stop dates to be used. The sergeant’s active duty pay and other pay and allowances should have been stopped on December 4, 2002, when he was released from active duty. The Army area servicing finance office at the demobilization station, Fort Campbell, did not enter the release from activeduty date into DJMS-RC. The sergeant continued to be paid for 730 days of active duty instead of the 365 days that he was actually mobilized. He was also paid for his deployment to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. release from active duty date into DJMS-RC, the sergeant continued to improperly receive payments, as if he were still on active duty. In an attempt to stop the erroneous payments, in February 2003, pay personnel at the Colorado USPFO created a transaction to cancel the tour instead of processing an adjustment to amend the stop date. The sergeant was one of 34 soldiers in the company whose pay continued after their release from activeduty. In total, the soldier was paid over $8,000. DJMS- RC to stop these payments as required. 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. 57 of 64 soldier eligible for hardship duty pay wereoverpaid at least part of 1 month. For some soldiers, payments continued until May 31, 2002 and for others the payments continued. Fort Bragg official explained that the Army finance office personnel were not aware that these payments were still being made after the soldiers had returned to the United States. office is responsible for inputting transactions to stop certain location-based pays, such as hardship duty pay and hostile fire pay. Overpayments to B Company soldiers occurred during demobilization because the in-theater finance office continued to make hostile fire and hardship duty pays after soldiers left Afghanistan in October 2002. The Fort Bragg active Army finance office did not enter transactions into DJMS- RC to stop these payments as required. We found that the Army had overpaid soldiers by more than $100,000. The West Virginia USPFO was told by personnel at DFAS-Indianapolis not to get involved because problems for C Company that we were not able to identify. The local finance office in Uzbekistan did not have the systems up and ready, nor available personnel who were familiar with DJMS-RC. According to DFAS policy, the in-theater finance office was responsible for initiating location-based payments for the unit. Unit personnel stated that the staff in the finance office were not adequately trained in how to input pays. The sergeant took with him all the necessary paperwork to have the pays started for all the companies under the battalion, including C Company. On the return flight from the sergeant’s mission in Kuwait, his plane encountered enemy fire and was forced to return to a safe airport until the next day. The finance unit at that active Army finance location was more knowledgeable in how to enter transactions into DJMS-RC to initiate location-based pays for the unit's soldiers. The failure by active Army personnel at the finance office in Uzbekistan to enter the transactions necessary to start location- based pays was the sergeant's fault. for entering changes to soldiers’ pay records enabled almost simultaneous attempts by two different pay offices to enter pay transactions into DJMS-RC for the same soldier. As shown in the following illustration, at another case study location we found that, in part because of confusion over responsibility for starting location-based pays, a soldier was required to carry out a dangerous multiday mission to correct these payments. A sergeant with the West Virginia National Guard Special Forces unit was stationed in Uzbekistan with the rest of his unit. This page is intentionally left blank. until May 31, 2002 and for others the payments continued until the end of their tour of active duty on December 4, 2002. These erroneous certain places hardship duty pays resulted in overpayments. In addition, because DJMS-RC processing capability limitations required the designated areas payment to be manually entered every month the unit was in the designated area, the in-theater finance office in Uzbekistan failed to consistently enter the monthly designated area payments for all entitled soldiers. Throughout the time C Company was in Uzbekistani and Afghanistan, we identified a total of 5 soldiers who missed one or more monthly payments. Regulation 500-3-3, Reserve Component Unit Commander’s Handbook (July 15, 1999) requires unit commanders to annually review and update pay records for all soldiers under their command. We saw little evidence the commanders of our case study units carried out these requirements. Neither Army Guard unit commanders nor active Army commanders were required to receive training on the importance of the pay to on-board personnel reconciliations. We were told that this was primarily because unit commanders have many such administrative duties, and without additional training they may not receive sufficient priority attention. she had not received any formal training on how to operate JUSTIS when she was assigned to the job. She estimated that she was not fully comfortable with all the required transaction processing procedures until she had been on the job for about 7 years. In addition, unit commanders have significant responsibilities for establishing and maintaining the accuracy of solders’ pay records. U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, Reserve Component Unit Commander’s Handbook (July 15, 1999) locations we audited showed that state Army Guard personnel were not performing effective reconciliations of pay and personnel record discrepancies each month. One such report concluded, “Failure to reconcile the Personnel/Pay Mismatch listing monthly provides a perfect opportunity to establish fraudulent personnel or pay accounts.” Several of the instances we identified in which soldiers received pay and allowances for many months after their release from active duty likely would have been identified sooner had USPFO military pay personnel investigated the personnel/pay mismatch discrepancies more frequently. and personnel mismatch reports and unit commanders’ finance reports. Available documentation showed that these controls were either not done or were not done consistently or timely. The processing of Army Guard pay relies on systems that are not integrated or effectively interfaced. These after-the-fact detective controls are critical to detecting and correcting erroneous or fraudulent pays. To be effective, the 54 state-level Army Guard commands must individually reconcile common data elements in all54 state-operated personnel databases for Army Guard personnel at least monthly. locations we audited established a standard, but undocumented, practice of reconciling roughly a third of the common data elements every month. However, documentation was not always retained to determine the extent to which these reconciliations were done and if they were done consistently. Our findings are similar to those in reports from Army Guard operational reviews. For example, the most recent reviews at three of the six case study locations showed that state Army Guard personnel were under-represented in the unit's operations. Currently, as a matter of practice, pay and personnel representatives from the USPFO conduct a manual reconciliation. The purpose of the reconciliation is to ensure that for common data elements, the pay and Personnel systems contain the same data. A U.S. Navy official told us that while it is the US PFO’s goal to carry out such reconciliations each month, it currently does not have the resources required to do so. As summarized in table 25, we look at some of the issues that have been raised in the past. GAO: Standards for the timeliness of processing pay transactions are currently in place for units, finance offices, and central site. These standards are focused on the full range of transactions and associated unit level data is generated based on the normal permanent/home station relationship with a Reserve Component Pay Support Office. Within the next 6 months, DFAS and the Army will jointly review how these existing mechanisms can be used to more succinctly capture data specifically related to mobilized soldiers and units. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Army pay office of proper documentation and processing the related pay transaction through the pay system. Some locations had established informal processing targets, for example, 3 days. These lengthy processing delays resulted in late payroll payments to deployed soldiers. The case study units lacked specific written requirements for conducting and documenting monthly reconciliations of pay and personnel mismatch reports and unit commanders’ finance reports. Available documentation indicated lengthy delays in processing pay transactions after pay offices received supporting documentation. The report also found that the Army pay office was not required to provide a written explanation of how it processed pay transactions. errors in entering pay start transactions when they were processing large numbers of Army Guard soldiers during initial mobilizations. Military pay personnel told us that they were able to avoid backlogs by conscripting personnel from other USPFO sections to help in assembling and organizing the extensive paperwork associated with activating appropriate basic pays, entitlements, and special incentive pays for their mobilized soldiers. In addition to concerns about the numbers of personnel onboard at the USPfo military pay offices involved in processing pay transactions for our case study units, we identified concerns over the number of personnel involved. The National Guard Financial Services Center is working with each of the identified units and supporting USPFOs to ensure all pay issues are resolved. The Army and DFAS will continue to work the correction of any specific cases identified as still open for these units. As noted by the GAO, many of the cases identified have already been resolved or involved a delay in payment over 30 days from the date of the report. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur.to review the pay problems we identified at our six case study units. units, we identified numerous instances in which military pay technicians at both the USPFOs and active Army finance office locations made data coding errors. We were told that these errors occurred because military pay personnel were unfamiliar with the system’s pay processing requirements for active duty pays to mobilized Army Guard personnel. Correcting these erroneous transactions required additional labor-intensive research and data entry by other more skilled pay technicians. As discussed previously, we also found that pay technicians did not understand how to properly code. Data collected from Army Guard units mobilized to active duty indicated that some members of the units had concerns with the pay support customer service. Of the soldiers who provided written comments about customer service, none provided any positive comments about the customer service they received. Only two knowledgeable military pay officials were present to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers in our case study. For example, a company commander told us that he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received during the initial mobilization process. Unit officials expressed frustration with being routed from one office to another in their attempts to resolve problems with their active duty pays and allowances. Personnel we talked with at the Colorado special forces unit we audited were particularly critical of the customer service they received both while deployed in Afghanistan and when they were demobilized from active duty. For example, a unit administrator told us he contacted.to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers mobilized for his unit. He characterized theCustomer service his unit received at initial mobilization as time consuming and frustrating. None of the DOD, Army, or Army Guard policies and procedures we examined addressed the level or quality of customer service that mobilized Army Guard soldiers should be provided concerning questions or problems with their active duty pays. We identified several sources that soldiers may go to for customer service or information on any such issues. These include reviews and carry out monthly reconciliations. Establish an ongoing mechanism to monitor the quality and completion of training for both pay and finance personnel and unit commanders. Identify and evaluate options for improving customer service. Many Army Guard soldiers were displeased with the customer service they received. Not all soldiers and their families were informed at the beginning of their mobilization of the pays and allowances they should receive while on active duty. This information is available at the USPFO of their home state’s Army Guard, the designated active Army area servicing finance office, and a toll free number, 1-888-729-2769 (Pay Army). We found indications that many soldiers were not informed of this information. they should receive while on active duty. This information is critical for enabling soldiers to identify if they were not receiving such pays and therefore require customer service. In addition, as discussed later in this report, we found that the documentation provided to Army Guard soldiers concerning the pays and allowances they received did not facilitateCustomer service. Our audit identified customer service concerns at all three phases of the active duty tours and involving DFAS, active Army, and Army Guard servicing components. Consistent with the confusion we found among Army Guard and. duty pays and combat zone tax exclusion transactions. We found significant pay problems at the six Army Guard units we audited. These problems related to processes, human capital, and systems. The six units were: three special forces and three military police units. In addition, we conducted a limited review of the Army National Guard’s “Special Forces’’ and “Military Police” units. The units were as follows: Special forces units Colorado B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces Virginia B Company. Military police units California 49th Military Police Headquarters and Headquarters Maryland 200th Military police Company One soldier from a Mississippi unit was paid $9,400 in active duty pay during the 3 months following an early discharge for drug-related charges. Forty-eight of 51 soldiers in a California National Guard military police unit received late payments because the unit armory did not have a copy machine available to make copies of needed pay-related documents. Four Virginia Special Forces soldiers who were injured in Afghanistan and unable to doaudit work were not paid for their service. They were later paid. For the six units we audited, we found significant pay problems involving over one million dollars in errors. These problems consisted of underpayments, overpayments and late payments that occurred during all three phases of Army Guard mobilization to active duty. Overall, for the 18- month period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, we discovered more than $1 million in errors in the Army Guard pay system. The Army Guard was responsible for providing security at the Pentagon shortly after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Army Guard soldiers will likely be required to rely on existing pay systems for at least several more years. Review of the pay experiences of the soldiers in the Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company indicated that some of the same types of pay problems that we found in our six case study units continued to occur. Of the 152 of the units reviewed, only four had problems with their pay systems. The Army Guard is the second largest military pay system in the U.S., after the Air Force. three soldiers had left B Company primarily due to frustration over pay problems. The unit official indicated that he expected additional soldiers would depart as a result of the current debt problems. We identified 31 out of 65 soldiers from Virginia’s B Company who did not receive certain types of pay at all. These problems resulted from failures by unit soldiers to provide necessary documentation to initiate certain pays, and data entry errors or late entry of data needed to start active duty pays by Army Guard USPFO military pay personnel. Case study location found that when the unit was first mobilized, USPFO pay personnel were required to spend considerable time and effort to correct hundreds of errors in the unit’s pay records dating back to 1996. Such errors could have been identified and corrected during the preceding years’ readiness reviews. Many cases in which active duty pays were not started until more than 30 days after the entitled start dates because soldiers did not submit the paperwork necessary to start these pays. The extensive problems we identified at the case study units vividly demonstrate that the controls currently relied on to pay unit. show they received. We used available documentation and follow-up inquiries with cognizant USPFO personnel to identify if (1) soldiers’ entitled active duty pays and allowances were received within 30 days of initial mobilization date. Soldiers in our case study units may have experienced additional pay. As such, our audit results only reflect problems we identified and not the actual amount of pay received by soldiers in our cases study units. We apologize for any confusion caused by our findings. We are working to correct the problems identified in this report. phases of active duty mobilization. Due to the lack of supporting documents at the state, unit, and battalion levels, we may not have identified all of the pay problems related to the active duty mobilizations of these units. The payment problems we identified at the six case study units did not include instances of fraudulent payments. In addition, our work was not designed to identify, and we did not identify, any fraudulent pay and allowances to any Army Guard soldiers. However, we counted soldiers’ pay problems as a problem only in the phase in which they first occurred. six case study units continued to occur. Of the 152 soldiers mobilized in this unit, we identified 54 soldiers who our review of available records indicated were either overpaid, underpaid, or received entitled active duty pays and allowances over 30 days late. We found that these pay problems could be attributed to control breakdowns similar to those we found at our cases study units. For example, available documentation and available documentation could not be used to determine if a soldier had been overpaid or underpaid. We also found that pay system input errors associated with amended orders, delays and errors in coding pay and allowance transactions. We used mobilization data supplied by the Army Operations Center to assist us in selecting the six units we used as our case studies. We also obtained in-depth information from soldiers at four of the six case study units. Using a data collection instrument, we asked for soldier views on pay problems and customer service experiences before, during, and after mobilization. The information we received from these data collection instruments is not representative of the views of soldiers in these units. The purpose of our limited review was to determine if there were any pay problems experienced by a more recently mobilized unit. they were entitled to receive during their deployment. Of the $17,000 in overpayments, we found that less than $100 was subsequently collected from the soldiers. We found a lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable staff. In addition, after-the-fact detective controls were not in place, including a reconciliation of pay and personnel records. We determined a number of causes for these pay problems. In total, we identified estimated over payments of $17,.000, underpayments of. $1,300, and late payments of $67,000. active Army finance offices while deployed in Afghanistan and surrounding areas as “poor’ or “openly hostile” Some of the soldiers in the unit expressed significant dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses were required to spend attempting to identify and correct their pay. The labor-intensive efforts by the special forces soldiers to address pay problems, in some cases, distracted them from important mission operations. Several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decisions whether to reenlist. Special Forces soldiers who were injured in Afghanistan and unable to resume their civilian jobs experienced problems in receiving entitled active duty pays and related health care. In some cases, the problems we identified may have distracted these professional soldiers from mission requirements, as they spent considerable time and effort while deployed. Further, these problems may adversely affect the Army’s ability to retain these valuable personnel. Appendixes I–VI provide details of the pay experiences of the soldiers at the case study units we audited. We compared the actual number of personnel on board to the NGB-authorized staffing level for the military pay sections. Two of the six case study locations had fewer military pay technicians on board than they were authorized. The highest pay grade of the nonsupervisory pay technicians at the six cases study units was a GS-7, and the majority of personnel were in the GS-6 pay grade. The Army and DFAS have established an agreement that in part seeks to ensure that resources are available to provide appropriately skilled personnel. the USPFO, Military Pay Section is based on Full Time Support authorized state strength levels. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to determine whether concerns over relatively low graded military. pay technicians exist at all 54 USPfos. (p. 76/Draft Report) Enclosure grade levels in the USP FOs’ Comptroller sections were validated as correct under OPM standards. Army Guard operating procedures provide that the primary responsibility for administering Army Guard soldiers’ pay as they are mobilized to active duty rests with the 54 USPFOs. NGB provides annual authorization for the overall staffing levels for each state. Each state allocates positions to each of the sections within aUSPFO, including the military pay section and other sections such as vendor and contract pay. Few military pay technicians on board at six locations we audited had received formal training on pay eligibility and pay processing requirements for mobilized Army Guard personnel. No such contingency staffing plan exists for the USPFOs. Consider expanding the scope of the existing memorandum of understanding between DFAS and the Army concerning the provision of resources to support surge processing at mobilization and demobilization sites. Determine whether issues concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations identified at our case study units exist at all 54 USPfos, and if so, take appropriate actions to address these issues. If so, consider providing additional resources for surge processing for pay start and stop transaction requirements at Army Guard home stations. The National Guard could use additional National Guard soldiers being brought on active duty in a Temporary Tour of Active Duty status. Normal manning at the USPFO, Military Pay Section is based on Full Time. The additional requirement and funding will need to be addressed by the supplemental provided to Army. (p. 76/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur.concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations identified at our case study units. If so, take appropriate actions to address these issues. processing pay transactions for our case study units. No DOD or Army requirements for military pay personnel to receive training on pay entitlements and processing requirements associated with mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Modify existing training policies and procedures to require all USPFO and active Army pay and finance personnel responsible for entering pay transactions to receive appropriate training upon assuming such duties. Require unit commanders to receiving training on the importance of adhering to requirements to conduct annual pay support documentation reviews and carry out monthly reconciliations. Establish an ongoing mechanism to monitor the extent to which personnel have taken recently established training courses. pay technicians relied primarily on on-the-job training and phone calls to the Army Guard Financial Services Center in Indianapolis. Only two of the six case study locations we audited tracked the extent to which pay technicians have taken training in this area. One payroll clerk told us that she had not received any formal training on how to process active duty pays to activated Army Guard personnel. Two of the five scheduled courses for fiscal year 2003 were canceled—one because of low registration and one because of schedule conflicts. pay technicians were validated as correct under OPM standards. The National Guard has instituted mobilization specific training for pay technicians. National Guard Financial Services Center quality assurance program pay support documentation reviews and monthly reconciliations will be incorporated into precommand courses at the company level for the National Guard by the end of Fiscal Year 2004. The appropriate mechanism for monitoring the training of unit commanders and finance battalion personnel is dependent on the location of that training in the overall Army training infrastructure and will be considered as part of the overall evaluation of the reserve pay training. Army finance school is already evaluating the expansion of the current instruction on mobilized reserve component pay in the training curriculum for the finance advanced individual training course. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The importance of conducting annual pay support documentation reviews and monthly reconciliations will be incorporated. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to require unit commanders to receive training on the. importance of adhering to requirements. US Army Reserve Command (USARC) has expanded training programs on DJMS-RC. Over 35 training events have occurred since February 2002 in support of deploying units and mobilization/demobilization sites. The Army finance school is working with USARC to develop an exportable training package on DJ MS-RC, which should be available within the next 6 months. The National Guard Financial Services Center quality assurance program is currently used to monitor completion of JUMPS Standard Terminal Input System (JUSTIS) training. available within the next 6 months. DFAS and the Army are sending a joint training team to Kuwait and Iraq in November 2003 to specifically address reserve component support. For the midterm (6 months to 2 years), the training on reserve component pay input for soldiers in finance battalions and garrison support units will be evaluated to determine how best to expand the training within the Army total training infrastructure. The Army finance school is already evaluating the expansion of the training for reserve and active component pay processing into a single system. coverage, resulting in three delays in scheduling a surgery. He also told us he received medical bills associated with his wife’s hospitalization for the delivery of their premature baby as a result of these gaps in coverage. We found several instances in which existing DOD and Army regulations and guidance in the pay and allowance area are outdated and conflict with more current legislative and DOD guidance. Some existing guidance reflected pay policies and procedures dating back to Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm in 1991. While we were able to associate pay problems with only one of these outdated pay problems, we found them to be common. Out-of-date requirements in current regulations may contribute to confusion and customer service issues. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998 replaced the basic allowance for quarters and the variable housing allowance. However, volume 7A, chapter 27 of the DOD FMR, dated February 2002, still refers to the basic allowances. The act also replaced foreign duty with the basic housing allowance, which is the same as the quarters allowance. It is possible that these outdated requirements may have caused as yet unidentified pay problems. state of Colorado to provide service for his pay problems. Several systems issues were significant factors impeding accurate and timely payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Lack of an integrated or effectively interfaced pay system with both the personnel and order-writing systems, limitations in DJMS-RC processing capabilities, and ineffective system edits of payments and debts. DOD has a significant system enhancement project under way to improve military pay. Given that the effort has been under way for about 5 years and DOD has encountered challenges fielding the system, it is likely that the department will continue the system. that this reengineering effort deals not only with the systems aspect of the problems we identified, but also with the human capital and process aspects. In its written comments, DOD concurred with our recommendations and identified actions to address the identified deficiencies. DOD’s response outlined some actions already taken, others that are underway, and further planned actions with respect to our recommendations. If effectively implemented, these actions should substantially resolve the deficiencies pointed out in our report. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no. active duty pay and allowances, would result in significant pay problems. A complete and lasting solution to the pay problems we identified will only be achieved through a complete reengineering. The need for such actions is increasingly of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to take the following actions. Establish a unified set of policies and procedures for all Army Guard, Army, and DFAS personnel to follow for ensuring active duty pays for Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty. days would seem reasonable). Establish who is accountable for stopping active duty pays for soldiers who return home earlier than their units. Clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders, including medical extensions. Require Army Guard commands and unit commanders to carry out complete monthly pay and personnel records reconciliations and take necessary actions to correct any pay and Personnel record mismatches found each month. Update policies to reflect current legal and DOD administrative requirements with respect to active duty pay and allowances. amend a tour of duty. The new warnings will advise that the transaction will or could result in a collection action and will ask the pay technician to confirm that is their intent. Required time frames for processing pay transactions. Written requirements did not exist with respect to the maximum amount of time that should elapse between the receipt by the responsible Army Guard or Army pay office of proper documentation and processing the related. While we did not verify the effectiveness of this change, it has the potential to reduce pay problems. or involved a delay in payment over 30 days from entitlement rather than an actual unresolved discrepancy. Within the next 6 months, we will evaluate the feasibility of using the personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the. feasibility. vividly demonstrate that the controls currently relied on to pay mobilized Army Guard personnel are not working and cannot provide reasonable assurance that such pays are accurate or timely. The personal toll that these pay problems have had on mobilized soldiers and their families cannot be readily measured, but clearly may have a profound effect on reenlistment and retention. It is not surprising that cumbersome and complex processes and ineffective human capital strategies, combined with the use of an outdated system, would result in significant pay to augment our documentation and walkthroughs. GAO’s Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government states that effective human capital practices are critical to establishing and maintaining a strong internal control environment. A sufficient number of well-trained military pay staff is particularly crucial given the extensive, cumbersome, and labor-intensive process requirements that have evolved to support active duty pay to Army Guard soldiers. Management should take steps to ensure that its organization has the appropriate number of employees, including hiring, training, and retention, are in place and effectively used. Several organizations with key roles in payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers have issued their own implementing regulations, policies, and procedures. The DOD Financial Management Regulations (FMR) guidance on pay and allowance entitlements alone covers 65 chapters. We found that policies and procedures were not well understood or consistently applied across the potentially hundreds of organizations and thousands of personnel involved in paying mobilized Guard personnel. These processes have been developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years to accommodate changing legislative requirements, DOD policies, or the unique operating practices of different DOD organizations and systems involved in these processes. developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years, provide numerous opportunities for control breakdowns. We found that a substantial number of payment errors were caused, at least in part, by unclear procedural requirements for processing active duty pay and allowance entitlements to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. In addition, these cumbersome policies and procedures contributed to the pay errors we identified. For example, we found existing policies and procedural guidance were unclear with respect to the following: pay and allowances for active duty soldiers and their dependents. requirements, particularly in light of the potentially hundreds of organizations and thousands of personnel involved, were not well understood or consistently applied. Further, we found instances in which existing guidance was out of date—some of which still reflected practices in place in 1991 during Operation Desert Storm. These complex, cumbersome processes, which were developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years, provide an opportunity for the Army to make timely, accurate active duty pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers, the report says. Confusion centered principally around pay processing responsibility for Army Guard soldiers as they move from state control to federal control and back again. To be effective, current processes rely on close coordination and communication between state (Army Guard unit and state-level command organizations) and federal (active Army finance locations at mobilization/demobilization stations and at area servicing finance offices) We found a significant number of instances in which critical coordination requirements were not clearly defined.to which they were entitled. We also found that existing policies and procedures were unclear with respect to organizational responsibilities. During the initial mobilization, units receive an alert order and begin a mobilization preparation program, Soldier Readiness Processing (SRP) The financial portion of the SRP is conducted by one of the 54 United States Property and Fiscal Offices (USPFO) According to DFAS procedures, the unit’s Army Guard USPFO should have initiated these pays. In addition, these problems could have been minimized if they were identified and corrected by the Army mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox during the soldier readiness processing. identify any pay problems for this unit in the demobilization phase. To obtain an understanding and assess the processes, personnel (human capital), and systems used to provide assurance that mobilized Army Guard soldiers were paid accurately and timely. We reviewed applicable policies, procedures, and program guidance; observed pay processing operations; and interviewed cognizant agency officials. We applied the policies and procedures prescribed in these documents to the observed and documented procedures and practices followed by the various agencies. We also used the internal controls standards provided in the Standards for Internal Control in Federal Government. duty pays for Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty. A joint task force has and deployed Army finance elements. As a first step, expanded central guidance will be published within the next 30 days. This breakout of responsibilities will also be provided in a simple matrix form to visually reinforce this guidance. Within approximately 60 days, the Army and DFAS will begin compliance reviews of the mobilization/demobilization stations to ensure adherence to published guidance and to provide any further assistance these offices may need. (p. 74/GAO Draft Report) The report indicated these deficiencies were the direct result of a myriad of current systems with multiple, complex interfaces to fully support current business process requirements. The five key DOD systems involved in authorizing, entering, processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers were not integrated. Lacking either an integrated or effectively interfaced set of personnel and pay systems, DOD must rely on error-prone, manual entry of data from the same source documents into multiple systems. Figure 6 provides an overview of the five systems currently involved in processing Army Guard pay and personnel information. Thousands of Army Guard (individual units and state-level organizations), active Army, and DFAS components may be involved in authorizing, processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers. An estimated 2,300 local Army Guard home units, unit commanders, and unit administrators are involved in maintaining up-to-date soldier personnel and related pay records. 28 active Army area servicing finance offices at over 50 locations worldwide that are involved with servicing Army Guard soldier’s location-based active duty pays. requirements were not clearly defined. Confusion over Responsibility for Entering Pay Transactions Results in Family Obtaining a Grant to Pay Bills. A sergeant incurred pay problems during his mobilization and deployment to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom that caused financial hardship for his family while he was deployed. In this case, the active Army and his state's USPFO were confused as to responsibility for processing pay input transactions associated with a promotion. The sergeant was promoted from a sergeant first class to master sergeant (E-8)  DFAS garnished his wages and collected approximately $1,100 of the soldier's salary. The soldier's wife had to obtain a grant of $500 from the Colorado National Guard's Family Support Group to pay bills. DFAS Indianapolis mobilization procedures authorize the Army Guard’s USPFOs and the Army Guardsman's Association to garnish the wages of members of the Army National Guard. The Army National Guardsman was overpaid during the period of his demotion. He was demoted back to an E-7, and a second promotion was given back to him. Indianapolis mobilization procedures authorize the Army Guard’s USPFOs to enter transactions for deployed soldiers. We found existing guidance did not provide for clear responsibility and accountability. For example, at one of our case study locations, we found that this broad authority for entering changes to soldiers’ pay records enabled almost simultaneous pay changes for soldiers who separate early or who are absent without leave or are confined. The Army Guard has the responsibility for entering transactions while in-theater and terminating payments for soldiers. The local servicing active Army finance office also has primary responsibility for entering transactions to stop hardship duty pay, hostile fire pay, and the combat zone tax exclusion. However, in this case, that office did not take action to stop these types of pay and allowances for many of the unit’s soldiers. For example, military pay personnel at Fort Campbell failed to deactivate hostileFire pay for many soldiers who were in a hostile fire/combat zone. The unit also failed to identify and stop any active duty pays that soldiers were no longer entitled to receive. active duty tour, soldiers normally return to the same Army locations from which they were mobilized for demobilization out-processing before returning to their home units. Demobilization personnel, employed by the active Army or Army Guard, are required to provide each soldier with a Release from Active Duty (REFRAD) order and a Form DD 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from active duty. At this time, the supporting USPFO is to use these documents as a basis for deactivating the soldier’s active duty pay and allowances.  DFAS-Indianapolis guidance provides only that “the supporting USPFO will be responsible for validating the status of any soldier who does not return to a demobilized status with a unit.” The guidance did not state how the USPfo should be informed that a soldier did not return with his or her unit, or how theUSPFO was to take action. The guidance also did not clearly specify how to carry out assigned responsibilities for soldiers who return from active duty earlier than their units. allowances. For example, a unit administrator told us he contacted the servicing area active Army finance office for the 101st Airborne in West Virginia. The finance office instructed him to contact the USPFO in WestVirginia because, although he was from a Colorado unit, his unit was assigned to a West Virginia Army Guard unit. However, when he contacted West Virginia for service, officials from that office told him to reach out to his home state of Colorado for help with his pay problems. USPFO referred soldiers to the active Army finance office and that office referred them back to the USPFO. Officials said the circular nature of giving assistance to soldiers was sometimes unavoidable. For example, they said that once soldiers left their home unit and the Fort Bragg and in-theater finance offices assumed pay responsibilities, they informed soldiers and their spouses to contact these active Army Finance offices to discuss active duty payment problems. U.S. Army Pay Office acknowledged that it is sometimes unavoidable to refer soldiers to different offices. Oman and returned safely to Uzbekistan. While guidance that permits both Army Guard and active Army military pay personnel to enter transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers provides flexibility in serving the soldiers, we found indications that it also contributed to soldiers being passed between the active Army and Army Guard servicing locations. For example, at another of our case study locations, we were told that several mobilized soldiers sought help in resolving active duty pay problems from theactive Army’s mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox. the spouses nor the soldiers received clear guidance on whom to contact to address their pay concerns. For example, some soldiers sought help from the active Army’s finance offices at Fort Knox and Fort Campbell. However, upon contacting officials at those locations, soldiers were told that theactive Army could not help them because they were Army Guard soldiers. According to DFAS officials, the active army finance offices have the capability to service Army Guard soldier. Fort Knox or Fort Campbell finance personnel were either unaware of their capability or were not aware of it. Army Guard and active Army finance components are confused over responsibility for processing pay transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Many of the complaints we identified concerned confusion over whether Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty should be served by the USPFO or by the active Army. One soldier told us that he submitted documentation on three separate occasions to support the housing allowance he should have received as of the pays and allowances for the unit’s soldiers. After not receiving any pay support, soldiers told us they contacted their Army Guard unit. guidance, the active Army mobilization stations are to act as a “safety net” to catch and correct any errors in soldiers’ active duty pays and allowances before they are deployed. The underpayments and late payments resulted in adverse financial repercussions for a number of the unit’s members and their families. We were told that neither the spouses nor the soldiers received clear guidance on whom to contact to get the money back. The unit members’ spouses tried to contact the soldiers while they were deployed to find out why they were not receiving the anticipated funds. to the government or to the Army Guard soldiers. We briefed DOD and Army officials, National Guard Bureau officials, DFAS officials, and USPFO officials in the selected states on the details of our audit. We conducted our audit work from November 2002 through September 2003 in accordance with U.S. generally accepted practices. On October 10, 2003, we requested comments on a draft of this report. We received comments on November 5, 2003 and have summarized those comments in the “Agency Comments and Our Evaluation” section of thisReport. 2002 through September 2003 in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) to establish a unified set of policies and procedures for all Army Guard, Army, and DFAS personnel to follow for servicing active duty pays for Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty. GAO DRAFT REPORT DATED OCTOBER 10, 2003 GAO-04-89 (GAO CODE 192080) “MILITARY PAY: ARMY NATIONAL GUARD PERSONNEL MOBILIZED TO ACTIVE DUTY EXPERIENCED SIGNIFICANT PAY PROBLEMS” unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to interested congressional committees. We will make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at the following sites: www.cnn.com, www.dailymail.co.uk, and www.theguardian.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders, including. medical extensions. DoD RESPONSE: Concur.to recommendation one. For medical extensions, the GAO recommends that the Department of Defense clarify how to amend orders. The DoD responds that it will do so in a matter of days, not months. The Army published revised guidance on June 10, 2003, reinforcing procedures on this process. Concerning the specific case in Colorado cited by the GAO, DFAS and the Army have implemented changes to the input systems to warn the operator processing a tour cancellation when the correct input should be a tour curtailment. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the secretary of the Army, in conjunction with DFAS, to take action. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. (p. 75/Draft Report) Within the next 30 days, the Army will prepare a standard information flyer to be given to all mobilizing reservists. The flyer will address entitlements as well as sources of pay support. The existing centralized information sources on individual soldiers pay will be expanded. Specifically, the GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. remains essentially a command responsibility. For dependents of deployed soldiers, the single source for finance, or any administrative issues, is either the rear detachment of the soldiers’ deployed unit or, for the National Guard, the applicable State Family Assistance Coordinator. The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to review the pay problems we. identified at our six bases. The pay problems. we identified at six bases are now under review by the Department of Defense. The GAO recommended expanding the scope of the existing memorandum of understanding between DFAS and the Army. The Army will work with the National Guard on resourcing the USPFOs for surges. The DoD responded that it is not the appropriate vehicle to address staffing of U.S. Pay Offices under the National Guards. The GAO also recommended that the Secretary of Defense determine whether issues concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations identified at DFAS could be addressed at a later date. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to establish who is accountable for stopping active duty pays for soldiers who. return home separate from their units. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Within the next 30 days, DFAS, in cooperation with the. Army, will reinforce existing procedures on responsibilities for stopping. active duty pay for soldiers. This will be part of the revised guidance identified in response to. recommendation one. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to update policies and procedures to reflect current legal and DoD administrative requirements. The Army will reinforce to all reserve commands the importance of this requirement. In Fiscal Year 2004, DFAS, the Army,. and National Guard will respectively update the cited regulations under their cognizance to the most current and accurate requirements. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Guidance and to provide any further assistance these offices may require. Within the next 3 to 6 months, the task force will build upon the existing guidance to provide comprehensive procedures and related standards, down to the individual technician level, for all offices and units responsible for pay input support of mobilized soldiers. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Standards for the timeliness of pay transactions for mobilized soldiers will be established within the next three to six months. The need for such actions is increasingly imperative in light of the current extended deployment of Army Guard soldiers in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Immediate steps to at least mitigate the most serious of the problems we identified are needed to help ensure that the Army Guard can continue to successfully fulfill its vital role in our national defense. We recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Army, to take steps to mitigate the problems. The Army Guard is a vital part of the U.S. military. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence.o.com. The list contains links to the full-text document site daily. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gaO.gov. interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service to evaluate the feasibility of automating some or all of the current manual monthly pays. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Programming changes to DJMS-RC have been implemented to enhance the processes. The DoD has not commented on this report. A study was conducted of improvement alternatives in the fall of 2002, which concluded that a new commercial off the shelf based payroll capability (“Forward Compatible Payroll” (FCP) was the best option to expeditiously improve our system payroll services. FCP is currently prototyping military entitlements and deductions and has already demonstrated that DJMS RC’s current monthly manual pays can be automated rapidly. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service. component affiliations and duty statuses. FCP will also resolve pay systems capability related problems described in this report. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The DFAS has already updated its current input system (Defense MilPay Office) to provide a warning to field finance personnel concerning the debt impact of debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD Response: The Department of Defense has no immediate plans to implement the proposed changes to its pay system. warning to field finance personnel concerning the debt impact of tour cancellation (vice modification) for Reserve/Guard members. DJMS-RC would require a small to medium system change to edit debts that exceeded an established threshold or required approval. Secondary manual processing would be required to start the collection process or delete the debts. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of defense (Comptroller), to incorporate the new system. are required for operators of a knowledge-based personnel community must be made after the capabilities of the commercial off the shelf product are fully known. Staff making key contributions to this report include: Paul S. Begnaud, Ronald A. Bergman, James D. Berry, Jr., Amy C. Chang, Mary E. Chervenic, Francine M. DelVecchio, C. Robert DeRoy, Dennis B. Fauber, Jennifer L. Hall, Charles R. Hodge. The General Accounting Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is to go to www.gao.gov/audit and click on the link for a copy of a GAO report. For more information on the GAO, visit www.GAO.gov. By the end of fiscal year 2003, DOD reporting shows that it will have invested over 5 years and about $360 million in conceptualizing and planning the system. In 2002, DOD estimated that integrated personnel and pay functions of DIMHRS would be fully deployed by fiscal year 2007. Part of the requested funding for fiscal year 2004 was to acquire a payroll module, Forward Compatible Payroll. According to program officials, this module, in conjunction with a translation module and a Web services component, is to replace DJMS-RC by March 2006. DOD has a major system enhancement effort under way in this area. The Defense Integrated Military Human Resources System (DIMHRS) is intended to replace more than 80 legacy systems. One of the major benefits expected with DIMH RS is “service members receiving accurate and timely pay and benefits.” The DFAS and Army have been actively involved in recommending an improved operational military pers/pay concept in the D IMHRS environment. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. establishing an edit check and requiring approval before processing any debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. Consider a complete reengineering of the processes and controls and ensure that this reengineering effort deals not only with the systems, but also with the people behind them. As part of the effort currently under way to reform DOD’s pay and personnel systems—referred to as DIMHRS—incorporate a complete understanding of the Army Guard pay problems as documented in this report into the requirements development. In assessing the risks associated with DIMHRS implementation, DOD highlighted 20 such risks. For example, DOD reported a 60 percent risk associated with “Service issues with business process reengineering and data migration.” The department’s ability to effectively mitigate such risks is of particular concern given its poor track record in successfully designing and implementing major systems in the past, the authors say. Given the schedule slippages that have already occurred combined with the many risks, Army Guard soldiers may be at risk. The Army DIMHRS Program is still in the very early stages of determining when and how integrated processes and workflows will be incorporated. The current plan is to “…initially mirror the existing ‘As-Is’ structure until the new capability has been fielded and risk factors/ requirements have been clearly identified. A determination of what additional skills and expertise are required for operators of a knowledge-based personnel community must be made.’’ “Joint Service Functional Concept of Operations,” dated July 15, 2003, page 14. Each pay is designed to provide fully automated computation capability for active, Reserve/Guard and detailed leave and earnings statement reporting to the Service member through myPay. FCP will use legacy military pers/pay data feeds to create a single military pay record for each Service member supporting all Service component affiliations and duty statuses. Until such time FCP has been implemented, we will ensure that these certain pays paid under “other credits” USPFOs ands Reserve Component Pay Support Offices with monthly newsletters. Defense Finance and Accounting Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of redesigning leave and earnings statement. Soldiers would have clear explanation of all pay and allowances received so that they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled pays. (p. 78/Draft Report) Enclosure understanding their leave and Earnings statement by reviewing and updating (as necessary) the information provided on our website(s); by providing independent leave andEarnings statement remarks for present and future changes; and by providing monthly newsletters. information sources on individual soldiers pay will be expanded. DFAS will continue to add functionality to myPay for input of discretionary actions. Soldiers will be able to give their dependents so they can see the Leave and Earning Statement without being able to change anything on the pay record. This enhancement is scheduled for August 2004. The DFAS also operates a central customer service center for pay inquiries for all Services. The toll free number for this center as well as the myPay internet address will be 1-800-273-8255. MyPay.center as well as the myPay internet address will be incorporated in the flyer discussed in response to recommendation 13. Until the implementation of DIMHRS, with full integration of pay and personnel, the processing of pay transactions will still require the movement of some entitlement information/authorization from units and personnel to finance via paper. As always, pay remains essentially a command responsibility. For the individual soldier, the individual Soldier, the pay is the responsibility of the soldier, not the organization. will ensure that these certain pays paid under “other credits’ are included in the flyer addressed in response to recommendation 13. DFAS will update the DFAS Reserve Component Mobilization Procedures to mandate a remark be entered on the service member’s leave and earnings statement for pays paidunder “ other credits” to inform the service members exactly what entitlement(s) they have paid. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army to evaluate the feasibility of using the JUSTIS warning screen to help. the feasibility of using the JUSTIS warning screen to help eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The National Guard will develop a JUSTIS table identifying all applicable soldiers in order to notify the USPFO technician of accounts requiring monthly entitlement input. This will be more efficient and effective than a pop-up warning screen, which would appear only if the individual soldier’s social security number were input. In one case study, soldiers were underpaid their entitled jump, foreign language proficiency, special duty assignment, or hardship duty pays. Pay technicians inadvertently omitted the monthly manual input required to initiate these types of pays every month. USPFO pay personnel had a procedure in place to help prevent inadvertently omitting month-to-month entry of nonautomated pays for entitled soldiers. Although this was not the case in this case, the procedure was used to alert them that soldiers were eligible to receive that particular pay component that month. to receive that particular pay component that month. These month-to-month pays and allowances were not separately itemized on the soldiers’ leave and earnings statements in a user-friendly format. In contrast, at four of our six case study units, we found that a significant number of soldiers were overpaid their entitled automated pays when they were demobilized from active duty. The warning screen could be used to help preclude some of the pay problems we found resulting from failures to enter transactions. any pay problems. Review the pay problems we identified at our six case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. Evaluate the feasibility of automating some or all of the current manual monthly pays, including special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, hardship duty pay, and HALO pay. Use the personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. Using the JUSTIS warning screen to help eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of eliminating the use of the “other credits” for processing Hardship Duty (Designated Areas); high altitude, low opening jump pay; and special duty assignment pay. We acknowledge that the information available to the member is inadequate in today’s system. This has DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Hardships duty pay is scheduled for automation in April 2004. We will also recommend inclusion of automation of high elevation, low open jump pay in FCP. DJMS-RC is a large, complex, and sensitive payroll computer application. DFAS Indianapolis is the central site for all Army military pay. Each MMPA contains a 1 million MMPAs for the Army. Personnel data contained in the MMPA are generated from SIDPERS, a personnel database maintained and used by the Army Guard at the 54 state-level personnel offices. All pay-related transactions that are entered into DJMS- RC, through JUSTIS and DMO, update theMMPA.  JUSTIS is the pay input subsystem used by the 54 state-level Army Guard commands, including the USPFOs, to update DJMS-RC. JUSTIS receives certain pay-affecting personnel data from SIDPERS. Database management of JUSTis is decentralized in that each of the 54 sites owns and maintains its own JUSTIS database. DMO is the Technical Support Office that designs and maintains the DJ MS-RC core pay software. Users can sign on to DJ MS through online interactive software used for file transfer transactions. DMO is the pay input subsystem used by active Army finance offices and the DOD military pay offices to update DJMS-RC. DMO can be used to enter location-based pays, such as hostile fire and hardship duty pays and combat zone tax exclusion transactions. We found that DMO was used to create transactions for military pay and allowances that are not reported at the time of mobilization for upload to DJMS.JUSTIS from hard copies of mobilization orders. For more information on DMO, visit the DMO website. collection efforts on the $9,400 overpayment did not begin until July 2003, when we pointed out this situation to USPFO officials. The lack of an integrated set of systems was also apparent in the relationship between JUSTIS and the order writing system—AFCOS. Currently, certain personnel and order information entered and stored in the AFCOS database is automatically filled in the JUSTIS input screens. This auto-fill functionality eliminates the need for some error-prone, manual reentry of data into JUSTIS. error-prone, manual reentry of data into JUSTIS. Currently, manual entry of data from a hard copy of the soldier’s orders and other documentation is required. NGB officials stated that providing the auto-fill functionality to the mobilization would be a good idea. For example, at one of the case study units we audited, USPFO pay personnel had to manually enter the soldier's active duty tour start and stop dates into JustIS from a Hard Copy of the actual mobilization order. NGB officials planned to release a programming software change to all 54 USPFOs that would allow the start and stop dates to be automatically filled into the mobilization screens. Because this software change was scheduled to occur after the conclusion of our fieldwork, we did not verify its effectiveness. In any case, while this proposed programming change may be beneficial, it does not eliminate the need for manual entry and entry of mobilization information. They stated that providing the auto-fill functionality to the mobilization input screens would require minimal programming changes. personnel and pay systems, thus causing various pay problems—particularly late payments. We found that an existing interface could be used to help alert military pay personnel to take action when mobilization transactions are entered into the personnel system. For example, when Army Guard soldiers change from inactive drilling status to active duty status, state personnel offices create personnel-related transactions in SIDPERS. But associated pay- related transactions to update the soldier’s pay records are not automatically created in JUSTIS. USPFO pay personnel are not aware that a pay-related transaction is needed until they receive documentation from the soldier. Automated improvements could be used to proactively alert USPFOs of certain pay-impacting transactions that are created in SIDPERS. In our case studies, we found instances in which mobilization order data were either not entered into DJMS-RC for several months after the personnel action or were entered inconsistently. At the case study locations we audited, several Army Guard soldiers received amended or revoked orders that were entered into SidPERS but were not entered in DJMS. of the limited number of pay technicians available to process pay transactions. The Chief of Payroll at one of our case study locations told us that because they were currently understaffed, staff members worked 12 to 14 hours a day and still had backlogs of pay start transactions to be entered into the pay system. We were also told that two of our other cases study locations experienced backlogs and errors in entering pay start Transactions when they were processing pay start payments at the same time. For more information, visit the U.S. Army Payroll Association's website. With an effectively integrated system, changes to personnel records automatically update related payroll records from a single source of data input. An automatic personnel-to-payroll system interface can also reduce errors caused by independent, manual entry of data from the same source documents into both pay and personnel systems. Without an effective interface between the personnel and pay systems, we found instances in which pay-affecting information did not get entered into both the Personnel and Pay systems, thus causing various pay problems—particularly late.

ROUGE-1: 79.51, ROUGE-2: 73.34, ROUGE-L: 21.29
BERTScore: 63.39

==============================================
==================== [30/100] ====================
Summary:
In fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Comptroller’s office set targets for each component based on their respective budgeted amounts for contract services. In fiscal year 2014, the office obtained additional input from the Army to justify an increase in the Army's target. The Comptroller received three waiver requests totaling $607 million for fiscalyear 2014. For example, the Navy submitted a waiver request in June 2014 requesting $263 million in additional target allocation to account for additional costs during the year. This new process allowed the comptroller to approve adjustments related to specific requests and allocate portions of the reserved amount. adjustments during the year. The Army and Navy exceeded the Comptroller-provided targets due, in part, to a lack of accurate budget and obligation data for contract services. The Air Force did not. The Comptroller’s office took steps in fiscal year 2014 to improve management of the contract services spending limit. The actual limit should be reduced from $55.8 billion to $54.9 billion, as shown in figure 1. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2014/01/30/military/defense/contract-services-spending-limit. 2010 levels to account for (1) funding increases associated with contract services that were transferred from overseas contingency operations to the base budget and (2) the cost of additional civilian personnel positions over fiscal year 2010 levels. DOD identified an aggregate spending limit of $55.75 billion for fiscal year 2014. The spending limit identified in the act applies to DOD in its entirety; therefore, individual components may exceed their individual targets. DOD would still be in compliance with the law if total obligations for contract services across the entire department were less than the aggregate limit. For example, in both fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Comptroller included approximately $248 million in research and development budgeted amounts in the spending limit. The Comptroller office’s calculation of the civilian workforce adjustment was not consistently applied, further overstating the limit. DOD concurred with this recommendation and has taken steps to address it for fiscal year 2015, as discussed later in this report. The actual limit should be reduced from $55.8 billion to $54.9 billion. In December 2014, we reported on DOD’s implementation of the section 808 limitations in fiscal years 2012 and 2013. We found DOD exceeded the spending limit in fiscal year 2012 and adhered to the limit in Fiscal Year 2013. However, we also identified issues with the DOD Comptroller office's calculation of the limit which resulted in an overstated limit. After adjusting for these errors, we found that DOD obligated $1.72 billion more than the limit. The Air Force and Navy adhere to their targets. The Army still exceeded its target by more than $2 billion. The Air Force obligated $1.45 billion less than its fiscal year 2014 target provided by the Comptroller. The Army obligated $254 million more than its adjusted Comptroller target. After exceeding its targets, the Air Force did not have to make adjustments to command’s obligation targets for fiscal year2014, as each command was able to manage to their respective target. The Air Force Financial Management and Comptroller (FMC) office monitored monthly obligations levels and communicated with commands to ensure that they adhered to their targets. In fiscal year 2014, the Navy obligated $1.07 billion more than its adjusted Comptroller target. The Army obligated $10.4 billion on contract services for the operations and maintenance account. Navy FMC officials said they do not set command spending targets for contract services, but expect commands to stay within their respective budgeted amounts for contract Services. The Navy F MC office began monthly monitoring of contract services obligations for fiscal year 2015 to help identify potential overages as they occur instead of only at the end of the fiscal year. potential overages as they occur instead of only at the mid-year and end-of-year execution reviews. Second, Navy FMC officials attributed the remaining $600 million of the $1.07 billion it obligated over its target to a coding error in its financial system. The financial system does not allow for coding of progress payments on items, such as ships or aircraft. To make progress payments for these types of items, these payments are coded as contract services to work around the system limitation. coded as contract services to work around the system limitation. Navy financial management officials said they manually corrected these coding errors in the past, but decided to forego the manual corrections in fiscal year 2014 in preparation for audit readiness in 2016. The Navy FMC office requested updates to its financial system in August 2013 to correct this coding issue, but the change has not yet been approved or implemented. All of the military departments achieved funding reductions greater than 20 percent for closely associated with inherently governmental and staff. After exceeding its contract services targets by more than $2 billion in both fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Army took additional steps to manage and monitor the contract services spending limit for fiscal year 2014. Army budget officials attributed a portion of the obligations over its target to coding errors in its financial system. These coding errors include obligations for contract services from overseas contingency operations that are not subject to the spending limit but were inadvertently included in the billion over its 2013 level. To address this issue, an Army budget official said they monitored contract services obligations during the year. In fiscal years 2012 and 2013 the Comptroller set the Army’s spending target based solely on its enacted budget amounts for contract services. Army budget officials said these budget estimates did not accurately capture the extent to which funds were allocated to contract services because Army commands do not separately identify contract services budget estimates in their annual budget inputs to the Army Budget Office for inclusion in the President's budget. For example, in fiscal year 2013, the Army obligated $2.7 billion more than estimated forcontract services. still exceeded its target by more than $2 billion in fiscal year 2013. For fiscal year 2014, the military departments continued to improve their management of contract services obligations, but experienced varied success in adhering to their targets. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government call for effective control activities that enforce guidance to help ensure stewardship of government resources. The Army and Navy exceeded their spending targets. The Air Force obligated $1.45 billion. The Navy obligated $2.2 billion. We reviewed the Comptroller’s methodology for calculating the spending limit. We compared the PRCP obligation data to contract services obligations reported in the Federal Procurement Data System-Next Generation from fiscal years 2010 through 2014. We found that both sources showed a similar downward trend in contract Services obligations. To assess the extent to. DOD to implement fiscal controls, we limited our analysis to implementation efforts by the military departments, which account for over 70 percent of DOD’S contract services. obligations. in fiscal year 2016. The review should also ensure that to the maximum extent practicable, the activities do not include any closely associated with inherently governmental functions. These are those that may be at risk of becoming inherently governmental due to the manner in which the contractor performs the work, among other things. Upon completion of this review, DOD guidance instructs the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to submit an inventory review certification letter to the Office of Personnel and Readiness that outlines the results of the review. for Operations, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), concurred with the findings of our report. The report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4841 or makm@gao,gov. Contact points for our Office of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the contact named above, W. William Russell (Assistant Director); Beth Reed Fritts; and Suzanne Sterling made significant contributions to this review. In also, Pete Anderson, Virginia Chanley, John Krump, and Roxanna Sun made key contributions to the report. The report was compiled by the Office of the Inspector General. The Air Force and Navy achieved reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations greater than 30 percent from fiscal years 2010 through 2013. The Army achieved a 9 percent reduction by fiscal year 2013, but achieved a 32 percent reduction in fiscal year 2014. The DOD Comptroller intends to measure a 30 percent reduction from 2010 levels based on former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld’s recommendations. The Comptroller plans to enforce the reduction by making adjustments to component funding levels for the fiscal year 2017 budget submissions. additional insight into the steps taken to implement the reductions. Based on updated guidance from the Comptroller, issued in May 2015, instructing components to rely on the advisory and assistance services budget category. We analyzed each military department’s obligations for this budget category from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 to determine if reductions had been achieved by the military departments. We conducted this performance audit from January 2015 through September 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to Congress extended the time period for DOD to implement the full 20 percent reduction through fiscal year 2015. The reductions are expected to take place at each component, rather than an aggregate reduction across the department. Fiscal years 2014 and 2015 are also referred to as carryover years—meaning that whatever required reductions that DOD did not achieve in fiscal year 2014 will be implemented in 2015, the agency says. The cuts are directed to those closely associated with inherently governmental functions and staff augmentation, the department says. from 2010 levels based on former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative which called for DOD to reduce service support contractors by 10 percent each year from fiscal year 2011 through 2013. If components are not in compliance with the full 30 percent reduction by fiscal year 2015, a Comptroller official said it plans to also include the additional 10 percent reduction for fiscalyear 2011 called for by Secretary Gates. While section 808 calls for a total of 20 percent in reductions in fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Comptroller said it also plans to include the full reduction. aggregate spending limit of $55.75 billion for fiscal year 2014. Section 813 of the NDAA for fiscalyear 2015 extended the aggregate spending limit through fiscal year 2015. Congress has also enacted legislation to improve the availability of information on DOD’s acquisition of services and to help the department make more strategic decisions about the appropriate workforce mix of military, civilian, and contractor personnel. In fiscal year 2002, Congress enacted section 2330a of title 10 of the U.S. Code, which required the Secretary of Defense to establish a data collection system. system to provide management information on each purchase of services by a military department or defense agency. In 2008, Congress amended section 2330a of title 10 of the U.S. Code to require the Secretary of Defense to submit an annual inventory of contracted services performed for or on behalf of DOD during the preceding fiscal year. This annual inventory submission is to include, among other things, the number of contractor full time equivalents and the associated direct labor cost for these positions. More recently, section 955 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2013 required the Secretary for Defense to ensure the information was available. Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 limited DOD’s total obligations for contract services in fiscal years 2012 through 2014. The limit does not apply to contract services for military construction, research and development, and services funded for overseas contingency operations. DOD may adjust spending above 2010 levels to account for (1) funding increases associated with last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. The objectives for this review were to determine the extent to which the Department of Defense (DOD) implemented the requirements of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) To determine the extent to which DOD implemented the contract services spending limit in fiscal years 2014, we reviewed relevant laws and DOD guidance. We analyzed budget and obligation data from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Comptroller for fiscal years 2010 and 2014 from the program resource collection process (PRCP) system. We interviewed DOD and military department budget officials. to determine steps taken by the Comptroller’s office to implement the limit. The additional guidance issued by the Assistant Secretary of defense for Readiness and Force Management in May 2014 instructed each component to report in their fiscal year 2013 inventory review certification letters specific actions taken and supporting documentation. fiscal year 2013 required the Secretary of Defense to ensure that the civilian and service contractor workforces are appropriately sized to support and execute the National Military Strategy. Section 955 further requires that the efficiencies plan ensures that the total funding reductions are commensurate with reductions in military end strength. We have on-going work assessing DOD’s compliance with section 2330a as well as DOD's implementation of section 955 and plan to report the final results in fiscal year 2016. Following the submission of the inventory, Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 further reinforced those provisions by requiring DOD to issue guidance instructing components to reduce funding by 10 percent. These functions may include personal services or other positions that may put the government at risk of contractors inappropriately influencing government decisions. Unlike the aggregate DOD spending limit, the statutory requirement for guidance on reductions in funding for closely of contractor services that are considered closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions. As a result, we recommended that DOD identify additional data sources beyond the inventory of contracted services to help ensure that funding reductions called for in the law are implemented. improved implementation of fiscal controls as discussed later in this report. We also have ongoing work that will further examine DOD’s planning, programming and budgeting process for contracted services and plan to report the final results in 2016. DOD obligated $54.6 billion, or $280 million less than the limit on contract services in fiscal year 2014. We analyzed certification letters submitted by 35 DOD components for the fiscal year 2013 inventory review to determine what steps and supporting documentation each component provided to demonstrate compliance with the required funding reductions. used to determine if the reduction was achieved. DOD updated its inventory guidance in May 2014, instructing components to identify the steps taken to demonstrate compliance with the required reductions. We found that the supplemental guidance did not provide components with any additional clarification in how to measure the reductions given the lack of data collected through past inventories. We also found that one measure that could be used to determine compliance was the advisory and assistance services budget category which includes many of the types of contractor services that are considered closely associated with inherently.

ROUGE-1: 67.19, ROUGE-2: 62.42, ROUGE-L: 27.50
BERTScore: 67.36

==============================================
==================== [31/100] ====================
Summary:
The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. The U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700. The GAO's Office of Inspector General is based in Washington, D.C. and has offices across the country. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Orders may also be placed by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006.Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) federal agencies ineligible to receive AmeriCorps grants. The law also requires that to the maximum extent possible, the Corporation (1) increase the amount of matching contributions provided by the private sector and (2) reduce the total federal cost per participant. In response to congressional concerns over the cost of mandating the purchase and use of uniforms, the uniform package (t-shirt, sweatshirt, button, and so on) is no longer a program requirement. The Corporation has revised its grant application guidelines for programs receiving funding in the upcoming 1996-97 program year. the public and private sectors. Since we completed our review, the Congress and the Corporation have undertaken a number of measures that are intended to reduce the costs of AmeriCorps. Because many of these initiatives will not take effect until the upcoming 1996-97 program year, it is too early to determine their impact. Madam Chairman, that concludes my statement for the record. For more information about this testimony, please call Wayne B. Upshaw at (202) 512-7006 or Carol L. Patey at (617) 565-7575. hours toward an associate’s degree in the natural sciences through their service, which can lead to state certification as an environmental restoration technician. The Congress mandated new funding restrictions for the Corporation. The Corporation, after consulting with Members of Congress, has revised its grant guidelines. These new measures will only affect programs receiving grants for the upcoming 1996-97 program year. The law also makes federal agencies ineligible to receive AmeriCorps grants, making the program more cost-effective for the federal government. well as to supervise and train participants; office facilities and supplies; and materials and equipment needed in the course of conducting national service projects. Most of the Corporation’s funding for AmeriCorps*USA projects went to providing the 1,700 hours of total service was nondirect service time. The Corporation for National and Community Service. the smallest share of resources, amounting to about 12 percent (or about $41 million). Nonfederal Ameri corps* USA grantees received resources of less than $800 per participant from non-Corporation federal sources. Local government agencies to operate AmeriCorps*USA programs. Grants are based in part on the number of participants the program estimates it will enroll. If participants leave the program during the year, the Corporation may either allow the program to redirect participant the Corporation could redirect participant stipend and benefit funds to other program expenses or take back any unused portion of the grant. To ensure that federal Corporation dollars are used to leverage other resources for program support, grantees must also obtain support from non-Corporation sources. of the Corporation’s funding for AmeriCorps*USA projects went to providing operating grants and education awards. About 69 percent of all matching resources came from either a federal or a state or local government source. Non-Corporation federal funds accounted for about 50 percent of total resources available to federal grantees. The remaining in-kind contributions from sources other than the Corporation were reported to us in May 1995 as resources already received or those that program directors were certain of receiving. million) and 26 percent (about $34 million), respectively. The remaining 31 percent of matching resources were from private sources, with cash and in-kind contributions accounting for 17 percent and 14 percent. In calculating resources available on a per-participant and per-service-hour basis (see table 1), we found that the average from all sources per AmeriCorps*USA participant was about $26,654. This amounted to about $16 per service hour or about $20 per direct service hour. their first 5 months of operation and identified diverse achievements related to each service area. Participants renovating inner-city housing, assisting teachers in elementary schools, maintaining and reestablishing native vegetation in a flood control area. AmeriCorps’s legislation identified renewing the spirit of community as an objective, and the program”s mission includes “strengthening the ties that bind us together as a people” We observed several projects focused on rebuilding communities. For example, a multifamily house being renovated was AmeriCorps*USA participants showed diversity in educational, economic, and ethnic backgrounds. Participants said that a valuable aspect of the program was working with others with different backgrounds and benefiting from their strengths. Another of AmeriCorp*USA’s program objectives was to foster civic responsibility. We saw evidence of this at programs such as one where participants devoted half of each Friday to working on community service projects they devised and carried out independently. Participants at another program, in which they organized meetings to establish relationships between at-risk youth and elderly people, commented that this work had taught them how to organize programs. rebuilding communities. For example, a multifamily house being renovated was formerly a congregating spot for drug dealers. Participants of several programs we visited spanned a wide age range, from teenagers to retirees. Teams also showed diversity in educational, economic, and ethnic backgrounds. Another team built a community farm market and renovated a municipal stadium, both of which a town official said will continue to provide economic and social benefits to the community. For more information on these programs and others, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/city-building-programs-rebuilding-communities. to earn one or the other before using the education award. In one program, a general equivalency diploma (GED) candidate was receiving classroom instruction and individual tutoring. A larger program that recruited at-risk youth, most of whom do not have high school diplomas, provided classroom instruction related to the service that participants performed, such as a construction-based math curriculum. Program officials said most of the participants are enrolled in the program and will be able to earn their GEDs. Programs offer participants the chance to get postsecondary academic credit. One program offered participants the option of pursuing an environmental studies curriculum. Another program allowed participants to earn 36 credit hours toward an associate’s degree in the natural sciences through a natural sciences curriculum. Program officials said most of the participants are enrolled in high school equivalency courses and that at least five have already passed the GED test. The program is affiliated with a private college and costs $10,000 a year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The Corporation has also increased the grantee’s share of total program operating costs from 25 to 33 percent for grants awarded for the 1996-97 program year. The guidelines also encourage programs to seek additional funding only for education awards. Total resources available means many things. It means cash and in-kind contributions that pay participants’ living allowances, social security taxes, health insurance, child care, and the education awards they earn. The Corporation’S words—“get things done.” health insurance, child care, and the education awards they earn in exchange for their service. It means resources available to pay local program staff who manage operations and supervise staff; to pay rent for office space and purchase supplies; and to pay for travel and transportation for program staff and participants. And it means resources for planning grants used to design and formalize future national service programs. The Corporation for National and Community Service is a non-profit organization based in Washington, D.C. It is funded by donations from individuals, corporations, foundations and individuals. AmeriCorps*USA is the largest national and community service program since the Civilian Conservation Corps of the 1930s. Participants earn an education award of $4,725 for full-time service or half of that amount for part- time service. Selection of participants is not based on financial need. A national service program before, during, or after postsecondary education is available. The Corporation used about $149 million of its fiscal year 1994 appropriations to make about 300 grants to nonprofit organizations and federal, state, and local government agencies. To earn a part-time award, a participant must perform 900 hours of community service within 2 years. Individuals can serve more than two terms; however, they can only receive two education awards. The awards, which are held in trust by the U.S. Treasury, are paid directly to qualified postsecondary students. The Corporation requires that programs devote some portion, but no more than 20 percent, of participants’ service hours to nondirect service activities such as training or studying for the equivalent of a high school diploma. work had taught them how to organize programs, experience they believed would be helpful as they took on roles in their communities. Training periods included conflict resolution techniques and team-building skills. Programs also supported participants in obtaining high school diplomas or the equivalent. According to Corporation regulations, a full-time participant who does not have a high school diploma or its equivalent generally must agree to earn one or the other before using the education. education or job training. For more information, visit AmeriCorps*USA.

ROUGE-1: 75.47, ROUGE-2: 66.78, ROUGE-L: 35.76
BERTScore: 52.50

==============================================
==================== [32/100] ====================
Summary:
Liberty RadEx is set to take place April 26-30, 2010, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The exercise is to focus on technical recovery issues involving intergovernmental coordination. There are limitations in federal capabilities to help state and local governments address the interim storage and eventual disposal of the radioactive waste that would arise from RDD or IND incidents. This is due, in part, to current restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris York that was conducted on June 16-17, 2009, and a planning session held in Philadelphia on October 28-29, 2009. the level of environmental cleanup after RDD or IND incidents. The guidance recommends that this process include potential future land uses, technical feasibility, costs, cost-effectiveness, and public accountability. EPA added that it looks forward to the lessons to be learned from the upcoming Liberty RadEx exercise in 2010. Officials believe the exercise should provide lessons that can be applied to RDD and IND incidents in the future, as well as to other environmental cleanup efforts in the U.S. and abroad. purpose is only theoretical at this point. There is little research data on the likely dispersal patterns of concrete, asphalt, and glass that would result from use of an RDD or IND. Some federal agency officials question the need to improve the predictive capabilities of these plume models. For example, the DHS IMAAC director told us that the current state-of-the-art and plume modeling approach is sufficient for its primary purpose in directing the protective actions of first responders. Nevertheless, NNSA officials informed NNSA is working with FEMA on a multiyear program to improve federal capabilities to model the release of material during a radiological or nuclear incident. EPA agreed that characterization of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents would be challenging because existing plume models are not entirely applicable to urban areas. NNSA officials contend that plume modeling will never replace the need for actual measurements for radioactive contamination. EPA added that other types of contamination, such as other radioactive materials, are more difficult to model. The current predictive capability of various plume models is not sufficient, and may never be sufficient to reduce the time necessary to fully characterize the extent of contaminated areas after RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior official at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center (IMAAC), the predictive capabilities of existing plumes models are not at the resolution necessary to produce this added value for urban areas. This official told CNN that modeling for this purpose is only theoretical at this point. a limited number of states have access to low-level radioactive waste disposal facilities for waste generated by users of radioactive materials in their states. Another issue is paying for waste disposal. In the Superfund program, EPA can bill the responsible party, if known. However, covering the cost of waste disposal would be complicated in the case of RDD or IND incidents. One additional complicating factor would be the mixing and problematic separation of radioactive, biological, and chemical materials in the debris that would stem from such incidents. and experiences drawn from national and international sources. For example, a Government Decontamination Service official told us that this agency is currently engaged in learning more about how to deal with the disposal of radioactive waste that has no known owner. The issue is not only ownership, but where to put the radioactive debris and how to cover the cost of storage and disposal. In this regard, the United Kingdom has a clearance rule for allowing very low-level radioactive waste to be disposed of in less expensive ways. restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris stemming from such incidents. According to NNSA officials, DOE’s disposal sites currently can only accept low-level and mixed low- level radioactive waste from its own and DOD facilities. EPA is concerned about access to commercial radioactive waste disposal sites in the event of such an incident, according to an EPA decontamination expert. Currently, there is only one low-levels radioactive waste. disposal site located in Utah that could be used by most states for radioactive debris disposal. EPA determined that there was a significant capacity and competency gap in efficiently meeting the laboratory evaluation needs for an RDD scenario. Such an incident could contaminate 3,000 square miles and require potentially millions of samples for laboratory analysis. According to EPA documentation, the gap in laboratory capacity would result in the lack of timely, reliable, and interpretable data. EPA has documented that it is currently establishing an all-media Environmental Response Laboratory Network. It is also conducting a demonstration project to enhance the capacity and capability of public laboratories. There are some limitations in federal capabilities to complete laboratory validation of contaminated areas and levels of cleanup after applying decontamination approaches. FEMA’s proposed process for determining cleanup standards during the recovery phase for RDD and IND incidents has not been fully exercised, although there was a tabletop discussion among government officials in a June 2009 exercise. EPA and FEMA regional office respondents differed somewhat on the need for standard national guidance on the application of approaches for environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials. Many of the federal regionalOffice respondents mentioned the need to conduct recovery exercises that involve state and local governments. sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD or IND incidents because federal agencies have only carried out environmental cleanup of localized areas of radioactive materials. Some limitations exist in federal capabilities to help address the magnitude of the cleanup that would follow these incidents. The current DHS planning guidance for RDD and IND incidents recommends a framework for incident cleanup and recovery using a process called “site-specific optimization” for determining the level of environmental cleanup after RDDor IND incidents. For example, DOE and EPA have substantial experience using various analysis and environmental cleanup methods and technologies to address localized areas. The proper characterization of the quantity, properties, and level of debris contamination and decontamination residue from an RDD can have significant impacts on cleanup costs and restoration timelines. Concerns about limitations in these federal capabilities were expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency managers. EPA officials informed us that its Office of Research and Development is currently developing a suite of decision support tools for the management of waste and debris from a variety of different events, including radiological incidents. In commenting on a draft of the report, EPA officials told us that the agency is working on the issue. magnitude of RDD or IND incidents. For example, DOE has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in research, development, and testing of methods and technologies for cleaning up and decommissioning contaminated structures and soils. Since the passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), which established the Superfund program, EPA has undertaken significant efforts to study, develop, and use technologies that can address radioactive contamination. DOD has also played a major role in studying potential applications for innovative technologies for its Superfund sites. Experts say conventional use of high-pressure hosing to decontaminate a building is effective under normal conditions but could be the wrong cleanup approach for an RDD using cesium-137. In this case, the imbibing (absorbing) properties of some porous surfaces such as concrete would actually cause this soluble radioactive isotope to penetrate even further into surfaces. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help address, in a timely manner, the magnitude of cleanup that would be associated with RDD or IND incidents. EPA has published inventories of radiological methods and technology guidance for contaminated sites, surfaces, and media. During the initial response phase to an incident, responders might rely on fairly simple cleanup approaches. The latter recovery phase might require no additional action or use of complex decontamination technologies depending on the level of desired cleanup. EPA has also published guidance for its On-Scene Coordinators at each regional office to aid in their response to a radiological incident. This guidance covers the full range of Radiological incidents, but its focus is primarily on the early to intermediate phases. Federal agencies’ current approaches to analysis and environmental cleanup have only been applied in localized areas. Decontamination research is currently under way to gain a better understanding of potential applications of current and experimental methods and technologies for primarily RDD incidents. Current research has focused on predicting the effects of radiation release in urban settings through simulation, small-scale testing, and theory. In addition, researchers at EPA’s National Homeland Security Research Center informed us that while there are currently no RDD or IND incidents, there are potential applications. its Superfund sites. As a result of federal agencies’ experience with radioactive materials, there is evidence that the agencies could effectively carry out the analysis and environmental cleanup of localized areas contaminated by these materials. In regard to analysis, DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) has developed operational plans, orders, and publications on how to respond to a radiological or nuclear incident. NNSA has developed various FRMAC manuals to guide operational, assessment and monitoring activities. In addition, EPA's National Decontamination Team has published guidelines that provide a framework for how to develop sampling plans to support decontamination efforts. We spoke with subject matter experts at the National Nuclear Security Administration, EPA, and FEMA. We also observed a demonstration of the capabilities of the Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. In addition, we reviewed reports and reports and reviews of incidents and incidents.incidents in the U.S. and around the world. We spoke with experts at DOE’s Lawrence LiverMore National Laboratory, Idaho National Laboratory and EPA”s Andrew W. Breidenbach Environmental Research Center, National Air and Radiation Environmental Laboratory. Homeland Security Research Center: More research is needed to develop standard national guidance for their efficacious application in urban areas and to other RDD or IND incident scenarios. Expert: Without guidance and discussion early in the response phase, a contractor might use a decontamination technology during this phase for no other reason than it was used before in an unrelated situation. The expert told us that this situation has shown that without this guidance, the technology could be used in an unconnected incident in the future. Security experts have raised concerns that terrorists may try to smuggle radiological or nuclear materials into the United States to produce either an RDD or IND. Sealed sources are used throughout the U.S. and are commonly called a sealed radiological source. This radioactive material is encapsulated, or sealed, in metal, such as stainless steel, titanium, or platinum, to prevent its dispersal and is commonly known as a sealed Radiological Source (RDS) or dirty bomb. The RDD is a bomb made from a mixture of nuclear and radioactive materials. Sealed sources are used to diagnose and treat illnesses, preserve food, detect flaws in pipeline welds, and determine the moisture content of soil. Depending on their use, sealed sources contain different types of radioactive material. Chechen separatists placed a canister containing cesium-137 in a Moscow park in the mid- 1990s. Although the device was not detonated and no radioactive material was dispersed, the incident demonstrated that a dirty bomb could be planted in a city. The U.S. government has no plans to use sealed sources in the near future. The dispersal of the polonium by the perpetrators of the crime and the victim resulted in widespread contamination across London and even abroad. The decontamination activities at these sites spanned 19 days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost over $1 million. British investigators also identified over 1,000 people who might have been in various ways exposed to thePolonium. Health officials tested 738 of them and found that 137 had reportable levels of this substance, although few of these individuals turned out to have levels that warranted medical attention. In 2006, Alexander Litvinenko, a former officer of the Russian Federal Security Service, was poisoned with radioactive material. No radioactive material was dispersed, but the incident demonstrated that terrorists have the capability and willingness to use radiological materials as weapons of terrorism. In contrast, detonating an IND would require a terrorist group to obtain nuclear weapons material and to have highly sophisticated expertise and equipment to fabricate this material into a weapon. It would also take a group of highly skilled and experienced terrorists to carry out an IND. Within greater London, given the international nature of the event, even though the incident was classified as a hazardous materials event rather then a terrorist incident. According to the recovery planning process, the city selected a contractor from the Government Decontamination Service list of specialized contractors for the remediation work. This model contract contains allowable costs per unit, equipment charges, and charge out rates for the emergency response. Under the contract, the selected specialized contractor agrees to start off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches. of terrorism. For large commercial concerns, the insurance industry offers terrorist insurance that is underwritten by the government. For smaller companies, terrorist insurance is offered for an additional 20 percent surcharge on an existing policy. Other funding is available for local governments if such an event would overwhelm their financial resources, such as applying for grants from the national government or European Union. In regard to its framework of specialized contractors, the service has identified three specialized contractors that have capabilities to address various decontamination scenarios. off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches, and then apply more sophisticated approaches, if necessary, to meet the desired cleanup level. The actual payments for these services were made by the owners of properties, such as a hotel where the perpetrators of the crime had stayed, that were contaminated with polonium. The cleaning up of public premises was a responsibility of the local government. The national government has established ways to help cover the costs of such incidents. This includes insurance coverage for damages resulting from acts of terrorism. capabilities through testing. A specialized contractor is invited to visit the location, receives a briefing on the incident scenario, and is asked to develop a recommended decontamination strategy. The Government Decontamination Service assesses the contractor’s approach and recommendations to identify issues, strengths, and weaknesses. In addition, the service develops improvement plans, backed with exercises, to address identified performance gaps. For example, in December 2007, the government tested and evaluated the capabilities of one of its specialized contractors to analyze and clean up areas contaminated with radioactivity in downtown Birmingham. Established a Government Decontamination Service in 2005. This organization was created out of recognition that it would not be cost-effective for each entity to maintain the level of expertise needed for cleaning up chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear materials, given that such events are rare. The service provides advice and guidance to local governments, maintains and builds a framework of specialized analysis and environmental cleanup contractors, and advises the national government regarding response capabilities. This service implemented its responsibilities by assisting the City of Westminster respond to the analysis and Environmental cleanup needs of the city. We examined the extent to which federal agencies are planning to help cities and states clean up areas contaminated with radiation materials from radiological dispersal device (RDD) and improvised nuclear device (IND) incidents. We interviewed cognizant officials from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Department of Energy (DOE), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), and Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) In addition, we are providing information on actions taken in the United Kingdom to prepare for recovering from RDD and IND incidents. our survey to identify which federal agencies they would turn to for help in the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents. They provided inconsistent responses and frequently listed several federal agencies for the same activity. These responses seem to indicate that there might be some confusion among city and state emergency management officials regarding federal agency responsibilities to provide assistance to them. We recommend that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator to prepare a national disaster recovery strategy. GAO: States would need to rely heavily on federal government to recover from RDD, IND incidents. States indicated that their technical and financial resources would be overwhelmed by a large RDD incident. Most of these officials reported that they believe they could adequately address a smaller R DD incident. GAO provided DHS, DOE, and EPA with a draft of this report for their review and comment.. DHS and FEMA concurred with the recommendations in the report. DOE, through NNSA, states recover fromRDD and IND incidents, we included the United Kingdom in our scope. the need for intelligence information on RDD and IND threats. They generally said that sharing information with law enforcement agencies is necessary for appropriate planning for RDD or IND incidents. Only half of the respondents indicated that they were getting sufficient intelligence information from law enforcement sources. The EPA and FEMA regional office emergency management officials that responded to our survey also offered a number of suggestions on ways to improve federal preparedness to recover from R DD and IND incidents, generally concurring with the suggestions. The survey was conducted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology. rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance, despite the strengthening of some capabilities since the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001. One state was particularly concerned about current federal capabilities to handle multiple and simultaneous RDD incidents across the country. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report also found that cities and states would need to rely heavily on a strong federal response to a radiological incident. This report identified similar limitations inFederal capabilities to rapidly characterize an incident site and contaminated critical. days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost more than $200,000. The estimated total cost of managing this incident, including law enforcement investigation, testing individuals, sampling materials, and cleanup, was $4 million. FEMA has not completed planning to help cities and states recover from RDD or IND incidents as evidenced by not (1) developing a national disaster recovery strategy as required by law and (2) issuing specific guidance to coordinate federal, state, and city planning. initial response to save lives. A faster recovery would help lessen the consequences of RDD and IND incidents. Being fully prepared to recover from such an incident may also serve as a deterrent to those who would do us harm. To date, FEMA has not developed a response plan to help cities and states with the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents, the authors say. The authors say the federal government is not fully prepared for the analysis, cleanup and analysis of contaminated areas. The lack of recovery planning for RDD and IND incidents may be due, in part, to the relatively low priority given to preparing for them by city and state emergency management officials. Most localities would count on the federal government being prepared to carry out analysis and environmental cleanup activities following these incidents. The report claimed that catastrophic effects of RDD or IND incidents could be reduced and the path to recovery shortened with more effective decontamination, mitigation, and rapid recovery operations. The majority of the EPA regional offices indicated that a national disaster recovery strategy was needed to address overlaps and gaps in current government responsibilities. Cities and states lack a framework for developing their own recovery strategies. Few city respondents indicated that their recovery plans included preparations for an RDD incident. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning interactions with the federal government and more exercises to test recovery plans. Respondents from most cities (11 of 13) and their states (7 of 10) said that they planned to conduct RDD and IND recovery exercises in the future. attacks. 13 cities considered to be at high or medium risk to such attacks; their states and all federal FEMA and EPA regional offices. annexes to the National Response Framework, such as its emergency support function annexes and nuclear and radiological incident annexes. In addition, after speaking with emergency management officials in San Francisco and comparable state officials near Sacramento, California, we developed a semistructured telephone survey instrument. We originally selected 13 high- and medium-risk cities and their 11 states to cover the mostly likely target cities for a terrorist attack and to ensure that that information was available to the public in a timely manner. The cities included Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, and St. Louis. While Washington, D.C., is considered a high-risk city, we excluded it from our survey because it is unlike other cities in its reliance on the federal government and agencies that would take over analysis and environmental remediation activities. Emergency management officials representing these cities and their states responded to our survey, except for Washington. expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials who responded to our survey. Respondents representing most of the cities (9 of 13), states (7 of 10), FEMA regional offices (6 of 9), and almost all EPA regional offices expressed concerns about the capabilities of federal agencies. For example, respondents from several cities told us that they were concerned about how rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance, despite the need for rapid response. For more information, visit the EPA website. Denver, and the FEMA regional office in Oakland, to develop questions to survey all 10 EPA and FEMA regional offices. FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule database was used to identify the location and types of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises. We tabulated the yes and no responses to each pertinent question from the city, state, and federal surveys. We conducted a content analysis of the explanatory statements accompanying many of the questions. We found that FEMA region 8 was the only region that did not respond to the survey. cities, like those from their states, want the federal government to consult with them in the initial formulation of a recovery strategy. Respondents representing most cities (10 of 13) and states (7 of 10) also provided specifics on the type of planning guidance necessary. For example, respondents from some of the cities sought better guidance on monitoring radioactivity levels, acceptable cleanup standards, and management of radioactive waste. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning, including integration and clarification of responsibilities among federal, state, and local governments. cities and their states responded to our survey. Atlanta and the states of Georgia and Massachusetts were dropped from the list. Miami and the state of Florida were added to the list because they are in the same federal region. Because we decided to retain Boston despite receiving no response from Massachusetts, we ended up with 10 states. We also visited EPA regional offices in San Francisco and Denver, and the FEMA regional office in Oakland, to develop the list of cities and states that responded to the survey. The Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006 requires FEMA to develop, coordinate, and maintain a national disaster recovery strategy. The federal government has placed a higher priority on developing a strategy to respond to domestic incidents, including RDD and IND incidents. The lack of clearly communicated guidance on federal responsibilities and activities has left emergency management officials in the cities and states confused about which federal agency to turn to for assistance, according to a study by the Center for American Progress. The study also found that FEMA has not issued specific guidance to coordinate federal, state, and city recovery planning. FEMA recognizes its responsibility to prepare a national disaster recovery strategy. FEMA plans to seek out opinions of nonfederal stakeholders in developing this strategy. Once completed, the recovery strategy would provide guidance to federal, state, and local agencies in revising their operational plans for recovery activities, including recovery from natural disasters. The previous administration had drafted a “white paper’ addressing this strategy, but the new administration has decided to rethink the entire approach, a FEMA official says. The new administration could not provide a time frame for its completion. and demonstrates the need for development and implementation of a national disaster recovery strategy. EPA indicated that as no single federal department or agency has the sole requisite technical capacity and capabilities to respond to the scope of RDD or IND incidents. FEMA has not issued specific guidance. Nevertheless, EPA stated that our survey results underscore the importance having clear communication and notification among federal agencies. If not addressed, could hamper recovery efforts, if not addressed it could hampering recovery efforts. The draft report is available on the EPA's website. Currently, the limited federal planning guidance related to the recovery from RDD and IND incidents can be found in a number of documents. There are several annexes to the National Response Framework that address, in part, federal agency responsibilities and assets to help state and local governments recover from these incidents. For example, a December 2004 emergency support function annex covering long-term community recovery and mitigation, led by FEMA, provides a framework for federal support to localities to enable community recovery from the long- term consequences of events of national significance. The June 2008 nuclear and radiological incident annex describes federal responsibilities and provides some operational guidance. DHS is identified as the technical lead for recovery activities, but may request support from other federal agencies. According to this annex, the federal government, may request help from EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, that have cleanup and recovery experience and capabilities. The federal government has a significant role in leading cleanup efforts after RDD or IND incidents, in coordination with affected state and local governments. FEMA has not issued specific guidance describing how federal capabilities would be integrated into and support state and local plans for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior FEMA official, the agency has delayed issuing this guidance pending the reevaluation of its planning approach by the new administration. FEMA is developing regional support plans, including for RDD and IND incidents, through its regional offices. The agency is already aware that its planning system does not fully recognize the involvement of state andLocal governments. together on this guidance in an attempt to clarify the processes for providing federal cleanup assistance following such an incident. DHS’s guidance was intended to cover the existing operational guidelines for implementing the protective action guides and other response actions, and to encourage their use in developing specific response protocols. In responding to a draft of this report, EPA informed us that DOE had convened an interagency workgroup to address gaps in DHS‘s guidance and had issued a preliminary report, for comment by September 30, 2009. This guidance describes the generic framework for multiagency response and recovery for all levels of government. The guidance emphasizes that recovery should be an integral part of response from the very beginning. No single approach could meet the needs of every affected area, so this guidance is not prescriptive or an operational manual. In 2005, the United Kingdom established a special Government Decontamination Service to address issues. The U.K. took the following actions: Enacted civil protection legislation in 2004;. Established a Government Deconsolidation Service in 2005. The Civil Contingencies Act established a statutory framework of roles and responsibilities for local responders to address the effects of the most serious emergencies facing the country. Guidance issued pursuant to this legislation established an integrated emergency management system. The November 2005 guidance addressing emergency response and recovery covers the principles, practical considerations, operational doctrine, and examples of good practice for these activities. This guidance describes the generic framework for multiagency response. The guidance also describes the principles and practical considerations for each of the six activities. Community risk registers address specific risks identified by representatives from local emergency services and public, private, and voluntary organizations. One of the risk categories is an actual terrorist attack using an explosive device. The national government does not expect communities to directly track these risks, but rather to improve their own preparedness based on a community risk register. Local resilience forums are required to develop and maintain these registers that include a description of potential outcomes, likelihoods, impacts, and ratings for various risk categories and subcategories of events. The United Kingdom has developed a comprehensive program to ensure an effective response to a range of disruptive emergencies. The country uses the term “resilience’ as the ability of organizations to withstand or recover easily and quickly from hardships. Community risk registers have been published by local emergency management planners since passage of the Emergency Act of 2004. The UK has also developed a national disaster response plan. The plan is designed to ensure that the country can respond to major disasters in a timely manner. The U.K. has also created a national emergency response plan for major disasters, such as major flooding. incidents following passage of this act made it clear to the national government that these responders needed more comprehensive guidance than that contained in the 2005 guidance. One such event was the July 2005 subway bombing in London by a terrorist group that killed 52 people. This incident, in conjunction with other events in 2005, such as the Buncefield Fire and severe flooding, prompted the government in 2006 to form a National Recovery Working Group to address the need for additional recovery guidance for multiple risk scenarios. This working group was comprised of a In 2008, the government published a national risk register. This register provides information on the risks facing the country, including malicious attacks such as with an RDD. This threat information was previously held confidential by the government. The government reported that the release of this information is intended to encourage public debate on security and help organizations, individuals, families, and communities that want to prepare for these emergencies. The register is designed to complement community risk registers that have been published by local emergency planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. The community risk registers are based on local judgments of risks, as well as from information contained in the national risk assessment. The government reports that while there have been very few examples of attacks such as the 1995 release of Sarin gas in a Tokyo subway, it still recognizes the need to prepare and plan for them. In March 2009, the Nuclear Emergency Planning Liaison group published a UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template. This document provides generic guidance for a recovery strategy and structures needed to address a radiological release from a civil or defense nuclear reactor. a framework for addressing the release of radiological materials that prompted planning for the recovery from these events. This framework was primarily established through the 2001 Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations and the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act. According to a senior official from the United Kingdom’s Health Protection Agency, the radiation regulations were developed in response to a European Union directive following the 1986 Chernobyl, Ukraine, nuclear power plant accident. These regulations require preparation of on- and off-site emergency management plans for release of radioactive materials. low-level radioactive waste to be disposed of in less expensive and more numerous solid and hazardous waste landfill sites without specific regulatory approval or exemption. The United Kingdom and the United States have agreed to increase the exchange of information and personnel regarding the research, development, testing, evaluation, and development of technical standards and operations to address chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear incidents. While passage of the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act was an important legislative step to further emergency preparedness, the reaction of local responders to several domestic incidents following passage of this act made it clear to the U.S. establishing a government decontamination service. creating online national recovery guidance. updating a recovery handbook for radiation incidents. conducting a full-scale RDD recovery exercise. establishing a community and national risk register system. preparing specific nuclear recovery planning guidance. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template considers recovery to be more than simply the replacement of what has been destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. This guidance is based on examples from existing local government recovery plans and experiences. The guidance and associated monitoring templates would have potential application for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. characteristics of an RDD incident, including testing hundreds of people who may have been exposed to radiation. Officials told us that the attention to recovery in their country is rooted in decades of experience with the conflict in Northern Ireland. We found that actions the United Kingdom reported taking to prepare for recovery from RDD and IND incidents are similar to many of the suggestions for improvement in federal preparedness that we obtained through our survey of city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials in the United States. Westminster respond to the analysis and environmental cleanup needs following the November 2006 polonium poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko. Developed online national recovery guidance in 2007. This guidance reinforces and updates the early emergency response and recovery guidance by establishing, among other things, a recovery planning process during the response phase. The guidance—reviewed every 3 months and updated as necessary—emphasizes the need for training recovery personnel on essential roles, responsibilities, and procedures to test competencies, as well as testing competencies. the United Kingdom in our scope. This country has actual experience with recovery from a radiological incident in an urban area. We interviewed selected central and regional government officials responsible for response and recovery planning and preparation. We visited a decontamination contractor that performed environmental remediation activities in the aftermath of the 2006 radioactive poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko in London. We also reviewed documents provided by these officials and from other sources to obtain a better understanding of this issue. The U.S. is one of the leaders in recovery planning. statutory powers itself, nor does it directly provide analysis and environmental remediation services. Instead, it provides advice and guidance to local governments, maintains and builds a framework of specialized contractors to conduct these activities. In November 2006, the Government Decontamination Service was requested to respond to an incident involving the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko with a milligram of polonium-210. This service was asked to assist the City of Westminster, within greater London, given the international nature of the event. a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. The guidance requires that all high-risk cities in the United Kingdom prepare recovery plans. Recovering from RDD or IND incidents would likely be difficult and lengthy. Completing the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials would be among the first steps in the recovery process after the initial response to save lives. The 2006 polonium incident in London showed the value of recovery planning, according to United Kingdom officials. They found that implementing cleanup plans in the poloniam poisoning incident and testing plans in a November 2008 recovery exercise have helped the UK better prepare for larger RDD and IND incidents. The aftermath of the 2006 polonium poisoning incident in London had many of the characteristics of an RDD incident, including testing hundreds of people. FEMA regional office respondents indicated that it would be beneficial to synchronize existing guidance from multiple and disparate sources to ensure that they are complementary and not competing. About half of the EPA regionalOffice respondents expressed the need for guidance on the application of existing approaches for RDD or IND incidents. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Current handbooks, updated from the 2008 version, include management options for application in the prerelease, emergency and longer-term phases of an incident. Sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents, radiological dispersion devices, and satellite accidents. Conducted a full-scale RDD recovery exercise in 2008. This exercise, involving several hundred participants, provided a unique developed for the United Kingdom. Member countries of the European Union are currently customizing their handbooks for use at national, regional, and local levels. roles, responsibilities, and procedures to test competencies, as well as to design and conduct recovery exercises. Updated the recovery handbooks for radiation incidents in 2008 and 2009. The handbooks were first published in 2005 in response to the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The current handbooks include management options for application in the prerelease, emergency and longer-term phases of an incident. Sources of contamination considered in the handbook include food production systems, drinking water, and inhabited areas. industry sectors. The handbooks were developed in response to the need for further recovery guidance following the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The development of these handbooks was sponsored by six government departments and agencies representing national and local governments. According to a senior official from the Health Protection Agency, the European Union also supported the development of a series of generic recovery handbooks for use by other countries based on the structure, format, and content of the handbook developed for the United Kingdom. This official told us that The National Recovery Working Group found that many organizations had already conducted small-scale recovery exercises and had applied lessons learned from them. One of the lessons identified was the need to exercise the shift from the response phase to the recovery phase. The 2009 version of the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiological Incidents is considered relevant to radiological releases—accidental and intentional—from the nuclear and nonnuclear industry sectors. The handbooks, first published in 2005 by the UK, were updated in 2009. of comprehensive, state-of-the-art datasheets for around 100 management options. The handbooks can be applied as part of the decision-aiding process to develop a recovery strategy following an incident. In November 2008, Exercise Green Star tested government capabilities to recover from a terrorist attack based on the handbooks. The UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiation Incidents: 2009 can be downloaded for free from the UK Government's official website at: http://www.gov.uk/recoveryhandbooks. exercise, participants looked at immediate cleanup issues, including resource priorities and management responsibilities. On day two, participants considered the longer-term issues of environmental contamination, monitoring strategies, and financial considerations. The use of a real radioactive isotope within the exercise scenario ensured that participants were able to investigate their own and wider mechanisms for obtaining scientific advice. A scientific advisory group was put in place to expedite the recovery process by helping to manage scientific input into the decision-making process. An after-action report was prepared following this exercise to capture lessons learned. discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the leadership of FRMAC from the initial analysis of the contaminated area to the later cleanup phase. For example, there are unresolved operational issues regarding the level and quality of the monitoring data. According to EPA officials, while this transitional issue has been discussed in exercises dating back to the development of the Federal Radiological Emergency Response Plan in 1984, it has only recently be discussed in RDD or IND response exercises. Another unresolved issue is the level of monitoring data necessary for EPA to accept the leadership from DOE. concurred with the recommendations in the report. DOE, through NNSA, generally agreed with our report findings and provided technical comments. EPA did not agree or disagree with the report findings, but offered technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the appropriate congressional committees as well as to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Energy. the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Energy; the Administrators of NNSA and EPA; and other interested parties. The report will also be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or aloisee@GAo. Department of Energy. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. from other sources to obtain a better understanding of this system and how it might apply to the United States. Two officials from the United Kingdom who we interviewed during our site visit reviewed a draft of the information contained in appendix III for content and accuracy. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 to January 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King, Thomas Laetz, Jay Smale, Vasiliki Theodoropoulos, and Keo Vongvanith are on the board of directors. The board is made up of seven members: the directors, the executive directors, and the chief operating officers. For more information on the Board of Directors, visit the board's website at: http://www.cnn.com/cnn/2013/01/29/politics/top-stories/topstories/stories/kennel-cnn-kenneline-kenny-lennon.html#storylink=cpy. scheduling system for federal, state, and local exercises. 94 RDD or IND response exercises planned and carried out by these authorities from May 2003 through September 2009. FEMA’s National Exercise Division told us that only three of them actually included a recovery component that exercised activities associated with environmental cleanup. Many response and a few recovery exercises were conducted over the last 6 years that do not appear in FEMA's National Exercise Schedule. According to FEMA officials, a recovery discussion following an RDD and IND response exercise has typically not occurred. Federal agencies and local jurisdictions have used existing federal guidance as a basis for planning RDD and IND response exercises. According to DHS guidance, preparedness is the foundation of a successful national incident management system. The cycle of preparedness for prevention, protection, response, and recovery missions ends with adequate exercising, evaluation, and improvement, the authors say. Their search of FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule—a scheduling system for federal, state, and local exercises—revealed 94 RDD exercises. an RDD or IND response exercise has typically not occurred because of the time needed to fully address the response objectives of the exercise. The most recent RDD response exercise, based in Albany, New York, set aside 2 days (June 16-17, 2009) for federal, state, and local agencies to discuss operational recovery issues. One unresolved operational recovery issue discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises. Because we determined in our April 2009 report (GAO-09-369) that this database is unreliable, we asked each city, state and federal regional office in our survey to list RDD, IND, and recovery exercise that had taken place in their jurisdiction. intergovernmental coordination, such as setting environmental cleanup priorities and levels, as well as managing radioactive waste staging and disposal. It is uncertain whether federal capability is sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD or IND incidents. Government capabilities to recover from a terrorist attack based on RDD scenarios are uncertain. This was the first time that complex recovery issues had been considered in a national- level exercise. In this exercise, several hundred participants were wholly focused on recovery issues. The National Exercise Schedule has listed two planned IND response exercises in 2010 that are to have some recovery components. Table 1 provides a brief summary of four RDD exercises, since May 2003, which contained recovery objectives including a planned exercise for April 2010. The United Kingdom provides an example of another country’s efforts to prepare to recover from a terrorist attack using chemical, biological, radioactive, or nuclear materials. This country's attention to recovery needs is reflected in promulgating emergency response and recovery legislation, establishing a government decontamination service, and creating online national recovery guidance. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. This working group was comprised of a wide range of government departments and agencies, as well as other stakeholders who had been involved in the recovery phase following these events. In 2007, the working group produced a National Recovery Guidance document. This online guidance covers 14 generic issues, such as recovery structures and processes, training and exercises, and a lessons learned process, which are reviewed every 3 months and updated as necessary. This guidance establishes a planning process for involving recovery stakeholders during the response phase to ensure that the potential impact of early advice and actions are explored and understood. Several hundred participants took part in the exercise. The lessons learned from this exercise were incorporated into the United Kingdom’s recovery strategy. One key lesson is the benefit of exercising the handover of government leadership during the response phase to leadership of the recovery phase. Established a recovery strategy for the UK in 2008. 2008. The U.K. launched a recovery plan for the country following the earthquake and tsunami of September 11, 2011. The United Kingdom has a long history of dealing with natural disasters. nuclear weapons and special nuclear materials in transit. It is also considered applicable to recovery from RDD and IND incidents. Among other things, it provides guidance on the formation of a Recovery Advisory Group and Science and Technology Advisory Cell early in the response phase. The Advisory Group would be charged with identifying immediate and high-level strategic recovery objectives. This advisory group would transition into a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. It would include experts on health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring response and recovery activities. destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. It is a complex social and developmental process rather than just a remediation process. The manner in which recovery processes are undertaken is thus critical to their success and, therefore, best achieved when the affected community is able to exercise a high degree of self-determination. The Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group would be supported by specific subgroups. These subgroups would include ones for finance and legal, communications, business and economic recovery, health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring. cleanup of the physical infrastructure and natural environment. The guidance suggests that this subgroup consider forming task groups to, among other things, address waste management and disposal. The templates would be referred to throughout the recovery to ensure that the work of the Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group is focused and on track. In addition to the person named above, individuals who made important contributions to this report were Dr. Timothy Persons (Chief Scientist), Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King,

ROUGE-1: 77.94, ROUGE-2: 71.52, ROUGE-L: 25.43
BERTScore: 55.00

==============================================
==================== [33/100] ====================
Summary:
 WHD considered these rates to be sufficiently high, particularly compared to other industries, it decided not to set goals for these industries. WHD made this decision despite the conclusions reached in its analysis of the results of the survey. The analysis stated that, while child labor compliance rates were relatively higher in these three industries. Still lower than the overall compliance rates, the rates had improved from 0 percent previously to 72 percent of supermarkets with prior violations, 52 percent of full-service restaurants, and72 percent of fast food restaurants. received from a survey of employers. WHD conducted investigations of statistically valid samples of supermarkets, full-service restaurants, and fast food restaurants that employ children. The overall compliance rates for these industries were 82 percent, 78 percent, and 70 percent, respectively. But WHD chose not to set specific goals for improving compliance in the grocery and restaurant industries in its fiscal year 2001 and 2002 performance plans. It made this decision even though the rate of non-compliance for fast food restaurant was 30 percent. child labor compliance rates were relatively higher in these three industries than overall FLSA compliance rates. At least 52,000 and as many as 220,000 children illegally employed in the three industries. We do not believe that the most important indicator of compliance is the percentage of children who are employed illegally. A few companies that employ large numbers of children can have a disproportionate effect on the numbers, the authors say. The authors say it would be a “serious mistake’ to compare the findings of the survey with compliance rates found in its surveys of other industries. regional and district offices on how to use their resources most effectively or help them consistently apply the child labor provisions of FLSA. Since 1990, Labor has developed better goals for increasing employer compliance. Over the decade, its goals for improving compliance have moved from general statements to more specific goals that focus on improving compliance rates in certain low-wage industries such as agriculture and nursing homes and residential care facilities. The goal is to improve rates established through investigations of low- wage businesses such as nursing homes. identify specific, measurable goals for the industries in which children are most likely to work. Labor does not provide sufficient guidance and training to its regional and district offices on how to use their resources. Labor also disagreed with the conclusions supporting our recommendation to develop methods of measuring the success of its child labor compliance efforts. In this regard, Labor noted that it had recently decided to repeat its compliance survey of grocery stores, full-service restaurants, and fast food restaurants in fiscal year 2004. We believe that this approach reduces attention to some of the industries that pose significant risks to children. The nation acknowledges that children can derive many benefits from working, such as independence, confidence, and responsibility. However, work may also have negative consequences for children’s physical, emotional, and educational development. In recognition of this, Labor devotes a portion of its budget to child labor investigations. The nation also recognizes the importance of protecting the environment in which children are raised and raised in the U.S., and the role that children play in the community. The U.N. has a goal of reducing child labor by 20% by the end of the year. for all children age 18 and under who are still in school, require Labor and the Census Bureau to compile data on child labor from the states, including data on injuries and illnesses, and add additional restrictions. (See app. II for a list of the legislative proposals introduced in the 107th Congress that would strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA.) Labor’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) is responsible for enforcing the Child Labor Act. The Secretary of Labor should provide better guidance to WHD’S regional and district offices on how to improve. WHD’s child labor compliance efforts comprise several strategies. These include enforcement, partnerships, education and outreach, and public awareness. Since Operation Child Watch, most of Labor's national child labor campaigns have focused on education. WHD conducted its “Work Safe This Summer’ initiative designed to reach children beginning summer jobs in 1996-2001. efforts to educate young workers, parents and employers about workplace hazards, proper hours of work and education. Labor's newest child labor initiative, “YouthRules!” announced by the Secretary in May 2002, is aimed at “educating young workers and parents.” WHD’s education and outreach activities are specifically targeted to groups that can have an impact on youth employment. Education and outreach include publishing and distributing materials such as bookmarks with information on the rules governing the employment of children under age 18. WHD's enforcement actions include on-site investigations of employers and other activities designed to bring employers into compliance with the law. When WHD finds violations of the child labor laws, WHD takes legal action against the offending employers. The agency also maintains a Web site with info on the child labour provisions of FLSA and state child labor law. WHD’s fiscal year 2002 performance plan established a goal of 75 percent compliance with the minimum wage, overtime, and child labor provisions of FLSA. In September 2002, Labor reported that WHD had developed specific, measurable goals in its draft fiscal year 2003 annual performance plan. The draft plan includes goals for grocery stores, fast food restaurants, and full-service restaurants. WHD did not, however, establish goals for industries in work and in which they are most likely to be injured or killed. the injuries from 1992 to 2000 required children to miss 5 or fewer days of work, while 20 percent of the injuries required them to miss more than 10 days. Labor has devoted substantial resources to ensuring compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA over the past decade. WHD is correct in its statement that the number of investigator hours has increased. The report was not intended to describe all of the agency’s child labor enforcement efforts, but rather, as requested, to determine how well Labor enforces these provisions and to make recommendations for improvement. of WHD’s commitment to child labor compliance, nor are they evidence of the success of its efforts to ensure compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. It is unclear whether the increase in the number of violations found by WHD in fiscal year 2002 compared to fiscal year 2001 indicates a growing problem with child labor. We believe that our report provides a comprehensive and balanced picture of the effectiveness of Labor's efforts. Neither of these plans contained specific, measurable goals for the industries in which most violations were found. Prior to fiscal year 2003, WHD’s annual performance plans did not contain specific, measurable goals for improving compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. The fact that WHD conducts investigations in these industries does not negate the need for WHD to set goals for increasing compliance for these industries. The resource allocations indicated in Labor's charts may reflect WHD's responses to complaints as much as the results of the investigations. The report has been revised to reflect the goals contained in WHDs draft performance plan for fiscalyear 2003. of FLSA is dependent, in part, upon the establishment of a sound performance management system. WHD has taken some steps towards developing such a system, as reflected in the program goals it has established and refined in recent years. However, WHD continues to lack goals for industries that have high rates of injuries and fatalities. The system does not allow managers to fully evaluate the effectiveness of their child labor compliance efforts and ensure that their limited resources are used in the most effective manner, the agency says. waive penalties for child labor violations it found. Average percentage of penalties collected varied significantly among the district offices we visited. We did not recognize WHD’s efforts to publish a final rule on the 1999 regulatory proposal to update some of the hazardous occupations orders. WHD does provide adequate training to all of its regional and district offices on statement is misleading, the report says. The maximum penalty for a child labor violation was raised from $10,000 to $11,000 in 2002. compliance with the law. When WHD finds violations of the child labor provisions of FLSA during its investigations, it may assess penalties. The penalties range from $275 for a record-keeping violation to $11,000 for a violation involving a serious injury or death. Information on WHD’s investigations, violations, and penalties assessed is tracked in its investigations database–the Wage and Hour Investigative database. It is available on the WHD website at www.whd.org. the source of investigations completed in fiscal years 2000 and 2001, was the first time that WHD had run such reports. The information on fatalities and serious injuries to children tracked by WHD’s national office and provided to us in May 2002 contained data on only 7 fatalities and 36 injuries reviewed in fiscal year 2001. We believe the anecdotal information on injuries and fatalities does not provide enough information to be useful in making WHD's resource allocation decisions. 28. We found no evidence of a pattern of abuse or neglect. and 32 injuries reviewed in fiscal year 2002. We agree with Labor’s statement that our recommendation to consider enhancing the data collected on children who work by expanding CPS to include 14-year-olds or beginning additional cohorts of NLSY cannot be implemented without additional study and resources. We recommended that the Secretary “consider” these actions instead of recommending that they be taken. We clarified our conclusions to acknowledge that collecting these data may require additional resources. 29. We continue to believe that WHD's regional and district offices cannot target their resources in the most effective manner without.  WHD does not routinely obtain information from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work. WHD also does not use information from its investigations database or reports on local child labor initiatives to assess the results of the regional and district offices’ child labor compliance efforts. For example, we estimated that a significant proportion of illegally employed children worked in construction and manufacturing. We also found that children were more likely to be injured or killed while working in several industries in which WHD conducts few child labor investigations. WHD’s responses to complaints as much as the results of its efforts to target child labor violations in these industries. We disagree that our analysis of fatality rates is a “flawed interpretation of the BLS and NIOSH data” and that is more appropriate to use the actual numbers of children employed, injured, and killed to determine risk. While the number of children working in this industry may be small, we believe the injury rates to be sufficiently high to warrant further WHD attention. on the Youth Labor Force and WHD’s May 2000 materials prepared for its “Spring Into Safety” child labor campaign. WHD stated that his 1997 study provided “the best currently available estimate of the number of children employed in violation of Federal or State child labor laws” 2. Labor cites the drop in workplace injuries indicated by the BLS data from the Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses as evidence that ‘the workplace is becoming safer for children’ correct in its statement that the number of investigator hours devoted to child labor enforcement in fiscal year 2001, 74,000 hours, represents the largest investment of investigator time by WHD in the last 5 years. However, our report, which focuses on WHD’s efforts since 1990, shows that this is lower than the resources dedicated to childLabor enforcement in the first half of the decade. For example, in fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992, WHD investigators devoted 143,000, 83,000 and 105,000. hours, respectively, to child Labor Enforcement. We did not provide information on the number. of hours spent on activities other than investigations. WHD measured success of Operation Child Watch in the early 1990s by citing large number of violations and penalties produced. WHD headquarters officials told us they look at trends in the number of child labor violations found each year. It is not clear, however, what factors led to the decrease in theNumber of violations. It could have resulted from an increased rate of compliance among employers or a decrease in child labor investigations conducted by WHD. Officials say they do not know how to develop methods of measuring the success of their education. Labor recently established specific goals for fiscal year 2003 for the industries in which children are most likely to work. WHD’s national goals in the early part of the decade focused on increasing the number of its child labor enforcement activities. In fiscal year 2000, WHD conducted employ (“self-initiated” investigations). WHD officials told us that although they review every complaint they receive about a possible child labor violation, they do not receive many complaints about child labor.  WHD would have missed a large proportion of the cases with child labor violations if some district offices had not conducted self- initiated child labor investigations. WHD headquarters officials also do not use data from its investigations database to ensure that district offices nationwide are providing an adequate level of protection to all children who work, the authors say. The number of investigations conducted by each district office and by WHD’s five regions varied widely, they say. They say WHD officials were not able to explain these regional and district variances. reports we reviewed for fiscal years 1999 through 2002 showed that, in some years, many districts had no child labor initiatives. For example, in fiscal year 2000, almost all of the district offices in the northeast region had at least one child labor initiative. Two regions had regionwide initiatives that required all of their district offices to conduct child labor investigations. Some districts in the southwest region, however, had no local child labor Initiatives planned for fiscal year 1999-2002. The number of child labor Initiative in each region varied significantly from one region to another. District office practices for penalty assessment and collection vary significantly. District officials sometimes reduced the penalties for child labor violations or did not assess any penalties. In other, similar cases, they assessed penalties. For example, one district office we visited generally did not waive penalties forChild labor violations it found, but another did. For more information, visit childlaborpenalties.org or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. labor initiatives planned for fiscal years 1999 through 2002, although our estimates of illegally employed children showed greater numbers of children in the South to be illegally employed than in the Northeast. WHD leaves many of the decisions about how to deploy enforcement resources to its regional and district offices. While these estimates do not prove that illegal child labor was a problem in the area of the state covered by that district office, it is an indication that potential violations exist undetected. It is not clear that establishing a goal for improving compliance in the transportation and public utilities industry would be unrealistic. national office also does not provide regional or district offices with data from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work, legally or illegally. Officials in one district office told us that, because of their past enforcement efforts, illegal child labor was not a problem in their area. However, our analysis showed that a large percentage of children working in this state worked in those industries where children were most likely to be injured, the report found. The report was published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention.  WHD does not use all of the data available to plan its future child labor compliance efforts or assess their success. The initiative includes partnerships that WHD has formed with all levels of government as well as businesses, unions, and advocacy groups. WHD officials told us that they do not use data from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work because the information is not easily accessible. The data do not provide information at the local level that could be used to help plan local compliance efforts.  WHD also does not utilize information from its investigations database to determine what types of strategies are most successful in detecting child labor violations. WHD conducts child labor investigations either as a result of a receiving a complaint about a possible child labor violation or from a decision by a WHD office to conduct investigations of employers that focus specifically on children they employ. The WHD is not able to target its local efforts most effectively or hold local offices accountable at the national level for enforcing the child labor provisions of FLSA. child labor compliance efforts. We disagree with Labor’s statement that WHD routinely uses BLS and NIOSH data to plan the allocation of its child labor resources. Labor agreed with the remainder of our recommendations or agreed to take action on them. For example, it agreed to obtain and review data from the WHISARD database to better hold local offices accountable, explore the possibilities of collecting additional data the agency's comments on our report, Labor cites the increase from fiscal years 2000 to 2001 in the number of child labor violations. WHD’s national office develops the goals and performance measures for Labor's child labor compliance efforts. Much of the responsibility for planning and executing these efforts is left to WHD's five regional offices and the 50 district offices. WHD headquarters officials do not use quarterly reports prepared by these offices on their local initiatives to ensure that, nationwide, local child labor initiatives provide adequate protection for all children who work, the report says. The reports we reviewed for fiscal years 1999 through 2002 showed that, in recent years, every district office has had some local child labour initiatives. WHD’s national office does not provide regional and district offices with adequate guidance on how to target their child labor compliance efforts. WHD lacks a sound basis for determining, among other things, the extent to which it should devote resources to child labor investigations. Labor disagreed with our recommendation to establish specific, measurable goals for industries in which most children work and in which they are most likely to be injured. provide training to all WHD staff onHow to obtain information from the investigations database. training to all of its regional and district offices on how to obtain reports from the investigations database to use in targeting their child labor compliance efforts. Two of the five regional child labor coordinators and officials at two of the district offices we visited indicated that they had not been trained. Officials at the district office we visited told us they had staff members with the skills needed to obtain the reports from WHD’s database that enabled them to identify where they had found child labor violations in the past. local offices accountable, explore the possibilities of collecting additional data through CPS or NLSY, and provide better guidance to WHD’s regional and district offices concerning penalty assessment. Labor also provided technical comments and clarifications, which we incorporated in the report as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Labor, the Wage and Hour Administrator, the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and other interested parties. Copies will be made available to others upon request. told us they could tell their activities generate attention if WHD receives a lot of media inquires and that they count the number of times individuals access information from WHD’s Web site. However, WHD does not link its education and outreach activities with changes in employer behavior. We recognize the inherent difficulties in assessing the impact on employer behavior of WHD's education and Outreach activities. We found that some district offices were not aware of the impact of their outreach activities on compliance. limited resources. Some district offices were trying to develop such methods. Officials at one district office told us they felt it was important to obtain at least an indication of success by conducting investigations of employers after their education and outreach activities. They also said they were working with researchers at the University of Tennessee to develop methods of measuring the success of all of their child labor compliance activities. Despite having difficulty in developing methods, WHD headquarters officials told us that they were still committed to the cause of child labor. work. WHD has not developed adequate methods of measuring the success of all of its child labor compliance efforts. The Secretary of Labor should establish additional specific, measurable goals for WHD’s child labor Compliance efforts for industries in which children are most likely to be injured or killed, the authors say. They also say WHD should use data from BLS and NIOSH on the industries, occupations, and locations in which. children work and sustain work-related injuries and use them to target WHD's child labor enforcement efforts. restaurants, and fast food restaurants in fiscal year 2004. Labor has not conducted child labor compliance surveys of other industries. Some of the most serious child labor violations WHD found occurred in sawmills and companies that produce wood pallets. WHD’s opinion that targeting additional resources on this industry would not be a wise resource investment and would have no impact on occupational injuries and fatalities for children working in this industry does not factor in these high injury and fatality rates. 25. Labor took issue with our recommendation to routinely obtain data from BLS and NIOSH. The two primary sources of nationwide data on work-related injuries, one collected by BLS from employer records and the other collected by NIOSH from emergency room records, differ substantially in their estimates of the number of working children injured each year. For 1999, BLS reported that almost 13,000 children were injured on the job, while NIOSH estimated that over 80,000 kids were injured that year. BLS data for 1992 to 2000 showed that sprains, strains, and tears were the most common injuries. NIOSH data indicated that lacerations were theMost common injury. BLS reports all work-related fatalities, including those for children, in its Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries published each year. BLS identifies these fatalities through death certificates and reports from state workers’ compensation agencies, medical examiners, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and the news media. NIOSH collects data work for agricultural employers with fewer than 11 employees; and household workers.NIOSH data also underreport injuries because children who are injured may not inform hospital staff that their injuries are work- related. extent of injuries to children who work. BLS captures only injuries serious enough to require at least one missed day of work; therefore, data on many injuries are not captured. Many children who are injured may not miss a full day ofWork because they were not scheduled to work after being injured. In addition, BLS does not collect data on children who were self-employed; those who work in federal, state, or local government; or those who worked for agricultural employers with fewer than 11 employees. Officials were not able to explain why the trends indicated by the two sources differed so greatly. For example, certain types of injuries such as lacerations may be treated in emergency rooms but not necessitate one or more days away from work. Other injuries that may result in missed work days such as sprains and strains may be more commonly treated in physicians’ offices or outpatient clinics than inEmergency rooms, officials said. The BLS data from employer records on workers’ injuries was released on Thursday. important indicators that WHD should use in allocating its resources. For the transportation and public utilities industry, Labor mentions only fatality rates and the number of fatalities. We found that the injury rate was high compared to other industries. Therefore, we believe that it is important for WHD to focus some of its resources on the transportation industry. 18. The number of hours worked is preferable because different workers spend variable hours on the job in a given time period (e.g. year), and therefore have different lengths of exposure to hazards. from 108 monthly surveys to obtain the total number of hours worked by 15- to 17-year-olds between 1992 and 2000. We excluded children who worked for the government or were self-employed because they are excluded from the data for nonfatal injuries. We totaled the hours worked each week by all children for each year. We combined industries so that they would reflect the same industry groupings. We calculated industry rates by dividing the total. number of injuries to children under 18 by the total hours worked in each industry. We used the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries and Survey of Occupational injuries and Illnesses. Because the number of fatalities in each year was relatively low, we aggregated the data over the decade to provide statistically reliable information. We calculated fatality and injury rates by using the total number of hours children worked as indicated in CPS. We did not aggregate the data on nonfatal injuries over the. decade because theNumber of injuries reported was large. We used data from 108 monthly surveys to obtain the total. number of children who work. From 1992 to 2000, the number of fatalities and the fatality rates for working children remained fairly constant. Each year, according to data collected by BLS on work-related fatal injuries,between 62 and 73 children died from injuries sustained while working. The fatality rate for children aged 15 to 17 was fairly constant, ranging from approximately 0.006 deaths per 100,000 hours worked in 1998 to about 0.010 deaths per100,000hours worked in 1992. We coded children born in 1983 and 1984 as being 13 years of age and 12 years of Age. During the decade, over 40 percent of the children killed as a result of work-related injuries worked in agriculture. Retail trade and construction accounted for 20 percent and 14 percent of all fatalities, respectively. Children who worked for small employers—those with 10 employees or less—accounted for nearly two-thirds of the fatalities. Data on fatality rates, however, show that the number of hours children work in each industry needs to be considered as well as the number Of deaths in retail trade, the fatality rate was 0.003 per 100,000 hours worked. worked, much lower than the rate in construction, 0.050, in which 14 percent of the fatalities occurred. 44 percent of all children killed as a result of a work- related injury died as a. result of transportation-related accidents, including highway collisions and nonhighway incidents, such as a fall from a moving vehicle. Other common events included being from 1992 to 2000, although transportation- related fatalities appeared to increase. In both 1992 and 2000, 60 percent of. children who died as the result of work-related injuries were 16 and 17 years old. 75 percent of children killed for whom race was available were white. Demographic data for children who died as a result of a work-related injury show that most of the children killed were boys 16 years of age or older. Girls were as likely as boys to work from 1992 to 2000, but boys were almost eight times more likely to die. Hispanic children had a fatality rate that was twice as high as the rate for white children. Fatality data also show that certain industries and types of businesses pose a risk to children.1992. About 60 percent of children killed (about 60 percent) were aged 16 and 17, but a substantial number were 13 years old or younger. Most children (84 percent) were injured while working in the two industries in which children are most likely to work. In 2000, children who worked in eating and drinking places, food stores, general merchandise stores, and health services had the largest numbers of injuries. The injury rates per hours worked were lower for the retail trade and services industries than the rates for children who work in wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing. However, as with fatalities, the likelihood of injury needs to be considered in addition to the actual number of injuries, the authors say. in wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing had higher rates of injury than those working in retail trade or services. Injuries are caused by a variety of factors, but most frequently from coming into contact with an object or equipment. Other common accidents were overexertion, falls, and contact with hot objects. The causes of work-related nonfatal injuries were fairly constant over this period. In 1998 a 17-year-old worker fractured his hand when a piece of metal slipped off a power-driven machine he was operating. fall from a moving vehicle. Other common events included being caught or compressed by equipment or being struck by a falling or flying object. For example, in 2000, a 16-year-old boy who worked in a supermarket was crushed to death by a cardboard box compactor. Another 16- year-old was crushed when the forklift he was operating flipped over and landed on his chest. Overall, the characteristics of children who died as a result of work- related injuries remained relatively constant from 1992 to 2000. in agriculture, possibly because of the looser age restrictions that provide younger children with opportunities for employment in agriculture. In 2001, 15 percent of black children and 17 percent of Hispanic children worked, compared to about 30 percent of white children. Despite the fact that children from lower income families are less likely to work, when they do work, they tend to work more hours. Children in families with annual incomes below $25,000 worked an average of 21 hours a week in 2001, 5 more hours than children whose families had annual incomes of $75,000 or more. children were less likely than children of other races to work in prohibited occupations. There was no correlation, however, between family income and children who worked in hazardous occupations. Children from families with lower annual incomes were not more or less likely to work than other children. Children who were not citizens were more likely than those who were citizens to be in a prohibited occupation. Although children from families of lower incomes were more Likely to work more hours than allowed, they were not necessarily more likely to be involved in hazardous work. 3.7 million children between the ages of 15 and 17 worked, about 30 percent of all children in this age range. The percentage of children who worked in summer months fluctuated over the decade from a high of 36 percent in 1990 to a low of 30 percent in 2001. Although most children work for an employer, about 52,000 (2 percent) were self-employed and about 10,000 were less than 10 years old. The U.S. labor force as a proportion of the total United States labor force remained relatively stable. 52,000 (2 percent) were self-employed and about 10,000 performed unpaid labor in a family business. Throughout the decade, children primarily worked in retail trade, in businesses such as department stores, grocery stores, and restaurants. In 2001, as in 1990, about 60 percent of all working children were employed in this industry, mostly in eating and drinking places. Children generally held jobs in sales occupations, such as running a cash register or clerking at a store, or in services such as waiting tables or cleaning hotel rooms. Although most children worked in the retail trade industry during the past decade, a substantial percentage of the illegal employment was found in other industries. In 2001, over 40 percent of all children who were employed illegally because they worked in prohibited occupations worked as truck drivers. We determined that a child’s gender, race, and citizenship status were related to the likelihood that he or she worked in a prohibited occupation, but a child's annual family income was not related. Boys were more likely than girls to work in prohibited Occupations. In 2001, working children were as sizable a part of the United States labor force as they were in 1990. Most children worked in a variety of occupations concentrated in a few select industries, primarily retail trade and services. The percentage of children who worked illegally, either because they worked in occupations prohibited under the law or more hours than allowed, also did not change. In 2001, as in 1990, minority children and children from families with annual incomes below $25,000 were more likely than other children to work illegally. As many as 4 percent of all 15- to 17-year-olds who worked in 2001 worked illegally. Hispanic children who were employed worked more hours than other children. Children who worked illegally not only worked more than the allowed number of hours, they also worked in prohibited industries and occupations. Most of the children who worked illegal were 15-year old who worked morehours than allowed worked illegally under the child labor provisions of FLSA. In 2001, Hispanic children worked an average of 24 hours a week, at least 5 more hours aweek than other kids. In school months in 2001, 32 percent of all employed 15-year-olds with family incomes less than $25,000 a year worked more hours than allowed under the law. In contrast, only 9 percent of those with incomes over $75,000 worked more than allowed. In addition to income, race is also associated with the likelihood that a child will work more hours. Hispanic children are more likely to work too many hours than other children. The region of the country in which children live as well as the type of area in which they live (metropolitan or nonmetropolitan) are also associated. In 2001, 30 percent of all children aged 15 to 17 worked in summer months, compared to 23 percent who worked in school months. Older children are more likely to work in the retail trade industry than younger children. On the other hand, 15-year-olds are more Likely than older children toWork in agriculture, possibly because of the looser age restrictions that are placed on the industry. In 2001, children worked an average of 21 hours a week inSummer months. This is similar to the number of hours they worked in both summer and school months in summer. In summer months in 2001, nearly 60 percent of employed 17-year,olds worked in retail trade. 87 percent of all working children worked part-time in 2001. In 2001, 17-year-olds worked an average of 23 hours a week in summer months. By 2001, their average hourly earnings exceeded the minimum wage of $5.15 an hour by $1.21. The older a child is, the more likely he or she is to work and the more hours he orshe is likely to work, the study found. The differences are even greater in the summer when more children work. time and captures data not collected in CPS, such as information on children younger than 15. NLSY, however, cannot be used to show how the number and characteristics of all working children have changed over time because it only includes information on one group of children born from 1980 to 1984. Labor added questions to the survey in fiscal year 2000 to obtain additional data on children who work in agriculture. Labor has not been able to obtain data on a sufficiently large number of children working in crop agriculture to provide information that is statistically reliable. Most children working in agriculture are 16 years of age and older. The percentage of younger children (14- and 15-year-olds) who work in agriculture has increased, from 17 percent to 30 percent. Both the percentage of children who entered the country illegally and those who were not accompanied by their parents or other family members rose over the decade. Children’s work has a decidedly seasonal nature. More children work in the fall and winter months than in the spring and summer months. children are asked whether or not they worked in each of the 52 weeks in a given year. Most employment questions in NLSY deal with events that take place after the child’s 14th birthday. We used a different method to estimate employment for children younger than 14 years of age. We coded children who indicated that they had received income from a job in the previous year (1996) We performed these calculations for three periods in 1996 and one period in 1997 as shown in table 4 in this report. Labor compiles two additional sources of nationally representative data on working children. The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) contains data on one group of approximately 9,000 children born from 1980 to 1984. NLSY provides detailed information on the work experiences of this group of children over time and captures data not collected in CPS. The number and characteristics of children who die each year as a result of a work-related injury have changed little over the past decade. From 1992 to 2000, Once children reach age 16, they are only prohibited from working in jobs or with equipment covered by these Hazardous Occupations Orders. They are not limited as to the number of hours or times of day they can work. For jobs in agriculture, the child labor provisions are much less restrictive. Children of any age may work an unlimited amount of hours (outside of work hours) under the age of 18. Labor is in the process of reviewing the report and deciding what actions it will take in response to the recommendations. employers whose annual gross volume of sales is less than $500,000 and whose work cannot be linked to interstate commerce are not covered under FLSA. In addition, children who are self-employed are not subject to the child labor provisions of FLSA, although they may be covered under state child labor laws. Children who work for their parents are prohibited from working in occupations and operating equipment listed in the Hazardous Occupations Orders. When children reach age 18, they are no longer covered under the Child Labor Act. In 2001, several legislative proposals were submitted in the House of Representatives and the Senate that would strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. The proposals include the Children’s Act for Responsible Employment of 2001, which would, among other things, increase the maximum penalties for child labor violations. The Young American Workers’ Bill of Rights would amend the FLSA to require employers to obtain work permits for all children age 18 and under who are still under the age of 18. It would also prohibit children aged 16 and 17 from working in hazardous occupations in agriculture. Children who are 14 and 15 years old may work in many jobs in retail stores, restaurants, and gas stations. They may not, however, work in any job considered hazardous, including jobs in manufacturing, mining, construction, transportation, warehousing, communications, and public utilities. Once children reach age 16, age may work an unlimited number of hours (outside of school hours) in nonhazardous jobs, either on a farm owned by their parents or on a noncommercial farm with the written consent of their parents. NIOSH collects data on work- related injuries in its National Electronic Injury Surveillance System from a sample of emergency room records. FLSA and its implementing regulations limit the types of jobs, number of hours, and times of day that children younger than 16 years of age can work. Children younger than age 14 are prohibited from working in nonagricultural employment other than casual free-lance jobs such as babysitting and delivering newspapers. Children who are 14 and 15 years old may work in some jobs. Our estimates of illegal employment are both under- and overstated. Many activities prohibited, particularly the many types of equipment children are prohibited from using, cannot be gleaned by reviewing the occupational categories in CPS. The estimates are also overstated because they include some activities that are not prohibited by CPS. For example, all children younger than 18 are banned from using meat slicers. However, although CPS shows that many children work in “food services,” it does not indicate how many of them work with meat slicer. estimates are also overstated because they include some activities that are allowed in occupations that are prohibited. For example, because work as a public messenger is expressly prohibited for15-year- olds, we included children who worked in the occupation category “mail carrier” in our estimates of illegal employment. It was not, however, possible for us to determine the extent to which our estimates are under- or overstated as result of these limitations. In addition, our estimates were based on estimates of the number of children who were unemployed. This report is also available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you have any questions concerning this report please contact me at (202) 512-7215. Other major contributors are listed in appendix. V. This appendix discusses in more detail our scope and methodology for (1) estimating the number of working children in the United States who are employed illegally, (2) using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), and (3) computing fatality. 14-year-olds in the United States who work, (3) computing fatality and injury rates for working children, and (4) using data on occupational injuries to calculate relative risk. Most of the estimates in the report were calculated using data obtained from samples and, therefore, have sampling errors associated with them. All differences included in theReport were tested for statistical significance at the 0.05 level. To estimate the number of children who are employed illegally in the U.S., we compared data from the Bureau of “Other,” which contained anyone who identified a race that did not fall within the other categories listed. Using methods developed in our previous report and refined by Douglas Kruse, we defined a list of 100 occupational codes that correspond to activities prohibited by the Hazardous Occupations Orders. Any child in the base population with one of these codes was included in our estimates of children employed illegally. In this instance, 216 occupational codes matched the descriptions of activities prohibited for 15-year-olds to children. matched the descriptions of activities prohibited for 15-year-olds to children under 16. Any child identified in the base population with one of these codes was included in our estimates of children employed illegally. Due to the small sample sizes of children identified in these groups, cross tabulations were not statistically significant at the 0.05 level. To determine demographic differences in the likelihood of working illegally, the following variables were included in the model: sex, race, urbanicity and urbanicity. We conducted a logistic regression to identify the children who were most likely to work in illegal occupations. We used the CPS variable that describes the number of hours actually worked each week to determine whether 15-year-olds worked more hours than allowed each week under FLSA. Children who worked over 18 hours in a week in school months, from September to May, were included in our estimates of illegal employment. We further refined this analysis by conducting cross tabulations for race, industry, occupation, sex, geographic region, metropolitan area, and income. Differences that were found to be statistically significant are indicated in table 12 below. CPS treats ethnicity separately from race. A child can be identified in CPS as both “white” and “Hispanic.” To separately determine the effect of illegal employment on whites, blacks, and Hispanics, we coded the number of children who worked illegally in summer months. The number of illegal workers in the U.S. in the summer months was higher than in the school year, according to the CPS report. The CPS report was released on Tuesday. It is available online at www.cps.org. South Dakota, and Wisconsin; Northeast: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont. South: Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia. West: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. of illegal employment on whites, blacks, and Hispanics. For children whose race was identified as “black” or “white,” we included them in the category of race identified. This resulted in four racial categories: white, black, Hispanic, and other. For 1996 and 2001, “Other” included Asians and Native Americans. For 1990, ‘Other’ included Asians, Native Americans and “ other” which contained anyone who identified a race that did not. Data on children who work has been collected in CPS for 50 years. One limitation is that data on children younger than age 15 are not collected. 15-year-olds who lived in metropolitan areas were 1.4 times more likely to work more hours than allowed under the law. In 1989, Labor stopped collecting data on 14- year-olds in CPS, although these children are allowed under FLSA and its implementing regulations to work in many jobs. The estimates presented in this report paint an incomplete picture of the employment patterns for younger children. The Current Population Survey (CPS) is the primary source of information on the United States labor force. CPS provides data on where children work, the types of jobs they hold, and how many hours a week they work. In addition, it provides demographic information on children such as age, race, ethnicity, and family income. Because the data have been collected for over 50 years, they can be used to help identify working children in the U.S. The CPS is compiled monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) most of the information in CPS on working children is provided by an adult member of the household, in most cases a parent. Because the adult answering the questions may not be aware of the full extent of the child’s activities, information about the child's employment may be underreported or omitted. Another BLS survey, NLSY, collects information on children differently. In NLSy, children are directly asked by interviewers to describe their jobs as well as their activities at work. Because children are asked directly about their work and Standards Act (FLSA)—we compared data obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’s (BLS) Current Population Survey (CPS) on children in the United States who work to the child labor provisions of FLSA. Because CPS does not capture data on children who work in occupations that are illegal under criminal statutes, we could not include them in our estimates. FLSA and implementing regulations and guidance describe activities that children are prohibited from performing. Although CPS data on occupations are fairly specific, they do not list the actual activities children perform on the job. surveys from CPS for the following years: 1990, 1996 and 2001. For each year, we created data sets with children aged 15 to 17. Each year held roughly 70,000 observations. We defined the base population by using the child labor provisions of FLSA as a guide. Because FLSA does not apply to children who are self-employed and the provisions are much less stringent for children who work in agriculture, we eliminated children who were self- employed and those who worked in agriculture from the data set. Key questions concerning child employment in a family business were not added to CPS until 1994. To obtain numbers of children who worked illegally, we averaged the results of the nine school months to obtain the number of children in the U.S. who worked in aFamily business in 2001. To compare results for 2001 with results for 1990, we included children who working in a Family Business in the 2001 base population, even though these children are not covered by FLSA. See app. III for more information on the data set. believe that the amount of this understatement is large because many of the child labor violations found by WHD in its investigations of employers are violations of the restrictions on number of hours and times of day that children are allowed to work. Finally, our estimates are overstated to the extent that they include children whose employment is not covered under FLSA. While recognizing these limitations, we continue to believe that our analysis provides the best estimates that can be made with available data. In fact, we used the same methods as those used to develop estimates cited by BLS and WHD. information on the characteristics of employers for which children work, such as sales volume or other proxies for annual dollar volume of sales. As with the other limitations, however, the extent to which our estimates are overstated because not all children work in employment covered under FLSA cannot be determined. We used data from NLSY97, the survey of children born from 1980 to 1984, to estimate the number of 12- to 14-year-olds who work. In NLSy, children are asked whether or not they worked in each employer. since children under 15 make up less than 1 percent of all injuries to children, this discrepancy did not affect our estimates. Several legislative proposals were introduced in the 107th Congress to strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. The number and characteristics of children who worked from 1990 to 2001 as tabulated from the Current Population Survey (CPS) data we obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) are detailed in the tables below. In July 2002, the Senate passed the Traveling Sales Crew Protection Act, legislation designed to ensure that child employees of traveling sales crews are protected underFLSA. We question how WHD determined that “many of these specialty trade contractors are so small that they do not meet the FLSA coverage criteria” because this information is not tracked in. 21. The injury rate for children who work in this industry was relatively high. We noted that the injury rate was higher than for children in the transportation and public utilities and wholesale trade industries. We also noted the fatality rates for the construction industry were higher than those for the wholesale trade industry. We questioned WHD’s decision to determine that these contractors were too small to be covered by FLSA because they were so small. FLSA coverage criteria’ because this information is not tracked in WHD’s investigations database and we found no data on employer coverage under FLSA. We also found, in our discussions with WHD officials, that establishing coverage for employers in the construction industry was not a problem for some of the district offices we visited, particularly those on the east coast. CPS data on occupations show that many children are employed as truck drivers. However, our draft report incorrectly indicated that 43 percent of all children who are employed illegally are employed.

ROUGE-1: 69.82, ROUGE-2: 64.66, ROUGE-L: 22.36
BERTScore: 55.25

==============================================
==================== [34/100] ====================
Summary:
August 20, 2004. Federal Aviation Administration: Plan Still Needed to Meet Challenges to Effectively Managing Air Traffic Controller Workforce. Air Traffic Control: FAA’s Modernization Efforts--Past, Present, and Future. National Airspace System: Reauthorizing FAA Provides Opportunities and Options to Address Airspace. System. GAO/T-RCED-00-229. Aviation Acquisition: A Comprehensive Strategy Is Needed for Cultural Change at FAA. FAA Budget Policies and Practices. FAA Needs to Ensure Better Coordination When Approving Air Traffic Control Systems. GAO-04-901. FAA Has Many Investment Management Capabilities in Place, but More Oversight of Operational Systems Is Needed. GAE-05-23. FAA’s Acquisition Management Has Improved, but Policies and Oversight Need Strengthening to Help Ensure Results. GAo-05/23. Air Traffic control: System Management. Capabilities Improved, But More Can be Done to Institutionalize Improvements. Aircraft equipped with RNP capabilities could then fly alternative rolling, moving routes to avoid weather delays. Implementing RNP could also eventually lower the ATO’s costs, another panelist said. RNP technologies have been installed on larger aircraft for so long that some aircraft equipped with the technologies have already been retired to the desert, one panelist says. In addition, pilots have been trained to use the technologies, and the technologies are already being used in the U.S. Panelists generally considered RNP a highly promising, low-cost option for the ATO to improve service. One panelist recommended that theATO create incentives, such as the right to fly in preferred airspace, for users that equip their aircraft with RNP technologies. The panelists generally assumed that the private sector could provide flight service station services and other air traffic services. The ATO’s costs. determined in its favor, the panelists said. They said they were disappointed that RNP “hasn’t. been used” RNAV and RNP could potentially increase the capacity of the ATC system to handle air traffic. Aircraft equipped with RNP capabilities could then fly alternative routes or avoid bad weather. However, the airlines are “crying for” FAA to approve RNP, one of the panelists said, because of its potential to boost air traffic capacity. The FAA has not approved procedures for its use in the U.S., the panelist said, but it is expected to do so in coming months. the technologies, and the technologies are already being used in some other countries, including Canada. As a first step toward obtaining FAA’s approval of procedures for using RNP, a panelist said, the ATO could make policy announcements to set a tone and direction. These announcements would enlist the user community's support at little or no cost to theATO, he said. However, he added, such announcements would not be available to the public at the time of the announcement. Currently, FAA is implementing a number of improvements to airspace and procedures using RNP. Five airports are developing RNP-based procedures in partnership with airlines that favor RNP, FAA says. To give the ATO a more predictable source of funding and greater decision-making authority, would generally require legislative action and take time to implement, panelists say. The ATO could make some progress in addressing its cultural, technical, and budgetary challenges under its current authorities, the panelists generally agreed.  panelists expressed concerns about the government’s approach to regulating the use of onboard navigation equipment. FAA has “the wrong conceptual framework” for developing regulations to implement new procedures, one panelist said. Its current approach is disproportionate, he said, because it establishes the same safety standards as the ATO. However, he also cautioned, it would be important for FAA to implement RNP in a way that did not “disenfranchise” general aviation interests and regional carriers. Panelists discussed the potential benefits of a more widespread use of a concept called area navigation (RNAV) RNAV allows operators of properly equipped aircraft to use onboard navigation capabilities to fly desired flight paths without requiring direct flight over ground-based navigation aids. This provides for more direct routing, avoiding suboptimal routes prescribed by conventional “highways in the sky” that are defined by point-to-point flying over ground. RNAV and RNP hold promise for saving system users time and money by reducing flight times and fuel consumption. FAA is implementing the redesign at very high altitudes. The procedure, invisible to passengers, is called Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum. It is expected to save airlines $400 million in fuel costs during the first year. As technology allows, FAA says, more flight altitude levels will be added. systems.plans to continue this phased approach to acquiring new systems. Customers that do equip. customers that do not will be able to use the new system. The FAA says it will continue to make changes as technology allows. costs to identify positive and negative factors affecting performance and productivity. plan is a response to a congressional mandate, based on a recommendation we made in 2002, that FAA develop a plan for addressing an impending wave of controller retirements and deal with productivity issues. The panelists identified and discussed the impact of funding constraints and the federal budget process on ATC modernization. In their view, the most immediate issue is a critical shortage of funds to meet the current modernization program’s plans and users’ demands. FAA needs a customer-oriented business strategy and a business plan, a panelist said. Improving controllers’ productivity would be another way to save money, a fourth panelist suggested. The upcoming wave of air traffic controller retirements would create “an opportunity to redistribute and even to trim the work force in some areas,” one panelist noted. The FAA needs to focus its capital investment on avoiding outages, the panelist added. The ATO’s operating costs account for about three-quarters of its total costs. that time will show, when completed, how large a funding gap the ATO faces and how far it will have to go to address that gap. FAA says that it is prepared to identify and eliminate redundancies in the NAS. FAA has already taken some steps to control the costs of ATC modernization. For example, it has adopted the phased approach to implementing new ATC systems that it used under Free Flight Phase 1, called “build a little, test a little.” The ATO says it plans to continue this phased approach to acquiring new systems. The approach is called “build a little, test a little.” This approach relies on the early and ongoing investment of stakeholders, who review the progress of new projects regularly and identify critical omissions and “no go” items that would prevent a system from operating as intended. The FAA says it will continue to test and evaluate new systems as it acquires them. The ATO plans to use this approach to acquire new systems in the future. good financial management means linking FAA’s capital and operating budgets. FAA is revising its cost accounting practices and changing from a cash flow to a total cost business model for the ATO. Using the Strategic Management Process to drive budget decisions will help to ensure the establishment and maintenance of a linkage between the capital the operating budgets, says the airline's chief financial officer. The ATO expects everyone to learn the difference between cost and cash flow and get a better handle on unit costs as better cost accounting data become available. developing management training in cost accounting and budgeting. FAA plans to finish putting a new cost accounting system in place by 2006 that will allow it to assign, track, and better control costs. In the fall of 2004, FAA updated its cost estimates in light of OMB’s revenue projections for the next 4 years and arrived at a cumulative shortfall for the period of $5 billion for the operating budget and $3.2billion for the capital budget. According to FAA, a business plan that the ATO was preparing at that time will show, when completed, how large a funding shortfall will be. programs. As a result, when the appropriators decide not to fund a project, they may not understand how their decision will affect other projects. Separation of capital and operating costs in FAA’s accounting system makes it difficult to see the implications of capital investment decisions for operating costs. “Everything we put in the field winds up increasing the ops budget,” one panelist said. Furthermore, as a result of the lack of analysis of life-cycle costs, some investments in technologies end up in a warehouse because the ATO cannot afford to operate them. the field winds up increasing the ops budget. The firewall makes it difficult to see the relationship between software replacement (capital) and maintenance (operating) costs. The budget is not integrated to show what investments buy in terms of productivity, safety, or environmental benefits. FAA’s capital budget fails to show the impact of investments on the aviation industry, other panelists said. The FAA has not commented on the panel's findings or any potential changes to the FAA's budget for the next fiscal year. capital investments be funded out of annual appropriations means that major acquisitions generally take many years to implement. Particularly when annual appropriations fall short, projects’ development and deployment may be delayed and their costs may increase with time. By the time the acquisitions are fully deployed, panelists said, they may be out of date. technology as well as aging equipment may pose risks to users, and outdated software may require costly upgrades, they said. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. budget process incompatible with strategic planning. Panelists noted that the number of regional jets, low-fare airlines, and unmanned aerial vehicles are increasing. FAA has not developed a business model or plans for managing the increased air traffic, one panelist said, rather than integrated, organized, and periodically revised. The FAA is good at forecasting demand, he said, but it does not evaluate “the anatomy of demand” and determine how that demand will be served. It is “absolutely a problem at FAA” that “budget drives strategy and strategy does not drive budget,” he said. than integrated, organized, and periodically revised. FAA asks for more than it can get and then carries the difference over from year to year. Project managers first overpromise capabilities and underestimate costs to increase the chances that new projects will be accepted. Then, after projects are accepted, they overestimate costs because they assume their requests will be cut. Although managers could include options in their budget submissions, they don't do it enough in the budget process. The budget process establishes incentives for unrealistic planning. Managers are reluctant to revise ongoing projects because they do not want to be seen as fickle. A private company that operates under a board of directors and obtains revenue from customers does not have incentives to play budget games to get projects approved, a panelist said. Some panelists criticized the federal budget for $1.4 trillion in cuts to health care, education and other programs. The cuts are part of a larger reduction in federal spending on programs such as health care and education. Some panelists criticized the federal budget for failing to show priorities and relationships among proposed investments. In the budget, one panelist said, “everything is as important as everything else” Another panelist observed that the budget sets no capital investment priorities. According to a third panelist, a line item budget tears apart a highly layered, interdependent system. Then, when the budget request goes to Congress, ‘you have no opportunity to try to explain to anybody the interconnections of these programs’ FAA budget process is slow, inflexible, and influenced by the political process. Annual appropriations are uncertain and discourage planning. The budget fails to show investment priorities and relationships between FAA’s capital and operating budgets. The panelists suggested a number of steps that the ATO could currently take to address these challenges. They included accepting the budget process as it is and reducing spending to match revenues. They also suggested implementing regulatory and procedural changes to allow the use of existing cost-saving measures. panelist described what he called the government’s traditional underfunding of the ATC system's capital requirements. Several panelists maintained that the federal budget cycle is too long and inflexible. They suggested, for example, that FAA and DOT officials might be unwilling to publicly release data that could raise questions about their management. The panelist said the government undercapitalizes any complex, rapidly evolving operational system, and overestimates the economic service lives of information technology investments. Whereas the government typically assumes such investments will last for 15 years, a 7-year estimate would be more reasonable. The federal budget cycle is too long and inflexible to meet the needs of an ATC system. The federal budget process freezes plans for the system 12 or 18 months in advance. The budget procedure requiring that capital investments be funded out of annual appropriations means that ATC plans have to be made 12 to 18 days in advance of the budget process. Such a “dramatic,” ‘dynamic’ system requires “more managerial freedom, much more day-to-day, week- to-week, month-to.-month decision- making,’ panelist says. panelists said, they may be out of date. The political process influences budget decisions in the administration as well as in Congress. Congress has generally supported FAA’s modernization program, but funding difficulties have ensued. Other panelists added that the ATO would have difficulty “deliver the bad news” Unless revenue increases are forthcoming. According to this panelist, OMB would deny funding for the modernization program if it were to be approved by the White House and Congress. The ATO will publish a business plan that projects deficit scenarios. increases are forthcoming. According to this panelist, OMB would deny any requests for increased funding and would, instead, tell the ATO to find another way of doing business. Panelists noted that funding from annual appropriations is uncertain, and that this uncertainty is incompatible with strategic and capital planning. The amount of money available for appropriation each year cannot be predetermined, one panelist said, and the size of the appropriation may vary from year to year. This uncertainty focuses attention on which technology will receive the funding rather than on what improvements in safety or capacity the technology is. The ATO could use existing cost-saving technologies, contracting with the private sector to provide certain air traffic services, and obtaining information on other countries’ ATC technologies and on international technical standards. To give the ATO a more predictable source of funding, panelists suggested that it be authorized to establish and manage user fees, rather than rely on appropriated tax receipts. The changes would allow the ATo to implement a “sensible” capital investment program and hire the technical expertise it needs. on what improvements in safety or capacity the technology is supposed to deliver (the outputs), he said. In debating whether this investment or that investment should receive funding, planners have lost sight of the big picture, he suggested. “Who anywhere would have a capital investment plan that was predominantly about standing still?” he asked. Another panelist also considered the federal budget process incompatible with strategic planning. In his words, “it’s not a good idea to spend money on things that don’t work,” the panelist said. The panel was only an initial step in a possible long-term, evolving effort to develop and sustain discussion on ATC modernization. Because our scope was limited, we could not include a large number of leading experts, institutions, and networks involved in specialized efforts. More thought, discussion, and research are needed to develop greater agreement on what we really know, what needs to be done, and how to do it. Nevertheless, the panel provided a rich dialogue and panelists developed strong messages in responding to each of the questions. The panelists attributed many of the ATC modernization program’s chronic problems to cultural and technical factors. They cited resistance to change at all levels within the agency and insufficient technical expertise as key factors impeding modernization. They identified multiple, currently available options for addressing these factors. The panelists developed strong messages in responding to each of the three questions. Those messages are highlighted below. The full report is available on the FAA website at: http://www.faa.gov/ modernization. A government organization is insulated from the economic pressures that the private sector faces, one of the panelists indicated. Federal employees do not have the firsthand experience with layoffs and business failures to understand why improvements to the ATC system’s efficiency are needed, the panelist said. Other panelists emphasized the reluctance of management to change, according to a panelist with experience in restructuring. The U.S. Air Traffic Control system has been in operation for more than 40 years. It is the world's second-largest air traffic control system. congressional committees for changing “some extremely entrenched political fiefdoms.” FAA cannot do everything alone from the inside, because airplanes and airports, for example, need to be equipped with the technology. Another panelist said that he had found the congressional authorizing committees amenable to changes, but the appropriators liked things the way they were. what is expected of them, how they fit into the strategy, and what the vision is for their organization. In addition to having a vision, another panelist says, it is important for the ATO to tie that vision to the user constituency. The union is “very political,’ several panelists asserted. One panelist charged that it was “hindering the progress’ of a performance-based organization. Resistance to change can be an issue outside FAA as well as within it, panelists noted. The ATO was getting support from DOT, OMB, and congressional committees for changing “some extremely entrenched political fiefdoms,” one panelist said. Another panelist cited the union’s long-term opposition to the implementation of a software program that tracks productivity. Employing a team concept could help overcome resistance to the implementation of new technologies. Putting engineers, finance people, controllers, and electronic technologists together, all on the same team, could unite them as they moved through the stages of implementation. When the time comes to field a technology, the focus would be on getting it up and running and operating safely, a panelist implied. A change in management’s could also help, the panelist said, as could a change in the way airports are run. implementation because it might threaten jobs. A change in management’s approach could go a long way toward overcoming controllers’ and other employees’ resistance to change. One foreign air traffic organization changed its whole approach to the unions and the staff, started talking to them as people, and began executing “participative working” programs. Union representatives and managers take the same courses together and address issues of affordability together, one panelist said. The key to these positive results, he said, is positive communication. Managers have stopped seeing employees as a problem and have started to see them as part of the solution. The only way to bring about a cultural transformation is to replace those who resist change, either by allowing them to retire or by hiring others to take their places. In the corporate world, one panelist observed, a new executive brings in a new management team to support a cultural turnaround. The new team is then loyal to the company, the panelist said. The key to these positive results is psychological change, he said. Senior and middle managers could not or would not adjust to the change and had to be let go within the first 2 years. Another panelist emphasized that cultural change starts at the top and questioned why the ATO’s new COO had replaced only two top managers in theATO and simply replaced them with new staff. The other employees also had difficulty adjusting and were still adjusting in some respects, he said, but getting management on the right page was the real challenge.to change. replaced only two top managers in the ATO and simply reassigned other managers. The ATO’s fate depends on other organizations, including FAA, DOT, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and Congress. A number of panelists described the air traffic controllers’ union as also resistant to change. According to one panelist, for example, the union delayed the adoption of technologies such as the User Request Evaluation Tool (URET) because some controllers saw them as a threat. support a cultural turnaround. Technical as well as cultural factors have impeded ATC modernization, panelists say. FAA does not have “the engineering technical capability to change,” one speaker says. Another panelist notes that an executive in the private sector replaced the top 200 people in his organization to achieve the transformation he was seeking. The new team is then loyal to the new executive, the panelist says. The ATC needs a new COO and a new chief executive, he says. plans to train or hire people with needed skills to address shortfalls in technical expertise. Recognizing that cultural factors can play a critical role in an organization’s success, the ATO has initiated organizational changes that are designed to create a foundation for cultural change and deliver benefits to customers efficiently. For example, theATO established collaborative teams of technical experts to address ATC modernization issues. The ATO is also working to address some of the cultural and technical factors panelists identified as affecting A TC modernization. FAA sent a large number of detailed e-mails in response to a call for recommendations to improve internal communications. FAA’s management culture was “intensely hierarchical, risk averse,” and “reactionary.” Now, FAA is attempting to foster “results-focused, proactive and innovative behavior” Changing the agency’‘s leadership model is also designed to replace a “personality-driven culture” with a sustainable, stable, viable organization. The panelists said replacing airline ticket taxes with a user fee is essential for the ATO’s success. While recognizing that such a fee would be controversial, the panelists maintained that it would produce a more predictable, reliable funding stream than the annual appropriations process. One panelist cautioned, it would be “fatal” to implement the fee in any way that did not make the ATo financially independent of Congress. The ATO is still largely a government organization and therefore remains subject to most governmental constraints. “alternative to capital starvation,” one panelist said. Even if the user fee stream initially produced no more revenue than the airlines are now paying in aviation-related taxes, he said, the ATO could reap a “transition dividend” during the first 5 or 10 years after the bonds are issued, limiting its annual outlays to the debt service on the bonds. He characterized this strategy as “money that’s lying on the sidewalk waiting to be used” would have to consider what it was incentivizing through user fees. For example, if the fee was based on weight, he said, it might “incentivize even smaller planes and more planes,” thereby increasing demands on the ATC system’s capacity. Another issue that would have to be worked out, is how the common costs of air traffic services should be allocated. Whether users should pay only for the incremental costs of the services they use, as most users would argue, or whether some cross-subsidies are needed. use, as most users would argue, or whether some cross-subsidies should continue. Another panelist pointed out that implementing a user fee alone would not guarantee efficiency, because the air traffic services provider could simply raise the fee when costs increased. Some method of controlling costs would have to be built into the system, he said. Most panelists correctly assumed that legislation would be required to institute auser fee system. Specifically, a user Fee system could be implemented in a government or a public-private type of air traffic service. ones you respond to and serve,” he concluded. While panelists generally favored a user fee system, they cautioned care in proposing and implementing one. As one panelist said, the fee question, once raised, would be all-consuming and would require the expenditure of political capital. One panelist called for figuring out “not only what problem we’re solving, but what problems we might be likely to create,’ he said. Another panelist noted that the government would have to consider what it was incentivizing through user fees. The ATO lacks control over its revenues and funding priorities. Some panelists stressed the importance of progressing by small steps within the existing system. It was critical, one panelist said, for the ATO to ‘have some small early practical successes’ Other panelists focused on the obstacles within the system that they believed would impede or prevent success. The ATO still had a long way to go to achieve its goals, the panelists said, but they were united in their desire for it to succeed. A panelist predicted a slow but sure increase in delays. Severe reductions in the funding for ATC modernization could exacerbate what one panelist described as the government’s traditional underfunding of the ATC. If the ATO did not carefully analyze demand and determine how that demand could be served, it would find itself facing a “perfect storm,” a third panelist referred to as a ‘perfect storm’ The ATO has used the term 'perfect storm' in the past. “gold-plated things that don't affect the true performance of the system and drive the costs up completely unnecessarily,” one panelist said. Without a direct connection to the users and their mission, “evolution takes very unintended and very undesirable paths over long periods of time,’ another panelist added. As long as the customers are not directly paying the bills and providing the resources, ‘it’s going to be very hard to bring about real change’ and make the ATO “a customer-driven, customer-servicing organization.” strategy as “money that’s lying on the sidewalk waiting to be picked up’ Panelists maintained that the ATO's organizational placement, combined with its dependence on Congress for funding, limits the COO's ability to make decisions and take actions. The COO is not a Chief Executive Officer, as one of the panelists observed. Instead, he reports to his “owners’—who include the FAA Administrator and the DOT Secretary, panelists said. The COO lacks key financial data needed to determine, analyze, and manage the ATO’s costs. FAA did not maintain basic information on the costs and value of existing systems, reducing ATO's potential. The controllers’ union influences management”s decisions, panelists observed. The ATO is at odds with the FAA because it looks forward to the ATC system of 2025, according to one panelist, rather than helping the ATo address its immediate funding needs. The ATO's chances for success are limited because the COO is being asked to turn the organization around without being given the tools to do so. One panelist said he was skeptical about the ATO’s ability to act like a business when it is not really one. He suggested that it was only at the margins that the creators of the ATo had replicated a business. The ATO is still largely a government organization and not really a business, he said. It is charged with operating like aBusiness but is not provided with the management tools available to aBusiness. panel of independent advisers and costs about $2.5 million a year. According to several panelists, the ATO’s COO lacks the management tools that would be available to a private-sector CEO. In addition, the 20-year vision of the Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) is at odds with the ATo, according to one panelist, said the panelist. The FAA Administrator, DOT Secretary, and OMB Director can revise his budget request and Congress can make further changes. of privatization to be the enemy of moving forward with the ATO, as one panelist said. Instead, taking a two-pronged approach would be the best way, in the view of most panelists, to meet its immediate and longer term challenges. Clinton V. Oster, Jr. (Panel Moderator) Professor of Public and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University. Anthony J. Broderick (Panelist) Assistant Professor of Environmental and Public Policy, University of Wisconsin-Madison. Hiring skilled engineers instead of relying on contractors might enable the ATO to develop systems more economically and efficiently, one panelist suggested. A foreign air traffic services organization develops new ATC systems in-house and seldom uses contractors. It now utilizes its engineers to build systems rather than manage contractors. As a result, it is now developing the systems it needs faster and at less cost. Maximizing the use of commercial inputs was the recommendation of another panelist, who said that FAA needs to get out of the contractors' business. The ATO could profitably take advantage of the experiences of other countries’ air traffic organizations, which are technically as good as FAA ever was or ever was. According to a third panelist, commercial systems have a shorter economic service life than the systems that FAA designs. Another panelist also emphasized the availability of technical expertise in the private sector. The FAA needs to get out of the business of designing systems, according to a panelist on the ATO’s air traffic planning committee. FAA lacks a rudder, in a technical sense, for modernization. The ATO could obtain advice from an independent board or information from other countries on technologies that they have already adopted. A technical advisory board made up of system engineers could review proposals for FAA and demand the kinds of data and tests needed to scrub the proposals and identify any big roadblocks. Hiring skilled engineers would be a good first step, the panelists said, but it would take more than that to get FAA on the right track. The ATO should institute “a fundamental requirement and a cultural expectation” that it will review existing technologies before it buys or tries to develop its own. With a multibillion-dollar budget for software and other information technology, the ATO has ample opportunity to save money. FAA plans to train or hire people with needed skills to develop new technologies. The ATO's COO made a number of observations on FAA’s culture. He also noted that FAA plansto train or hired people withneeded skills to create new technologies, he said. technical expertise it needs; achieve cost efficiencies; and offer better, more responsive service. restructuring could resolve the conflict of interest inherent in FAA’s dual responsibility as the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. Other panelists portrayed the ATO as an organization that is charged with operating like a business but is not. The ATO was created by the Mineta Commission, but Congress did not approve funding for it until after the agency was created. The agency was charged with becoming performance-based but deprived of the means to transform itself, one panelist said. costs and value of existing systems, reducing the ATO’s potential to be data driven. As a result, he spent most of his first year overseeing the implementation of a cost accounting system and collecting other key data. Their performance is constrained because their terms of employment and compensation are based largely on negotiated agreements rather than on performance. In addition, salary caps limit FAA’S ability to pay for technical expertise. As one panelist observed at the end of the panel, the ATo’'s creation did not address the structural conflict of interest that exists. If every country or continent had its own technical standards, an international system could not function effectively. The ATO’s COO believes that good financial management means linking FAA's capital and operating budgets. The FAA is addressing some of the funding shortfalls and features of the federal budget process that panelists identified as affecting ATC modernization, the GAO says. The agency is also working on a plan to improve ATC operations across the U.S. and the rest of the world. productivity would be another way to save money, a fourth panelist said. He characterized his suggestion as “touch the third rail of aviation politics.” Another panelist emphasized the importance of starting to plan now to accommodate the airplanes that are being bought today to provide service for the next generation, which he variously estimated at 20, 30, or 40 years. For example, he said, the ATO needed to understand the interconnections between ATC systems and break the big picture into nuggets so that it could clarify for the appropriators why they should not break apart. technical benchmarks to promote efficient development, business models that take into account operational trends. As one panelist said, “we have to target the future mix of real operations that we’re really going to see, not build the world’s most perfect system from 1956” Despite their reservations, the panelists generally agreed that stakeholders should not “allow the concept of privatization to be the enemy of moving forward with the ATO,” they said. The ATO is a government organization. The other panelist argued that navigational technology is evolving and shifting from ground-based to cockpit-based systems. He suggested that the private sector could assume the cost of capitalizing the equipment, but “the government’s got to allow that technology to be used, and it hasn’t.” Although the ATO should change its policies on aircraft separation to permit ‘the technology that exists on airplanes today to do the job,’ the panelist said. they cited were the counterproductive incentives inherent in the budget process, the government’s refusal to allow new air traffic technologies to be used, and opposition to organizational and technological change. It was important, one panelist said, to overcome this opposition by describing “the difference between how things are and how they might be,” he said. Still other panelists looked to the future, calling for international technical benchmarks to promote efficient development, business models that take advantage of new technologies. operations, and “staged outsourcing” of the NAS’s functions might build confidence in the private sector. Obtaining information on technologies and procedures that other countries have already developed could help the ATO control costs. “We should be using and sharing” the technologies that have already been invented, one panelist said. A shared vision is crucial for a globally based air traffic system, another panelist noted. The air navigation service business spends $3 billion to $4 billion a year on writing code for air traffic management software. provide flight service station services and other air traffic services more efficiently than the government. The A-76 process would then serve not only as a way of saving money but also as “a pilot program for how things could get done,” one panelist said. In the view of another panelist, ongoing government oversight would ensure the safety of contracted operations, and “staged outsourcing’ of the NAS’s functions might build, he said. The FAA could contract for other air Traffic services, such as oceanic, night, en route, or airways facilities services. participating in a multiagency effort, sponsored by the JPDO, to develop a national plan for aviation in 2025 and beyond. According to the ATO’s COO, the restructuring of U.S. air traffic services that has taken place thus far, through the establishment of a performance- based air traffic organization, constitutes “the first building block” of the longer term effort to transform the aviation system. However, he acknowledged that the ATo has not yet connected this long- term vision with the financial and other challenges it currently faces. business plan that the ATO is developing to guide and improve its operations and financial management. FAA has worked to develop three longer term planning documents. It has published its Flight Plan for 2005 through 2009, a multiyear strategic effort that sets a 5-year course for FAA in the areas of safety, capacity, international leadership, and organizational excellence. Second, it has developed a rolling 10-year effort, called the Operational Evolution Plan (OEP), through which FAA plans to increase the capacity of the NAS by one- third. vision and manage not only its finances but also its future. Over time, he said, he plans to expand the OEP to include a strategy and the JPDO’s long-term vision. The OEP will then be “not just a set of projects,” but a project plan with a vision and a strategy that goes out 20 years. But given the current budget constraints, he conceded, the path to that goal is not clear. In March 2004, FAA created The ATO is trying to better align FAA’s priorities and stakeholders’ interests by developing a strategy map. Called the Strategic Management Process, this effort borrows heavily from a private-sector model. According to FAA, the strategy map will enable owners and customers to clearly understand both the services that the ATO offers and the needs of its customers. The ATO wants to be a sustainable, stable, viable organization that can make rational decisions that transcend changes in political leadership, FAA says. The Strategic Management Process will ensure linkage between FAA’s operating and capital budgets. Future budgetary conversations will revolve around the desired level of service, instead of focusing on a product. To become a “performance-based organization” and identify customer groups and their service needs, the ATO created “value-based” performance metrics. The ATO defined its performance in terms of customers’ needs and connected efforts to satisfy those. The Strategic Management process will ensure link between FAA's operating andCapital budgets. The ATO reorganized air traffic services and the research and acquisition organization along functional lines of business. The organization reduced layers of management from 11 to 7 to help address the hierarchical nature of the organization. The ATO conducted an organizationwide activity value analysis to determine the full range of activities that ATO headquarters is engaged in and the value customers place on those activities, and the potential for conducting any of those activities more.efficiently. For example, the ATO established collaborative teams of technical experts and ATC system. The ATO wants to know how much every unit of output costs so that it can allocate and compare costs and measure productivity. Each organizational unit and facility is developing applicable metrics for performance so that the ATO can compare costs, identify factors that affect costs, and use this information to improve performance. For example, each en route facility is determining its hourly cost to control flights. The ATO could then compare and analyze these costs to identify positive and negative factors affecting performance and improve efficiency and productivity. interest that exists because FAA is both the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. Another panelist noted that when his country restructured its air traffic organization, it immediately eliminated the same structural conflict of interest. According to the first panelist, other countries that have reorganized their air traffic organizations have also instituted arms’ length regulation if they did not have it. The FAA is responsible for air traffic control and safety, but does not have the authority to regulate air traffic service providers. instituted arms’ length regulation if they did not have it already. “We remain one of the few places that somehow thinks that self-regulation is a good idea, in spite of sort of overwhelming evidence in lots of arenas that it's not a very good idea," the ATO’s COO said. The ATO is developing a business plan that the FAA is developing to guide and monitor its operations. The FAA is addressing some of the structural changes that panelists proposed to improve the ATOs success over time. FAA and ATO are less closely joined than they were previously. This step is a positive move toward providing “arm’s length’ safety oversight. It does not go as far as placing the two organizations in separate federal agencies. At our request, the panelists concluded the panel with their parting thoughts on the day's discussion, including any advice they had for FAA or for Congress. Overall, they were united in their desire for the ATO to be more independent. Disproportionate, he said, because it establishes the same safety standards for aircraft of all sizes. “We can’t keep treating airplanes that need 100 cubic miles of airspace the same from a cost and benefit point of view,” he said. He maintained that the role of regulatory management on the evolution of the ATC system has been underestimated and called for significant investment in understanding risk management. The other panelist who expressed concerns about the government’s regulatory. FAA created the Air Traffic Safety Oversight Service (AOV) in March 2004. The AOV is responsible for ensuring the safety of changes to air traffic standards and procedures. The establishment of the AOV responds directly to a recommendation by the 1997 National Civil Aviation Review Commission that safety oversight of FAA’s traffic function be provided by a separate part of the agency. Although both organizations remain within FAA, under FAA, the goal is not clear how they will work together in the future. speaker, FAA does not have “the engineering technical capability to deal with an extremely complex, highly nonlinear adaptive system,” he said. According to another panelist, FAA doesn't apply rigorous systems engineering expertise early in nonadvocate technical reviews of project proposals. As a result, a number of FAA’s programs had fundamental system engineering technical issues, the panelist said, including complex ones such as the Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) and the Next-Generation Air-to-Ground Communications System (NEXCOM) Next-Generation Air-to-Ground Communications System (NEXCOM)—had fundamental system engineering technical issues that were not identified early in the program. The risks were not mitigated, and the programs experienced significant cost growth and schedule increases. “The system engineering organization in FAA is nothing more than a process organization,” another panelist said. As this panelist put it, FAA lacks a rudder, and needs to find a way to get back on its feet. of Public and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University Anthony J. Broderick Independent Consultant Former FAA Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification Steven R. Bussolari Assistant Division Head, Tactical Systems Division Manager, Air Traffic Control System Group, Lincoln Laboratory. John W. Crichton President and CEO, NAV Canada George L. Donahue Director, The Center for Air Transportation Systems Research, George Mason University. Xavier Fron Head, Performance Review Commission, EUROCONTROL Richard Golaszweski Executive Vice President, Gellman Research Associates (GRA), Inc. Golaszweski Executive Vice President, Gellman Research Associates (GRA), Inc. Ian Hall Director of Operations, National Air Traffic Services, United Kingdom Thomas Imrich Chief Pilot, Research, Boeing Commercial Aircraft Satish C. Mohleji Principal Engineer, Center for Advanced Aviation System Development, The MITRE Corp. Robert W. Poole, Jr. Director of Transportation Studies, Reason Foundation Michael Powderly President, Airspace Solutions John A. Sorensen Chief Executive Officer, Seagull Technology, Inc. his “owners”—who include the FAA Administrator and the DOT Secretary. FAA does not get “the kind of constructive advice that you might hope for.” Europe’s Performance Review Commission provides such constructive advice for EUROCONTROL, the European air traffic management organization. The commission serves as a panel of independent advisers and costs about $2.5 million a year. It is not expected to provide constructive criticism of FAA, a panelist said. The subcommittee is purely advisory, making the subcommittee purely advisory.

ROUGE-1: 85.13, ROUGE-2: 73.50, ROUGE-L: 26.10
BERTScore: 57.45

==============================================
==================== [35/100] ====================
Summary:
SOCOM programs have lower dollar thresholds, so they don't receive the same level of scrutiny brought to bear on the more expensive programs. Another factor that potentially enables SOCOM's culture of innovation and risk-taking in its acquisition programs is its general ability to execute programs below statutory and regulatory dollar figures that require more rigorous oversight. This point has been highlighted by James "Hondo" Geurts, current Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and Acquisition (and former SOCOM Acquisition Executive) limited scope of acquisition authorities. delegating more decisionmaking to lower levels and promoting a more risk-taking culture. A number of current senior acquisition officials in the military services recently served in SOCOM and appear to be promoting more delegation of authority and cultural risk- taking in the services. They include General Paul Ostrowksi, formerly a SOCOM PEO and currently the Principal Military Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics and Technology), and James Guerts, formerly the SOCOM Acquisition Executive. In some instances SOCOM has fewer acquisition authorities than the military departments. The definition of military departments, codified in 50 U.S.C. 3004, does not include SOCOM. SOCOM may not receive new acquisition authorities provided by Congress and must work through the Secretary of Defense to obtain these authorities or seek a legislative change. Potential associated issues for Congress may include the following: Based on the DOD report on acquisition authorities required in the 2018 NDAA, should additional acquisition authorities should be granted to SOCOM? SOCOM acquisition personnel are bound by and act with the same freedoms and restrictions as the military services and defense agencies. For example, all large DOD acquisition programs are given an Acquisition Category (ACAT) designation based on dollar figures and program scope. These designations determine the level of oversight required for the program. SOCOM and the military departments adhere to the same oversight standards and dollar threshold for categorizing programs. (For more information on program categories and dollar thresholds, see Table A-1 .) that can contribute to more effective acquisitions. The successful use of the Special Operations Command acquisition authority below the acquisition category (ACAT) 1 level illustrates the transformation benefits of having a joint buyer, close to the user, maintain a streamlined acquisition process. In discussing the SOCOM acquisition culture and the benefits of a flatter organization, a number of current and former SOCOM officials have stated that the lack of bureaucratic overhead allows the organization to identify emerging issues, modify programs that are underway, or, in some cases, terminate programs. turn generally further delegates the majority of Milestone Decision Authority (MDA) to the PEOs. SOCOM officials have asserted that this delegation enables more rapid decisionmaking and accelerates the acquisition process. The method SOCOM uses for acquisitions is similar to the acquisition processes used by the military services. However, there are also significant differences, many of which relate to the size and scope of SOCOM and its authorities. Table 1 summarizes select similarities and differences between SOCOM's acquisition process and that of the military. SOCOM's workforce operates professionally within the same DOD 5000 directives, the same Federal Acquisition Regulation and the same Financial Management Regulation. Give credit to our acquisition workforce for the results they achieve, and you might dismiss using USSOCOM as a benchmark for how to do acquisition under the assumption that we're somehow "different" In some instances, SOCOM may in fact have fewer acquisition authorities and flexibilities than the military departments. For example, 10 U.S.C. 2216 established a Defense.of DOD. Goldwater-Nichols: Special Operations Command has unique acquisition authorities. The report describes SOCOM's acquisition authorities for unclassified acquisition programs. It compares these authorities to those granted to the military departments. Report explores whether SOCOM has unique characteristics that influence how it conducts acquisition. It also compares the chains of command, and the scope of acquisition activity and program oversight for those organizations. It concludes with a recommendation that SOCOM be given more funding for its acquisition programs in the near-term. statutory authorities enable SOCOM to manage and oversee its acquisition programs. Special Operations Force Acquisition, Technology and Logistics (SOF AT&L) is the organization within SOCOM that leads internal major procurement efforts. The SOCOM Commander is directly responsible for all portions of the command and the Acquisition Executive (AE) reports directly to the Commander. Falling under the AE are the Program Executive Offices (PEOs) and Directorates. This direct chain of command allows for rapid communication on purpose, intent, and decisionmaking. SOCOM acquisition authority is restricted to Special Operations-specific items. The military services have the authority to acquire any necessary goods and services. When SOCOM does exercise its authority, it adheres to the same oversight and documentation requirements as the services. As James Smith, the current SOCOM Acquisition Executive, reportedly stated: We are absolutely subject to all of thesame oversight and policy as the rest of DOD. Our workforce operates professionally within the same DOD. The acquisition authority of SOCOM is more limited than those of the military departments. can get that solution into the fight sooner. SOCOM benefits from being a smaller organization with a more focused mission set and limited scope of acquisition authorities. The services, on the other hand, have a much broader acquisition mandate, including the acquisition of business systems, weapon procurement programs and extensive logistic contracts. This broader acquisition portfolio requires the services to manage acquisition programs across domains, using multiple acquisition processes, and to use different acquisition competencies. Other SOCOM attributes, such as being a small organization, can also help the services succeed. If SOCOM wants to acquire a weapon system that is not special operations specific, the acquisition must be executed through one of the military departments. The military services are responsible for funding certain types of SOCOM training, service-common equipment, and professional services. For example, the Air Force provides SOCOM with C-130s and the Army provides the ammunition for service- common weapons to include the M4. SOCOM, in turn, can modify these systems to special operations-specific requirements. The regulations governing acquisition are found in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Defense Acquisition Regulations Supplement (DFARS) SOCOM is not referenced or discussed in the FAR; the DFARS includes a brief definitional reference to SOCOM, defining it as a defense agency. There are no unique authorities granting SOCOM exemptions or waivers from acquisition requirements. The Office of the Secretary of Defense's issuances establishing policy, defining authorities, and assigning responsibility for acquisitions across all military services and defense agencies. unique characteristics that influence how it conducts acquisition. The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 ( P.L. 99-433 ) reorganized DOD's command and control structure, in part by establishing the current construct and authorities of combatant commands. SOCOM was the first combatant command endowed with acquisition authority and its own budget line. The agency was established and granted its own acquisition responsibilities in the Fiscal Year (FY) 1987 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) The FY2016 NDAA ( P.L. 114-92 ) granted limited acquisition authority to the U.S. Cyber Command. CYBERCOM is the second command to have current independent acquisition authority. However, SOCOM's acquisition authority is more expansive. Title 10 U.s.C. Section 164(c) grants SOCOM authority to validate and establish priorities for requirements; ensure combat readiness; develop and acquire special operations-peculiar equipment and material, supplies, and services. These authorities are applicable only to "special operations- peculiar items" military departments. 10 U.S.C. 2216 established a Defense Modernization Account and granted authority for its use to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries of the military departments. The FY2017 NDAA ( P.L. 114-328 , §2447d) granted a new reprogramming authority, referred to as a special transfer authority. This authority is intended to expedite the selection of prototype projects for production and rapid fielding. In the FY2018 NDAA, the Department of Defense was required to submit a report on the acquisition authorities available to the military department. less than 1% of the total DOD acquisition workforce of 156,000. Many analysts argue that small businesses and organizations can be more nimble, more innovative, and more adaptable than large enterprises. A 2004 congressional report identified SOCOM's unique size, culture, and close proximity to the warfighter as factors that can contribute to more effective acquisitions. As Sir Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group, reportedly stated, "Small businesses are nimble and bold and can often teach much larger companies a thing or two about innovations" would still not require a Nunn-McCurdy notification to Congress. The cost growth associated with the procurement of the CVN-78 Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier ($1.4 billion) was approximately 70% of SOCOM's entire procurement budget ($2.0 billion) Some analysts believe that these lower dollar thresholds allow SOCOM to operate below the radar, thus enabling a more nimble acquisition process and a culture that promotes "failing fast" Despite these perceived organizational advantages, SOCOM has experienced challenges in executing its acquisition programs. develop a covert submersible insertion vehicle, was documented by both the Government Accountability Office and RAND as experiencing considerable cost, schedule, and performance issues before finally being cancelled in 2009. This program illustrates observers' argument that it is not only the ability to succeed faster, but also to fail faster and adapt requirements or acquisition strategies faster, that gives SOCOM the able to execute acquisitions more efficiently and effectively. SOCOM's statutory restriction to procure strictly SOF-peculiar equipment, modifications, and services enables a more focused, operations-oriented acquisition culture. The Silent Knight Radar program is one of SOCOM's largest with a total estimated procurement cost through FY2023 of at $391.7 million. In comparison, the military services have numerous major programs with significantly higher procurement appropriations. The different size and scope of the acquisition efforts result in SOCOM having a substantially smaller acquisition workforce than the services. In FY2017, the SOCOM procurement appropriation was 1.5% of DOD's total procurement appropriation of $132.2 billion. The Navy's 2017 appropriation for the Virginia Class submarine program ($5.39 billion) is 250% larger than SOCom's entire FY2017 procurement appropriation ($2.08 billion) The Nunn-McCurdy Act requires DOD to report to Congress when an MDAP experiences cost overruns of 15% or more. There are currently more than 150 MDAPs in DOD; many of these programs have a larger budget in a single year than SOCOM's entire procurement budget for FY2017. If SOCom's current CAT II program (Silent Knight Radar) experienced 100% cost growth (from approximately $391 million to $782 million), it would still not require a Nunn/McCurdy notification to Congress. National Defense interview, James Smith reportedly stated the following: Our direct relationship to USSOCOM for the acquisition of only services and equipment that are unique to special operations gives us three primary advantages. First, USSOCom is a combatant command with an extremely relevant ongoing mission. We're fully co-located and integrated with the staff here. We have a firsthand understanding of priorities and urgency that gives us a different appreciation for schedule emphasis. It's not a cliché to say that our operators will often accept the "80 percent" solution if we can get that solution into the fight sooner.

ROUGE-1: 80.68, ROUGE-2: 75.47, ROUGE-L: 33.62
BERTScore: 60.70

==============================================
==================== [36/100] ====================
Summary:
Data mining is a computer-based control activity that analyzes diverse data for relationships that have not previously been discovered. Data warehouses store tables of historical and current information that are logically grouped. As a tool in managing improper payments, applying data mining to a data warehouse allows an organization to efficiently query the system to identify potential improper payments. For example, in the Medicare and Medicaid program, data on claims are stored in geographically disbursed systems and databases and are not readily available to CMS’s program integrity analysts. Identifying and analyzing the root causes of improper payments is key to developing effective corrective actions and implementing controls. Proactively preventing improper payments increases public confidence in the administration of benefit programs. addressing program design issues that are a factor in causing improper payments may be an important step in the right direction for the federal government to take to reduce and prevent improper payments. In this regard, implementing strong preventive controls can serve as the front-line defense against improper payments, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention. programs are in the process of implementing preventive controls to avoid improper payments, including overpayments and underpayments. Preventive controls may involve a variety of activities such as upfront validation of eligibility, predictive analytic tests, training programs, and timely resolution of audit findings. Data sharing allows entities that make payments to compare information from different sources to help ensure that payments are appropriate. When effectively implemented, when effective preventive controls are implemented, they can help prevent improper payments and save money in the long run. and beneficiaries, such as for pharmacy providers, to promote best prescribing practices and appropriate prescribing guidelines based on Food and Drug Administration labeling, potentially reducing improper payments. inconsistent program requirements would lend insight to developing effective strategies for enhancing compliance. Although strong preventive controls remain the frontline defense against improper payments, agencies also need effective detection techniques to quickly identify improper payments and to streamline or change eligibility or other program requirements. GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (Washington, D.C: Nov. 1999). decision of a state, county, or an area committee is final, no action may be taken to recover the amounts found to have been erroneously disbursed. This statute is commonly referred to as the Finality Rule. Another area for further exploration is the broader use of incentives for states to implement effective preventive and detective controls. Agencies have applied limited incentives and penalties for encouraging improved state administration to reduce improper payments. Incentives and penalties can be helpful to create a more efficient state. The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 requires CMS to use predictive modeling and other analytic techniques. Through such analysis, unusual or suspicious patterns or abnormalities can be identified and used to prioritize additional review of suspicious transactions. The legislation required that contractors selected begin using these technologies on July 1, 2011, in the 10 states identified by CMS as having the highest risk of fraud, waste, or abuse in Medicare fee- for-service payments. These predictive analytic contractors began using these Technologies to screen all fee-for-service claims nationwide prior to payment as of June 30, 2011. as of June 30, 2011, through CMS’s new Fraud Prevention System. Training can be a key element in any effort to prevent improper payments from occurring. This can include training staff on how to prevent and detect improper payments and training providers or beneficiaries on program requirements. For example, the Medicaid Integrity Institute trains state-level staff and facilitates networking by sponsoring free workshops for states. In addition, the MIG sponsors education programs for providers and beneficiaries, such as for pharmacy providers, to promote best practices. not readily available to CMS’s program integrity analysts. CMS has been working for most of the past decade to consolidate program integrity data and analytical tools for detecting fraud, waste, and abuse. The Integrated Data Repository (IDR) program is intended to provide CMS and its program integrity contractors with a centralized source that contains Medicaid and Medicare data from the many disparate and dispersed legacy systems. CMS subsequently developed the One Program Integrity (One PI) program, a web-based portal and set of analytical tools by which these data can be used. to help ensure that payments are appropriate. Data sharing can be particularly useful in confirming initial or continuing eligibility of participants in benefit programs. Analyses and reporting on the extent to which agencies are participating in data sharing activities is another important element needed to advance the federal government’s efforts to reduce improper payments. For example, the Department of Labor (Labor) reported that its Unemployment Insurance Program utilizes HHS’S National Directory of benefits. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) also reported that it uses the National directory of benefits for its Medicaid program. that its Unemployment Insurance Program utilizes HHS’s National Directory of New Hires Databaseto individuals who claim benefits after returning to work. In June 2011, Labor established the mandatory use of the database for state benefit payment control no later than December 2011. In another case, to address the issue of inaccuracy of self-reported financial income on applications for student aid, the Labor Department issued a program letter that included recommended operating procedures for cross-matching activity. to improve the ability to detect overpayments. payment estimated amounts. HHS cited statutory limitations for its state-administered Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. Despite these limitations, HHS officials stated that they will continue to work with states and explore options to allow for future estimates for the program. For fiscal year 2011, the TANF program reported outlays of about $17 billion. For another program, HHS cited the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 as prohibiting HHS from calculating or publishing any national or state- specific payment. The Department of Education implemented a 6-month pilot version of an IRS data retrieval tool in January 2010 for its Pell Grant Program. The tool allows student aid applicants and, as needed, parents of applicants, to transfer certain tax return information from the IRS directly to Education’s online application. Education reported that nearly 3.5 million students used the data exchange tool, representing approximately 21 percent of the applications submitted for the 2011 - 2012 academic year. The analytic technologies used in the tool include predictive analytic technologies. The Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 required CMS to implement a national Medicare recovery audit contractor (RAC) program by January 1, 2010. In fiscal year 2011, HHS reported that the Medicare Fee-for-Service recovery audit program identified $961 million in overpayments and recovered $797 million nationwide. While internal control should be maintained to help prevent improper payments, recovery auditing is used to identify and recover over payments. Further, the IRS has developed a set of analytical tools by which these data can be accessed and analyzed. $961 million in overpayments and recovered $797 million nationwide. The Medicaid RAC program was established by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Each state must contract with a RAC, which is tasked with identifying and recovering Medicaid over payments and identifying underpayments. Similar to the Medicare RACs, Medicaid Racs will be paid on a contingency fee basis—a percentage of any recovered over Payments plus incentive payments for the detection of under payments. It is important to note that some agencies have reported statutory or regulatory problems. In 2010, the President set goals, as part of the Accountable Government Initiative, for federal agencies to reduce overall improper payments by $50 billion. For fiscal year 2011, OMB reported that governmentwide agencies recaptured $1.25 billion in overpayments to contractors and vendors. Over half of this amount, $797 million, can be attributed to the Medicare recovery audit contractor program which identifies improper Medicare payments in all 50 states. Despite reported progress in reducing estimated improper payment amounts and error rates for some programs and activities, the federal government continues to face challenges in determining the full extent of improper payments. Federal agencies reported improper payment estimates totaling $115.3 billion in fiscal year 2011. Based on the agencies’ estimates, OMB estimated that improper payments comprised about 4.7 percent of the $2.5 trillion in total spending during that year for the agencies' related programs. The decrease in the fiscalyear 2011 estimate is attributed primarily to decreases in the number of improper payments reported by the agencies in the prior year. The estimate is a decrease of $5.3billion from the revised prior year reported estimate of $120.6 billion. the fiscal year 2010 amount of $16.9 billion to $15.2 billion, which represented a decrease in the error rate from 26.3 percent to 23.5 percent. Treasury reported that corrective actions taken to reduce improper payments primarily focused on completing examinations on tax returns that claimed the EITC. HHS reported that it reduced payment errors by continuing to routinely implement controls in its payment system to ensure accurate and timely payments, and implementing three key initiatives, including contract level audits, physician outreach, and Medicare Advantage organization guidance and training. The $115.3 billion in estimated federal improper payments reported for fiscal year 2011 was attributable to 79 programs spread among 17 agencies. Ten of these 79 programs account for most of the reported improper payments. The governmentwide estimate included improper payment estimates for nine additional programs that did not report an estimate in fiscal year 2010. The HHS Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit (Part D) program had the highest estimate of the newly included programs. The agencies’ efforts are a positive step towards increasing the transparency of the magnitude of improper payments, the authors say. from calculating or publishing any national or state- specific payment error rates for the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) until 6 months after the new payment error rate measurement rule became effective on September 10, 2010. HHS plans to report estimated improper payment amounts for CHIP in fiscal year 2012. For fiscal year 2011, the CHIP program reported federal outlays of about $9 billion. As previously discussed, OMB excluded estimated improper payments for two DOD programs from the governmentwide total because those programs were still developing their estimating methodologies. The three excluded programs were the Department of Education’s Direct Loan, Department of Defense”s Defense Finance and Accounting Service Commercial Pay, and DOD's Army Corps of Engineers Commercial Pay. About 50 percent of the total programs reporting improper payment estimates in fiscal year 2011, that reported a reduction in the error rate of estimated improper payments because those programs were still developing their estimating methodologies. In DOD  fiscal year 2011 agency financial report, DOD reported that improper payment Estimates for these programs were based on improper payments detected through various pre-payment and post-payment review processes. GAO and DOD Inspector General have previously reported on weaknesses in DOD’s payment controls. DOD Comptroller testified in May 2011 that DOD assessed its commercial payment program as low risk because DOD management has concluded that it had a highly effective pre-payment examination process. That process includes a software tool that tests for potential improper payments before disbursement. However, the DOD IG has reported that the tool had a false positive rate of more than 95 percent and that its use was not standardized across payment systems. We found that agencies reported the root causes information using the required categories for 42 programs in their fiscal year 2011 PARs and AFRs. Many agencies did not use the three categories to classify the types of errors and quantify how many errors can be attributed to that category. Together, these programs represented about $46 billion, or 40 percent of the total reported $115 billion in improper payment estimates. Of the $46billion, the estimated improper payment amounts were about $15.2 billion. The U.S. Treasury reported that the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) program’s estimated improper Payment amount decreased from the fiscal year 2010 amount of $16.9 billion. of the $115.3 billion of reported improper payments. The 10 programs with the highest error rates had rates ranging from 11.0 percent to 28.4 percent. Since the implementation of IPIA in 2004, federal agencies have continued to identify new programs or activities as risk-susceptible and risk-averse. Since 2004, the U.S. has identified more than $1.2 billion in improper payments, according to a report by the Treasury Department's Office of Inspector General for Financial Management. Not all agencies have developed improper payment estimates for all of the programs and activities they identified as susceptible to significant improper payments. Three federal entities did not report fiscal year 2011 estimated improper payment amounts for four risk-susceptible programs. HHS cited statutory limitations for its state-administered requirements; and, in some cases, fraud. Information on the root causes of the current improper payment Estimates is necessary for agencies to target effective corrective actions and implement preventive measures, the report says. It says additional analysis is needed to assess the root cause of improper payments, a key factor in identifying and implementing effective corrective measures. Agencies cited a number of causes for the estimated $115.3 billion in reported improper payments. These included insufficient documentation, incorrect computations, changes in program requirements, and, in some cases, fraud. Of the $46 billion, the estimated improper payment amounts were spread across the three categories, with documentation and administrative errors being cited most often. For. considered.are a factor in causing improper payments, enhancing incentives for grantees could help increase attention to preventing, identifying, and recovering overpayments. some agencies’ estimating methodologies need to be refined. We have also found that internal control weaknesses exist, heightening the risk of improper payments occurring. Until federal agencies are able to implement effective processes to completely and accurately identify the full extent of improper Payments, the federal government will not have reasonable assurance that the use of taxpayer funds is adequately safeguarded. We are currently working on engagements related to improper payment reporting at both DOD and HHS. Furthermore, as I will discuss later in this statement, additional analysis is needed. Fiscal year 2011 marked the eighth year of implementation of the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) IPIA requires executive branch agencies to annually review all programs and activities to identify those that are susceptible to significant improper payments. IPERA, enacted July 22, 2010, amended IPIA by expanding the threshold for required recovery audits from $500 million to $1 million. Another new IPERA provision calls for federal agencies’ inspectors general to annually determine whether overpayments have been made. Two agency auditors reported on compliance issues with IPIA and IPERA as part of their 2011 financial statement audits. USDA auditors identified noncompliance with the requirements of IPERA regarding the design of program internal controls related to improper payments. HHS estimated an annual amount of improper payments for some of its risk-susceptible programs, a key requirement of IPIA. HHS did not report an improper payment estimate for its TANF and CHIP programs for fiscal year 2011. A number of actions are under way across the federal government to help advance improper payment reduction goals. Calls for federal agencies’ inspectors general to annually determine whether their respective agencies are in compliance with key IPERA requirements. Under Office of Management and Budget (OMB) implementing guidance, these reports are required to be completed within 120 days of the publication of the agency’s annual PAR or AFR. OMB continues to play a key role in the oversight of the governmentwide improper payments problem. The fiscal year 2011 reports for most agencies due on March 15, 2012. to $1 million and expands the scope for recovery audits to all the oversight of the governmentwide improper payments problem. OMB has established guidance for federal agencies on reporting, reducing, and recovering improper payments. The agency has established various work groups responsible for developing recommendations aimed at improving federal financial management activities related to reducing improper payments, among other things. The work groups are: OMB, Circular No. A-136 Revised, Financial Reporting Requirements (Oct. 27, 2011); OMB Memorandum M-11-16, Issuance of Revised Parts I and II to Appendix C of OMB Circular A-123 (Apr. 14, 2011) Some agencies have reported statutory or regulatory barriers that affect their ability to pursue recovery auditing. OPM reported that financial institutions are barred from providing OPM with the information necessary to recover various overpayments. Only the Social Security Administration, Railroad Retirement Board, and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs may receive the information needed to identify the withdrawer to attempt to recover. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) reported that it faces regulatory barrier that restrict its ability to recover over payments for its Retirement Program. information necessary to identify the withdrawer to attempt to recover the overpayments because those agencies are the only ones named in the law to receive that type of information from financial institutions. Treasury has drafted language to address the issue and is working to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking to amend its regulation. In another instance, USDA reported that Section 281 of the Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994 precluded the use of recovery auditing techniques. Section 281 provides that 90 days after the decision of a state, county, or an area committee is. in controls over the Use of Public Funds and Related Improper Payments. Improper payments: Reported Medicare Estimates and Key Remediation Strategies. Opportunities to Reduce Potential Duplication in Government Programs, Save Tax Dollars, and Enhance Potential Duplicated in Government programs, Save tax dollars, and. Enhance Revenue. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work is a work of the U.S. government, it is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. improper payments. Incentives and penalties can be helpful to create management reform and to ensure adherence to performance standards. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For more information regarding this testimony, please contact Beryl H. Davis, Director, Financial Management and Assurance, at (202) 512-2623 or by e-mail at DavisBH@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony. on the last page of this testimony. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Jack Warner, Assistant Director; W. Tyler Benson; Francine Delvecchio; Crystal Lazcano; Kerry Porter; and Carrie Wehrly. For our report on the U.S. government’s consolidated financial statements for fiscal year 2011, see U.s. Department of the Treasury. 2011 Financial Report of the United States Government. GAO-12-288T. Washington, D.C.: December 7, 2011 DOD Financial Management: Weaknesses in Controls over the Use of Public Funds. entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.

ROUGE-1: 79.91, ROUGE-2: 71.22, ROUGE-L: 30.21
BERTScore: 56.07

==============================================
==================== [37/100] ====================
Summary:
The Army and the contractor concluded that using galvanized (zinc coated) steel to produce the cabs may be the only way to meet the 10-year corrosion protection requirement. Because the galvanized cab has the potential to protect against corrosion beyond the contract requirement, the Army agreed to share the cost. The Army is designing a new corrosion test to determine the number of years of protection the new design will provide. The modifications set a ceiling of $7 million on the Army’s share of costs. The first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the FMTV corrosion protection requirements. Army officials said that since the Army had specified the material to be used in 20 of the areas, it agreed to pay for necessary changes in these areas. The Army was unable to ongoing, high priority, effort and the contractor continues to be required to meet corrosion Protection requirements. Based on theFMTV corrosion problems cited in this report, we agree that improving corrosion protection should be an ongoing high priority effort. FMTV contract was terminated because of production problems and higher funding priorities. DOD also states that improving corrosion protection on tactical vehicles is an ongoing, high priority, effort and the contractor continues to be.strategy. The program’s schedule and production problems weakened its ability to compete with other programs for funds, a DOD official said. The decision was based on funding demands from higher priority programs, the official said, adding that the FMTV program was no longer a priority for the military. the cab agreement, the Army agreed to accept trucks with corrosion repairs of their cargo beds. The Army later tested the corrosion repairs made on two cabs and found the repairs unacceptable. The contractor offered to provide a 10-year corrosion protection warranty on the cabs, cargo beds, frame rails, and crossmembers on all trucks produced through February 28, 1997. Trucks produced after that date would be produced with cabs assembled new procedures. The contract was subsequently modified to require the galvanized steel cabs. terminating the final year, the contract was extended 2 additional years with the original final year’s production quantities spread over the 3-year period. The contract extension added an estimated $85 million to the original contract price. When the Army found that the first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the corrosion protection requirements, the contractor agreed to repair the corroded trucks, provide a 10-year corrosion warranty on those trucks. The contractor produced 2,491 trucks under these new procedures. The Army’s decision to award a $1.2-billion FMTV contract to a company that was not experienced in truck production. The contractor produced 2,491 trucks after McLaughlin improved its procedures to address corrosion problems found on the first 4,955 trucks. The Army also ran a contract-specified corrosion test on an FMTV cargo truck with a cab produced before McLaughlinimproved its procedures. The truck failed the test. By the end of the test, the truck was corroded in 60 areas. Stewart & Stevenson found that the main causes of the corrosion were inadequate cleaning and painting procedures by the cab subcontractor, McLaughlin Body Company. McLaughlin subsequently improved its procedures at no cost to the Army. These improvements would be reflected in trucks produced after February 28, 1997. On November 13, 1996, the Army agreed to the warranty and again began accepting trucks with corrosion repairs. The warranty limited the contractor’s liability for these repairs to $10 million. The Army withheld $1,000 or $2,000 per truck, depending on type. House Committees on Government Reform, Armed Services, and Appropriations; the Secretaries of Defense and the Army; and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. Please contact me on (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, orders should be mailed to: Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. $2 each. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Texas; Tactical Vehicle Systems, Stewart & Stevenson Services, Inc., Sealy, Texas; and Defense Finance and Accounting Service, Columbus, Ohio. We conducted our review between July 1997 and November 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the Chairmen and Ranking Minority Members of the Senate Committees on Governmental Affairs, Armed Services, and Appropriations. The Army estimated that it would cost $18.5 million to replace all of the cabs on trucks covered by the warranty. It bases its estimate on 2,864 trucks that it thought would be covered, not 4,955 trucks that actually are covered. We were not able to determine the number of air drop and standard trucks in the 2,091 trucks not included in the Army’s estimate. To produce a conservative estimate of the potential total cost, we multiplied the standard cab cost of $6,000 per truck by 2,91 trucks. We identified the number of 2.5- and 5-ton FMTV trucks accepted by the government on a monthly basis. We compared the original FMTV delivery schedules to actual delivery dates. We did not independently verify the accuracy of material receiving and shipping report data obtained from the Defense Finance and Accounting Service. The Army might have incurred additional costs as of December 31, 1997, because of delayed FMTV truck deliveries, we estimated. We then multiplied that product by the monthly additional operating and support costs for the older trucks. We estimate that as of December 31, 1997, the Army may have incurred an additional $22 million to operate the older trucks that the FMTV trucks were to replace. We determined an average operating tempo for each truck using the operating tempo reported by the same three Army major commands. We based our estimate of the potential cost of replacing all of the cabs on trucks covered by the corrosion warranty on an Army estimate. The Army estimated that it would cost $18.5 million to replace the trucks. At a projected cost of $15.7 billion, the FMTV program is one of the Army’s largest acquisition programs. The Army plans to purchase 85,488 FMTV trucks to replace its aging medium truck fleet. Under the program, the Army will purchase a family of 2.5- and 5-ton trucks based on a common truck cab and chassis. The trucks will consist of cargo, long wheel base cargo, dump, fuel tanker, and trailer variants, among others. trucks. Stewart & Stevenson completed production under the contract in November 1998. The initial production contract does not include the 5-ton fuel tanker, 5- ton van, and both trailers. These vehicles will be included in future production contracts. The contract contained options for additional trucks. The fifth year of the contract was subsequently restructured and the Contract was extended 2 years. In our November 1998 report, we found that the Army had not (1) instituted safeguards to ensure that existing production problems did not occur in follow-on production contracts and (2) performed a cost and benefit analysis. contract, it established a source selection board, which evaluated the proposals of the three competing contractors. The Army gave highest consideration to the technical and cost factors of the proposals. Stewart & Stevenson was selected because its proposal offered the best value for meeting the Army’s overall requirements and receives the highest score for the technical factor and was the lowest cost. The board considered the government's previous experience with the prototype contractors as part of the Army's overall production readiness evaluation. This evaluation noted that Stewart and Stevenson had no prior experience in high volume production of combat. had no prior experience in high volume production of combat or tactical vehicles, (2) needed to convert European engineering drawings to U.S. specifications and standards, and (3) had unsatisfactory delivery performance on past low dollar purchase orders. To acquire FMTV truck production capability, Stewart & Stevenson purchased a plant from an oil-drilling equipment manufacturer, configured the plant for truck production, and established a tactical truck division. The contract required the contractor to deliver a minimum of 85 trucks by October 1992. production process beyond the current capability of truck manufacturers, (2) FMTV truck configurations would be established and subjected to prototype testing prior to the production contract award, and (3) contractors participating in the prototype competition either had produced military trucks in the past or were affiliated with an experienced military truck producer. Stewart & Stevenson was a distribution and service company trucks. The Army planned to have enough trucks to fully equip its first unit with FMTV trucks by October 1993—about 24 months after contract award. of seven variants—cargo, long wheel base cargo, dump, fuel tanker, tractor, van, and wrecker—and a 5-ton trailer. In the prototype phase, three companies were awarded contracts to develop and produce prototype trucks for evaluation and testing. On October 11, 1991, the Army awarded the winning contractor, Stewart & Stevenson Services, Inc., Houston, Texas, a $1.2 billion, 5-year fixed-price production contract for the first 10,843 FMTV trucks. Stewart & Stevenson subcontracted with Steyr to design and develop FMTV prototypes based on the design of a truck Steyr produced for the Austrian army. Steyr completed its subcontract work before Stewart & Stevenson submitted its production proposal and was not included in the production phase of the program. When the Army issued the solicitation for the production contract, it established a source selection board, which evaluated the source selection work. The contract was not awarded until after the board's evaluation of Steyr's work. contractor had to stop new production for 5 months and produced only 175 new trucks during the other 4 months. The contract required the contractor to pay for the modifications needed to make the trucks meet FMTV requirements. The Army changed its plans to terminate the final year of the 5-year FMTV production contract when the Congress provided additional funding to continue the program. The agreement increased the price of the FMTV trucks. The project office has not determined the exact cost of the contract extension but has an estimate that it will add $85 million to the Army's contract cost. Initial operational testing was originally scheduled to be completed in June 1993. Because of production problems, the Army did not begin operational testing until October 1993. The trucks failed the test because they did not meet reliability and some performance requirements. The Army identified over 90 problems that the contractor was required to correct. Operational testing of the new trucks began in April 1995. The first unit was not equipped with FMTV trucks until January 1996, 2 years and 3 months after the initial testing began. The tests were assessed as having met the FMTV requirements in both tests. to deliver a minimum of 85 trucks by October 1992 for production qualification testing, initial operational testing, and technical manual verification. The contractor delivered its first truck in March 1993 and did not deliver 85 trucks until March 1994. As a result, the start of the production qualification and operational testing was delayed. Production qualification testing was originally scheduled to be completed in August 1993; the test was not completed until December 1994. The test was designed to determine whether the FMTV FMTV trucks until January 1996, 2 years and 3 months later than planned. The Army did not execute a low-risk acquisition strategy. Rather than a lengthy development phase, the Army decided to conduct a prototype competition and use even though the trucks were not meeting test requirements. We recommended that the Army include safeguards in follow-on production contracts so that it does not repeat errors. The Army used a streamlined acquisition strategy to reduce the time required to develop and field FMTV trucks. The reduction in time was to be achieved by combining the demonstration and validation phase and the engineering and manufacturing development phase. officials and reviewed various FMTV program documents. For early historical data, we had to rely mainly on oral testimony because many documents dealing with the early program were unavailable. To determine the impact of delays in delivering FMTV trucks, we calculated additional operating and support costs the Army might have incurred. We were able to obtain some of the earlier documents, mostly those dealing with FMTV truck testing, by reviewing our workpapers from previous reviews of the program. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. the Army decided to conduct a prototype competition and use the results as part of the evaluation of proposals for a production contract. The Army believed this strategy would be low-risk partly because the contractors participating in the prototype competition were experienced in producing military trucks. However, the Army did not include experience or affiliation with an experienced truck producer as a requirement in the production contract solicitation and subsequently awarded the FMTV multiyear production contract to a contractor that was neither experienced in truck production nor affiliated with a truck producer. enclosure providing additional contextual information for some of the issues in the report. In the enclosure, DOD stated that it believed the acquisition strategy for the FMTV program has been appropriate. According to DOD, the competitive source selection took into account a balance of factors, including the contractor’s assessed production capabilities. We did not find the combination of awarding a contract. with an aggressive production schedule to an inexperienced truck producer, who had no affiliation with an experienced truck producer. consistent with a low-risk acquisition strategy. in truck production nor affiliated with an experienced truck producer. Contract contained an aggressive production schedule that did not take into account the contractor’s inexperience. The inexperienced contractor had problems establishing a production line and producing trucks that met testing requirements. These problems resulted in substantial delays in delivering the trucks. In response to the schedule delays, the Army and contractor agreed to accelerate truck production during testing even though the trucks were not meeting test requirements. The trucks were later delivered on time and on schedule.

ROUGE-1: 67.37, ROUGE-2: 62.26, ROUGE-L: 21.56
BERTScore: 60.15

==============================================
==================== [38/100] ====================
Summary:
check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066. issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. This is because buyouts usually result in the separation of employees with higher salaries and benefits than those who are separated through RIFs. Because of the rights of higher graded employees to “bump” or “retreat” to lower-graded positions during a RIF, employees separated are frequently not those who were in the positions originally targeted for elimination. We found that buyouts could generate up to 50 percent more in net savings than Rifs over the 5-year period following separation. such situations, buyouts or RIFs may be necessary. In comparing the costs and savings of buyouts and Rifs, our analysis showed that buyouts offered greater savings than RIF's, except when RIFed employees do not bump and retreat and are eligible to retire. This concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to answer any questions you or Members of the Subcommittee may have. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. non-Department of Defense (DOD) executive branch agencies to pay buyouts to employees who agreed to resign, retire, or take voluntary early retirement by March 31, 1995. DOD, though subject to the act’s governmentwide FTE ceilings, has the authority, under earlier legislation, to offer buyouts through September 30, 1999. For both DOD and non-DOD agencies, the buyout payment was the lesser of $25,000 or an employee's severance pay entitlement. According to OPM data, more than 112,500 buyouts had been paid governmentwide. buyout legislation, the buyouts appeared to have helped agencies downsize without adversely affecting workforce diversity. Of the nearly 83,000 employees who were paid buyouts from fiscal year 1993 through March 31, 1995, 52 percent were white males. The percentage of women in the workforce increased from 43.4 percent at the end of fiscal year 1992 to 44.6 percent by March 1, 1995. Likewise, during that same time period, the percentage of minorities went from 27.9 percent to 28. 9 percent of the workforce. The federal workforce is being reduced at a faster pace than was called for by the Workforce Restructuring Act. The act mandated a ceiling of 2,043,300 FTE positions for fiscal year 1995. By the end of fiscal year 1997, the administration’s budget calls for the federal workforce to be nearly 53,000 positions below the ceiling. DOD absorbed nearly three-quarters of the FTE reductions in fiscal year 1994 and over half of the governmentwide reductions in Fiscal Year 1995. Some agencies may need to pare down their workforces more than others as budgets are reduced, programs are dropped, and/or missions are changed. In such circumstances, some agencies may not be able to meet workforce reduction goals through attrition. Other downsizing strategies, such as buyouts or RIFs, may be necessary. do so 3 years earlier. If it were to reduce at this pace, NASA has said that it not be refilled by government or contractor personnel. Projected savings would be reduced by reducing management control positions. The Federal Workforce Restructuring Act of 1994 (P.L. 103-226) placed annual ceilings on executive branch full-time equivalent (FTE) positions from fiscal years 1994 through 1999. To help accomplish this downsizing, the act allowed non-Department of Defense (DOD) executive branch agencies to pay buyouts in fiscal year 1995. In fiscal year 1997, DOD is expected to absorb all of the FTE reductions made that year while the non-DOD workforce is expectedto increase by a net total of 0.2 percent. From September 30, 1994, through March 1995, the on-board executive branch civilian workforce dropped from 2,164,727 employees to 2,032,440 employees. CPDF data show that of the 132,287 reductions, 48 percent involved buyouts and 6 percent came from RIFs. The remaining 46 percent involved separations without buyouts or the basis for separation was not identified in the CPDF. The administration, through NPR, recommended that agencies direct their workforce reductions at specific “management control” positions that the administration said added little. attrition, and the cost and savings implications of buyouts versus reductions-in-force (RIF) We obtained information on the results of federal downsizing activities by analyzing workforce data contained in the Office of Personnel Management’s (OPM) Central Personnel Data File (CPDF) for fiscal year 1992 through November of fiscal year 1996. Our estimate of the extent to which mandated workforce reduction goals can be achieved by attrition was based on workforce trends in the President's fiscal year 1997 federal budget. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: We are pleased to be here today to discuss the progress being made in downsizing the federal workforce and agencies’ use of buyouts. As agreed with your office, our statement includes information on the results to date of federal downsizing efforts. We estimate that the statutorily mandated workforce reduction goals could be met through attrition, and the cost and savings implications of buy outs versus attrition. We also discuss the demographic results of the buyouts and the extent to which we estimate that they could be achieved through attrition. NASA has said that it would anticipate that RIFs would be necessary. Study finds that, over a 5-year period, buyouts would generally result in more savings to taxpayers. This is because buyouts usually result in the separation of employees. The study was published in the journal of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, which is published by the Association for Aeronautical and Space Studies (AAS). AAS is a nonprofit that promotes aerospace and space exploration in the United States. The percentage of supervisors at DOD agencies dipped from 12.7 percent of the workforce to 11.9 percent. All but one of the other designated management control positions increased somewhat. Acquisition positions showed no change. Non-DOD agencies came only slightly closer to meeting the NPR goals. Some employees delayed their separations so that they could receive a buyout. Although it was not an explicit goal of the buyout legislation, the buyouts appeared to have helped agencies downsize. Some positions showed a proportional reduction or slight increases. specific “management control” positions that the administration said added little value to serving taxpayers. Such positions included those held by (1) managers and supervisors and (2) employees in headquarters, personnel, budget, procurement, and accounting occupations. By fiscal year 1999, the administration called on agencies to increase managers’ and supervisors’ span of control over other employees from a ratio of 1:7 to 1:15. In our draft report on agencies’ use of buyouts that we are preparing for this Subcommittee, we present preliminary data showing that, as a proportion of the workforce as a whole, management control positions have been cut by half.

ROUGE-1: 72.34, ROUGE-2: 65.61, ROUGE-L: 28.43
BERTScore: 56.95

==============================================
==================== [39/100] ====================
Summary:
Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) are a tool developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and used by various federal agencies. DOE has acknowledged that TRLs can play a key role in assessing the maturity of technologies during the contracting process. Other agencies similarly charged with developing technologies, such as NASA and the Department of Defense (DOD), use TRL's to characterize technologies. The agency recently issued a Technology Readiness Assessment Guide, which lays out three key steps to conducting technology readiness assessments. Using TRLs we developed for these technologies, we found consensus among stakeholders that CCS is less mature than efficiency technologies. We found that the Office of Fossil Energy does not use a standard set of benchmarks or terms to describe or report on the maturity of technologies. DOE’s goals for advancing these technologies sometimes use terms that are not well defined. The lack of such benchmarks or an assessment of the maturity. of key coal technologies and whether they are achieving planned or desired results limits. the Guide is not mandatory, DOE’s Office of Environmental Management uses the Guide as part of managing its procurement activities. The National Nuclear Security Administration has used TRLs recently as well. In the absence of an assessment from DOE, we asked stakeholders to gauge the maturity of coal technologies using a scale we developed based onTRLs. Table 2 shows the TRLes we developed for coal technologies by adapting the NASA TRL for that technology. The TRL was developed to measure and communicate risks associated with using critical technologies in a novel way. The TRLs are used by various federal agencies to rate the extent to which technologies have been demonstrated to work as intended using a scale of 1 to 9. We consulted with the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), which had recently used a similar approach to examine the maturity of coal technologies. For example, EPRI defined TRL 8 as demonstration at more than 25 percent the size of a commercial scale plant. We applied these benchmarks to a coal power plant and came up with the TRL. for review and comment. In addition, we provided selected slides on reliability of electricity supply to NERC for comment. We received written comments from DOE’s Assistant Secretary of the Office of Fossil Energy, which are reproduced in appendix III. The Assistant Secretary concurred with our recommendation, stating that DOE could improve its process for providing a clearer picture of technology maturity. He also said DOE planned to conduct a formal TRL assessment of coal technologies in the near future. We have incorporated technical comments, which we have incorporated as appropriate. Many technologies to improve plant efficiency have been used and are available for commercial use now, but still face challenges. injection wells can be permitted as Class I (injections of hazardous wastes, industrial nonhazardous wastes, municipal wastewater) or Class V wells. According to EPA, once site site is closed, there is no risk of. endangerment of underground sources of drinking water until the operator meets all the closure and post-closure requirements and EPA approves site closure of the well. Injections not included in other classes, including wells used in experimental technologies such as pilot CO for geologic sequestration. EPA plans to finalize the geologic sequestration rule in fall 2010. Well operators will only be liable under the SDWA if they violate or fail to comply with EPA orders in situations where an imminent and substantial endangerment to health is posed by a contaminant. Neither the proposed rule nor the final rule will address liability for unintended releases of stored CO emissions in lieu of more efficient coal plants. In addition, some higher emitting coal plants may be subject to liability for the release of CO emissions. To identify stakeholders’ views on these technologies, we conducted initial scoping interviews with power plant operators, technology vendors, and federal officials. We selected a group of 19 stakeholders with expertise in carbon capture and storage (CCS) or technologies to improve coal plant efficiency and asked them a set of standard questions. This group of stakeholders included representatives from major laboratories, the National Academy of Sciences, International Energy Agency (IEA), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Global CCS Institute, and National Coal Council. operated. We also reviewed available data on the use of key coal technologies compiled by IEA and the Global CCS Institute. In addition to the contact names above, key contributors to this report included Jon Ludwigson (Assistant Director), Chloe Brown, Scott Heacock, Alison O’Neill, Kiki Theodoropoulos, and Jarrod West. Important assistance was also provided by Chuck Bausell, Nirmal Chaudhary, Cindy Gilbert, Madhav Panwar, and Jeanette Soares. May 2010, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We selected this nonprobability sample of states because they contained projects involving advanced coal technologies. To conduct this work, we reviewed key reports including those from the Department of Energy’s (DOE) national laboratories, the National Academy of Sciences, International Energy Agency, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. EPA and NERC provided technical comments, which we have incorporated as appropriate. Unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. If you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. Click here to read the full report. GAO conducted this performance audit from July 2009 through May 2010, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We interviewed senior DOE staff on these Visited coal power plants and research facilities in three selected states—AL, MD, and WV4. all U.S. emissions of COCO2 is the most prevalent greenhouse gas (GHG) program and interviewed seniorDOE staff on the plants and facilities in these states. We conducted the audit in compliance with GAO standards. Review (NSR) requirements that may apply when a plant makes a major modification, a physical or operational change that would result in a significant net increase in emissions. Technologies to improve plant efficiency offer potential near-term reductions, but also raise some concerns. The National Coal Council has also reported temporary declines in reliability during past deployments of new coal technologies. We provided a draft of our report to the Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of EPA for review and comment. In addition, we provided selected slides. IEA estimated that CCS technologies could meet 20 percent of reductions needed to reduce global CO. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) researchers called CCS the “critical enabling technology” to reduce CO emissions while allowing continued use of coal in the future. In 2009, NAS reported that if C CS technologies are not demonstrated commercially in the next decade, the electricity sector could move more.in greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, CCS could allow coal to remain part of the nation’s diverse fuel mix. TRLs we developed for coal technologies by adapting the NASA TRLs. for EOR use. Commercial deployment of CCS within 10 to 15 years is possible according to DOE and other stakeholders. But this is contingent on overcoming a variety of economic, technical, and legal challenges. plants have already been demonstrated commercially. For example, ultrasupercritical plants ranging from 600 to more than 1,000 MW have been built or are under construction in Europe and Asia. There are five IGCC plants in operation around the world, including two in the United States. lieu of more efficient coal plants. Some higher efficiency plant designs also face technical challenges in that they require more advanced materials than are currently available. From a legal perspective, most stakeholders reported that making efficiency upgrades to the existing fleet of coal power plants was limited by the prospect of triggering the Clean Air Act’s New Source Review (NSR) requirements. For example, “advanced” ultrasupercritical plants require development of metal alloys to withstand steam temperatures that could be 300 to 500 degrees Fahrenheit higher. In the next decade, the electricity sector could move more towards using natural gas to meet emissions targets. Most stakeholders told us that CCS would increase electricity prices. MIT estimated that plants with post-combustion capture have 61 percent higher cost of electricity. IGCC plants with pre- Combustion Capture (CCS) have a 27% higher cost compared to plants without these technologies, according to DOE. Some utility officials said CCS could lead to a decline in the ability of individual plants to operate reliably because a power plant might need more water. a commercial scale plant. We defined a commercial scale power plant as 500 megawatts (MW) and emitting about 3 millions tons of carbon dioxide (CO) annually. We based this definition on some of the key reports we reviewed, which used 500 MW as a standard power plant. Such a plant would emit about 3 million tons of CO emissions from a power plant can vary based on a variety of factors, including the amount of time that a power Plant is operated. We also reviewed available data on the use of

ROUGE-1: 81.82, ROUGE-2: 73.33, ROUGE-L: 34.06
BERTScore: 76.37

==============================================
==================== [40/100] ====================
Summary:
A complex set of provisions has been enacted to regulate competition for consolidation loan refinance business. In effect, some of these provisions constrain borrowers' ability to choose among consolidators. One way to address this situation is through offering borrowers multiple refinanceopportunities. Any added interest benefit for a borrower, however, would likely expand federal subsidycosts. Some FFEL lenders object to making a change in this area, asserting they offersome up front discounts on Stafford and PLUS loans based on the assumption they will be able tohold the loan over its life. Borrowers with less than $7,500 in outstanding loans seeking toconsolidate in FFEL may receive a maximum repayment term of 10 years. A 12-year repaymentterm is available to borrowers with that level of debt in DL. Married persons, each ofwhom has eligible loans, are eligible for a joint consolidation loan. Only one of the borrowers mustmeet the full set of individual eligibility requirements for a new consolidation loan, but each agrees to become jointly and severally liable for repayment. of predictable monthly payments which manyborrowers desire. Others feel that a borrower is better served under a variable rate formula where the borrower is able to take advantage of low market rates when available. It is likely that student loan interest rates will be hotly debated. Part of the debate is likely to focus on enhancing or preserving borrower benefits. There will also likely be concerns about thefederal subsidy cost. This is because, in the FFEL program, lenders are provided with a federal subsidy. the favorable rates currently in effect on their variable rate loans. This has enabled a largenumber of borrowers to secure a valuable refinance benefit. Over the last two years, in which very lowrates have been available, an estimated $63 billion in loan volume has been consolidated. Whenborrowers exercise their option to lock in low rates permanently the federal government is potentiallyexposed to high subsidy costs. In the FFEL program, this is so because the government hasguaranteed the lenders a market rate of return. In the DL program, subsidy costs increasewhen repayment revenue is reduced. Those in favor of the existing fixed rate setting formula assert that in the current low interest environment the fixed rate amounts to a valuable benefit to borrowers. Those opposed to sustaining the existing rate setting formulas suggest it offers an overlygenerous borrower benefit that is costly to the point of placing future aid in jeopardy. The removal of this benefit would amount to dropping a large share of the interest subsidy currently available to borrowers, they say. an extension of the debate on the fixed rate benefit. Borrowers who have lockedin fixed rates through consolidation in high interest periods sometimes miss out on moreadvantageous variable rates. Some borrowers fare worse under the high fixed ratesthey lock in. This raises concern, particularly with regard to those using consolidation for repaymentrelief (i.e., extended repayment) One way to address this situation is through offering borrowers borrowers fixed rates on variable-rate loans instead offixed rates on fixed rates. fixed interest rates of 6.8% for Stafford loans and 7.9% for PLUS loans disbursed thereafter. In the upcoming reauthorization of the HEA it is likely that borrower interest rates will onceagain receive consideration. Some feel that a fixed rate provides the borrower with a set of predictable monthly payments which manyborrowers desire. Others feel that the 6.7% fixed rate set to take effect for new loans made on or after July 1, 2006 is a good rate in comparison to historical borrower rates. would also delay the point at which they begin paying downloan principal. Consolidation loans were originally introduced in the HEA Amendments of 1986 ( P.L.99-498 ). They were initially intended to simplify repayment for borrowers, simplify loan repaymentservicing for lenders, and offer relief in the form of extended repayment to those borrowers seekinglower monthly payments. As the consolidation loan interest rate formula has been modified byCongress, consolidation loans may no longer offer the fixed rate benefit on consolidation loans. the subsidized Stafford loans while the borrower is in school (on at least a half-time basis) and during grace periods and deferment periods. PLUS loans: Variable rate loans available to parentsof dependent undergraduate students. The interest rates on these loans adjust annually, based on astatutorily established, market-indexed, rate-setting formula, and may not exceed9%. Consolidation loans: Loans that provide borrowersrefinancing options. A consolidation loan may be comprised of one underlying loan or multipleunderlying loans. Consolidation loans also enableborrowers to lower monthly payments by extending the repayment period. Borrowers seeking a DL consolidation loan may consolidate anyeligible loans that have been fully disbursed even if the borrowers have not yet entered a repaymentor grace period. This affords borrowers greater opportunity to lock in as permanent favorablevariable rates in effect in years when the interest rates are capped at 8.25%. (4) There are underlying tensions inherent in the current design of the loan programs that affect many of the reauthorization issues considered in this each loan they areseeking to consolidate. is because, in the FFEL program, lenders are provided a federal interestsubsidy payment (discussed later) when the statutorily set borrower rate fails to provide lenders amarket rate of return. In the DL program, where the federal government acts as lender, federalsubsidy costs increase when repayment revenues are reduced. Across both programs, more generousborrower benefits generally increase federal costs. Lenders may opt to pay the fee or a portion of the fee on the borrower'sbehalf in order to secure loan business. programs that affect many of the reauthorization issues considered in this report. It is generally thecase that enhancements to borrower benefits increase federal subsidy costs. For instance, in theFFEL program, where the government insures and subsidizes loans made by private lenders, federalsubsidy costs increase when interest subsidypayments to lenders are increased. In the DL program,where the government acts as lender,Federal subsidy costs are increased when less revenue is derived from borrower fees and when interest subsidies to lenders is increased. government acts as lender, federal subsidy costs are increased when borrower fees orrepayment revenues paid to the government are reduced. Another tension stems from dissimilarities in FFEL and DL program loan terms andconditions. The two programs disburse the same set of loans, but loan terms are notperfectly parallel across the two programs. Some favor promoting parallel terms and conditions, others do not if parallel terms are achieved by reducing a benefit currently available in only one of the programs. (5) Interest Rates on Stafford and PLUS Loans. goes to guaranty agencies to help offset loan insurance costs. Guarantors may wave the fee, and if the fee is assessed lenders may opt to pay the fee or a portion of the fee on the borrower's behalf. In FY2003,borrower origination fees generated approximately $1.3 billion in revenue across the two programs. Also, attention may be devoted to examining the comparability of borrower origination fee rates with other sources of revenue. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA) is being considered for reauthorization. Title IV of the HEA authorizes the major federal student aid programs. In FY2003, the federal student loan programs provided $45.8 billion in new loans tostudents and their parents. This report discusses issues concerning theStudent loan programs that are likely to be considered during reauthorisation. The report is organized in the following manner. First it provides background informationon the student loan Programs and their loans. Then it provides an overview of many of the issueslikely to receive attention in the reauthoration. Under the FFEL program, loan capital is provided by private lenders, and the federalgovernment guarantees lenders against loss through borrower default, death, permanent disability,or, in limited instances, bankruptcy. Under the DL program, operated through the U.S. Department of Education, the federal government provides the loans to students and their families. The two programs rely on different sources ofcapital and different administrative structures, but essentially disburse the same set of loans. The DL program was intended to help students meet the costs of postsecondary education. loans. The DL program, established in 1993, was intended to streamline the student loan deliverysystem and achieve cost savings. In FY2003, these programsprovided $45.8 billion in new loans to students and their parents. In that year the FFEL programprovided 8,429,000 new loans averaging approximately $4,009 each and the DL program provided2,937,000new loans. Currently both programs areauthorized and the two programs compete for student loan business. averaging approximately $4,009 each and the DL program provided2,937,000 new loans averaging approximately $ 4,075 each. The FFEL and DL programs provide the following types of loans to students and theirparents: Stafford loans (subsidized and unsubsidized): Lowinterest, variable rate loans available to undergraduate and graduate students. To qualify for a subsidized Stafford loan, astudent must establish financial need. The federal government pays the interest on the borrower'sbehalf on the subsidized Stafford loans while the borrower is in school. two programs. attention may be devoted to examining the comparability of borrower fees chargedacross and within the two loan programs. To limit the federal government'ssubsidy costs, and to limit the amount of debt incurred by borrowers, annual and aggregate Staffordborrowing caps have been established. The current caps for undergraduate students, which were enacted in the HigherEducation Amendments of 1992 ( P.L. 102-325 ), are as follows. As Table 1 shows, dependency status is a key factor in determining loan limits.  FFEL borrowers are allowed to choose among standard, graduated, and income sensitiverepayment plans. For new borrowers on or after October 7, 1998, who accumulate (after such date)outstanding loans totaling more than $30,000, a fourth repayment option is available. Income contingent repayment is available to all DL unsubsidized and subsidized Stafford borrowers. In FFEL, all repayment plans offer a 10-year repayment term with the exception of extended repayment under which repayment must occur within a time period not toexceed 25 years. period not to exceed 25 years. Repayment periods forDL extended and graduated repayment plans vary with the size of the loan. Some interest exists in adding a new "interest only"repayment option. Under such an option, a borrower would have low "interest-only" payments intheir initial years after graduation, but would also delay the point at which they begin paying. It is likely that some attention may be devoted to adopting more comparable repaymentoptions across the two programs. Dependency status is a key determinant of a student's personal borrowinglimits. It is assumed thatdependent students and the parents of dependent students will co-finance the postsecondaryeducation of the dependent students. Some have questioned,however, whether dependent students in particular are being provided adequate borrowingopportunities if they have to self finance their studies. In general, those in favor of expanding borrowing opportunities for dependent students are more likely to support the expansion of the federal PLUS program. finance their studies. In general, those in favor of expanding loan limits suggest loan limits have not kept pace withtuition increases and thus constrain students' ability to finance their education. Those opposed suggest it is undesirable for students to incurmore debt, and question whether the expansion of borrowing opportunities will have any positiveeffect on access, choice or persistence. Also at issue arefederal subsidy costs, because as borrowing opportunities are expanded so are federal subsidy costs. Repayment Plans. Issues concerning repaymentplans that surface with some regularity relate to differences point of placing future aid in jeopardy. They alsoquestion whether it is necessary to offer a refinance benefit when the rate is already subsidized onStafford loans. Further they question whether a benefit received in the years after postsecondaryschooling contributes in any way to students' postsecondary access, persistence, or choice. They notethe repayment period subsidy is provided without regard to need, over a lengthy period potentiallyextending up to 30 years beyond schooling, and disproportionately benefits students who attendedfour-year private institutions and/or graduate programs. activities, and improving efficiency. The 1998 amendments adopted a "risk sharing" approach. Under this approach, uses ofreserves are restricted, and guarantors are afforded flexibility in the use of their operating funds. It is likely that some attention will be devoted to the solvency of Federal Funds (i.e., locallyheld federal reserve funds) and the size of Operating Funds -- which can be used to support agencyoperations and also for discretionary student financial aid expenditures. Some concerns have been raised aboutshrinking reserves and robust Operating Funds. these benefits based upon their own status. Concerns have been raised about complications that may ensue for unsuccessful marriages. Guaranty agenciesadminister the federal government's loan guarantee. The role guarantors play within the FFELprogram has evolved a good deal since the program's inception. Initially, the role of the guaranty agencies was limited to guaranteeing the loan amount to be taken out by a single person. Now, they play a much larger role in the program, helping to guarantee loans for families of multiple people. evolved a good deal since the program's inception. Initially, the federal governmentintended to encourage the growth of state loan insurance programs. Over time the federalgovernment assumed the role of providing the insurance and now guaranty agencies service the federal guarantee and perform various program administrative tasks. Changes adopted during the 1998 reauthorization focused on strengthening therelationship between revenues and activities, and improving efficiency. The 1998 amendments adopted a "risk-based" approach to the FFEL program, with the aim of making it more efficient. large proportion of federal SAP subsidies. The Taxpayer-Teacher Protection Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108-409 );signed October 30, 2004, curbs growth in 9.5% loans, for one year. It does not curtail the 9. 5% guaranteeon new loans stemming from any new refinancing of obligations originally issued on orafter October 1, 1980 and prior to October1, 1993. However, there is some debate about how best to phase out theguarantee for nonprofit lenders. 1993. A phase out of the 9.5% guarantee would produce savings in mandatory spending. Thesesavings could be used to offset new expenditures. However, it does not curtail the. 9. 5% guaranteeon new loans stemming from "recycling"of proceeds from outstanding 9.4% loans. These proceedscan be use to finance new 9.3% loans, which are guaranteed by the U.S. government. This would reduce the need for the government to guarantee new loans. This could lead to a reduction in the cost of borrowing. returns (i.e., returns above the market-indexed SAP rate) Some argue that since the SAP is designed to approximate fair market compensation it isunnecessary to compensate lenders at levels that exceed the SAP rate. There seems to bebroad Congressional support for curbing this rate guarantee for future loans. The legislativedevelopments that led to the enactment of the guarantee are briefly described below. As part of an effort to ensure the FFEL program, the federal government provides a guarantee of a minimum 9.5% rate for lenders. 9.5% floor loans comprise a relatively small percentage of all outstanding loans. They have accounted for a very large proportion of federal SAP subsidies. In recent years lenders havebeen using a variety of refinancing techniques, and also invested earnings from existing 9. 5% floorloans to make or purchase new ones. There appear to be a number of ways for banks to finance 9.5%, including by using the proceeds from the sale of existing loans and by using earnings from new loans. guarantor fees for loancollections and defaulted loan rehabilitation work may be too high thus inflating Operating Funds. Excess Interest Provisions. The federal government provides lenders with a loan subsidy known as a special allowance payment(SAP) The SAP amount is determined on a quarterly basis by a statutory formula which is tied to a financial index and ensures lenders receive, at a minimum, a specified level of interest income onloans. The SAP is designed to compensate lenders for the difference between the below-market,statutorily set interest rate charged to borrowers. and a market set interest rate that is intended as fairmarket compensation on the loan asset. In some instances lenders receive interest income from borrowers exceeding the amountcalled for by the SAP calculation. The amount of income lenders receive above the government SAPrate is often called "floor income" The SAP affords lenders necessary protection in high interest environments during which thestatutorily established borrower rate may provide lenders insufficient below-market rate returns. However, in low interest environments, the statutorilyestablished borrower rate has the potential of providing lenders with above-market returns (i.e., returns above the market-indexed SAP rate) The Tax Reform Act of 1976 included provisions to encourage the issuance of tax-exempt student loan bonds. Such bonds are exempt from federal taxation, and are used by states to finance below market interest rate loans for students. In essence, through theissuance of bonds with low tax- exempt interest rates, state authorities are able to raise "low cost"funds, and then re-lend the funds at higher rates. Soon after these provisions were passed, student bond volume began to grow rapidly, andconcerns were raised. were passed, student bond volume began to grow rapidly, andconcerns about the profitability of tax exempt student loans surfaced. The 1980 HEA amendmentstook steps to curb the profitability. of tax-exempt loans by reducing by half the SAP rate on loans. However, to ensure that student loan authoritieswere always able to cover their operating costs, the amendments also established minimum SAPs,for loans disbursed on or after October 1, 1980, which ensure a minimum return of 9.5% on theseloans. tax-exempt student loans continued through the 1980son into the early 1990s. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ( P.L. 103-66 ) contained a provision eliminating the floor on tax-exempt loans supported through tax- exempt financing forissuances on or after October 1, 1993. These loans were afforded the same SAP rates as wereavailable for taxable loans. However, different provisions were retained with regard to loans made or purchased with tax- exemptedfunds obtained by holders from obligations originally issued on or afterwards. were set to take effect July 1, 1998. The decision to move toward a comparable maturity rate was made in 1993. The interest rate issue was revisited in 2002 with the passage of P.L. 107-139. This measureextended the existing variable rate setting formulas through June. 30, 2003, after which the comparable maturity rates wereonce again set toTake effect. (7) The current formula was initially enacted in the Student Loan Reform Act(SLRA) of 1993, the legislation that created the DL program. As of July 2006, new Stafford and PLUS loans will carry fixed interest rates. The desirability of thisplanned switch has been the subject of considerable debate. Student loan interest rates were a focal issue in the 1998 reauthorization. The statutory ratesetting formulas are used to establish rates for loans disbursed from July 1, 1998 through June30, 2006. The current rate setting formulas were adopted as a result of deliberations that centered on replacing so called "comparable maturity rates" that were set to take effect July 1. 1998.

ROUGE-1: 76.94, ROUGE-2: 68.74, ROUGE-L: 34.62
BERTScore: 55.72

==============================================
==================== [41/100] ====================
Summary:
financial assistance. In addition, ISTEA continued authorizations for a separate Bridge Replacement and Rehabilitation Program and Interstate Maintenance Program. ISTEA expanded the use of equity adjustments for the apportionment of federal-aid funds among the states. It also created “hold harmless’ funding, which establishes the state’s share of overall federal highway apportionments. It embodied quality-of-life objectives, stating that the nation's transportation system should be economically efficient and environmentally sound. While these goals remain a part of the overall surface transportation program, ISTEA broadened the goals and included new programs, planning processes, and management systems. For example, the Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement Program (CMAQ) directs funds to transportation projects in clean air nonattainment areas. ISTEA also provides for increased emphasis on mobility for the elderly, disabled, and economically disadvantaged. The goal is to ensure that the states’ transportation plans are intermodal (that is, coordinate various modes of transportation), environmentally sound, and energy efficient. Section 1098 of ISTEA tasked us with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds to the states. A review of the program’s objectives could be structured to recognize differences among highways and the federal role associated with important highways, such as those included in the NHS. Regardless of the factors chosen, some states will experience disadvantages that the construction of a formula may not be able to compensate for. Which states are negatively affected changes with the factors choosing and the percentage weights assigned to various factors. percent of a state’s apportionment for the Interstate Maintenance and NHS programs can be transferred to the state's surface transportation program. The flexible funding provisions have allowed decisionmakers at the state and regional level to decide for themselves whether to allocate transportation funds to highway or transit projects. In fiscal year 1995, $2,160.6 million in highway funds had been transferred to transit projects and $2.2 million in transit funds had gone applicable, any modifications to that funding realized through equity adjustments. funding for the four programs is fixed over the 6-year authorization period for ISTEA. The factors underlying the distribution of highway funds to the states, such as land area and postal mileage, are generally outdated and often do not reflect the extent or use of the nation’s highway system. Alternative factors such as lane miles, are more closely aligned with highway needs. Addressing the states’ highway needs, like the miles of highway in need of repair and the deterioration of the highway associated with traffic loads, is key. The data underlying the distribution of highway funds to the states are generally outdated, unresponsive to changing conditions, and often not reflective of the nation’s highway system or its usage. Because the percentage share is fixed for the four largest programs, any updated data that are factored into the calculation for two of these programs are negated. On the basis of our analysis and discussions with federal and state officials, we believe that the federal government should increase its share of highway funding for the states. Federal highway funds are provided to the states through the Federal Highway Administration. The money is distributed through various formula calculations and, to a lesser extent, through congressionally designated projects. Funds from these sources are collected from users and credited to the Highway Trust Fund for highway and mass transit projects or related activities. The fund is divided into a highway account and a mass transit account. DOT forecasts that the income to the highway account will total $20.5 billion in fiscal year 1996. The federal-aid systems—designated routes on which federal funds may be used—were at the core of the federal- aid highway program. Interstate. fuel consumption reflects travel on all roads, not just on the federal-aid system or on roads under a state’s jurisdiction. Fuel consumption patterns may differ across states because of the urban-rural population mix, the amount of travel done under congested conditions, differences in physical conditions. These data are reported by states monthly and adjusted at year's end. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the close of the calendar year. It would not be a precise measure for apportioning funds to specific groups of roads. of a federal-aid system does not mean the road is owned, operated, or maintained by the federal government. The designation is simply the first step in establishing the eligibility of selected state and local roads for federal assistance. Previously, federal aid was apportioned to Interstate, primary, secondary, and urban highways. ISTEA created only two systems: the National Highway System (NHS) and the Interstate System, which is a component of the NHS. The NHS is the centerpiece of ISTEA, and the system is expected to be the major focus for theFederal-aid highway program into the future. the major focus for the federal-aid highway program into the 21st century. In a speech on December 9, 1993, the Administrator of FHWA noted that since the Interstate was begun in 1956, the nation’s population has grown and shifted, the economy has changed, and needs are different. To serve these needs, the NHS was conceived as a way of focusing federal resources on the nation's most important highways. DOT, working cooperatively with state and local officials as well as the private sector, proposed to the Congress in 1993. well as the private sector, proposed to the Congress in December 1993 an NHS network of about 159,000 miles. This network is about 17 percent of the approximately 950,000-mile federal-aid network. For other roads eligible for federal assistance, a program with the characteristics of a block grant, the Surface Transportation Program (STP), provides financial assistance. In addition, ISTEA continued authorizations for a separate STP program that would provide financial assistance for roads that are not eligible for block grants. estimation of this measure, thus invalidating comparisons with data from previous years. Until the reliability of these data is improved, their use as an indicator for distributing federal highway funds would be suspect and arbitrary. An alternative measure, the International Roughness Index, is a more objective measure of pavement condition (roughness), and FHWA expects this data source to play a more prominent role in the future. In 1993, the most recent year for which data are available on pavement condition, 37 states used the Internationalroughness Index to measure pavement condition on Interstate highways. improvements in the percentage of the state’s pavement condition rated as “good” under FHWA’S classification system. One concern with providing incentives for improvements in highway conditions is that the data from the states on the condition and performance of their roadways are not always reliable, making it more difficult to equitably distribute such incentive payments. To emphasize the condition of the nation's most heavily traveled highways, such rewards could be further refined to focus on improvements in the Condition of the NHS. congestion and improving the efficient movement of goods may not be fully realized. Condition can be captured by measures of the use of a system, as distinct from the extent of the system. A system’s usage is typically gauged using factors such as vehicle miles traveled or consumption of motor fuel. One advantage of using data on the vehicle miles travel as a formula factor is that they tend to be quite reliable. The AASHTO Policy is open to the public and can be found at: http://www.aashto.org/policy. that they tend to be quite reliable. The AASHTO Policy Review Committee observed that data on vehicle miles traveled have been statistically designed for a high level of measurable accuracy. Also, in the Faucett study, vehicle miles travel garnered one of the highest correlation values, 0.913, of all the factors related to Interstate repair needs. That is, a state with a high number of vehicle miles traveling would also likely have high needs for repair of the Interstate. Another proxy of system use is motor fuel consumption. performance measures geared to preserving the existing infrastructure would help FHWA ensure that the states do not neglect needed preservation and maintenance. A well-maintained system is the necessary foundation for pursuing the myriad goals for the system, which include economic development, enhanced mobility, and improved air quality. Without such a foundation, system enhancements such as alleviating congestion and improving the efficient movement of goods may not be possible, the authors say. They say performance expectations need to be established for preservation and Maintenance and other important goals. Lane miles are a good measure of the extent of the highway system. Using lane miles as a factor for apportioning highway funds was endorsed by a Policy Review Committee of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) In fiscal year 1991, the committee noted that a measure of lane miles is probably the simplest and most efficient potential apportionment factor on which to obtain accurate information. The committee further noted that annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the close of the calendar year. 1986 and discussed in chapter 2. This study indicated a strong correlation, particularly for repairs of the Interstate, between highway needs and lane miles and vehicle miles traveled. The primary measures of the extent of the federal-aid highway network are center-line miles andlane miles. For example, a four-lane section that is 2 miles long would equal 2 center- line miles. The following sections discuss the advantages and disadvantages of certain proxies in more detail. The study was published in the Journal of the American Highway and Transportation Engineers. Some states believe that center-line miles, not lane miles, are a more appropriate factor for distributing highway funds. A highway that is 2 miles long would equal 2 center- line miles or 8 lane miles. However, this measure does not capture any information on the various widths of highways, because a lane mile is not the same thing as a center line mile. The U.S. Department of Transportation says it will continue to use center line miles for highway funding until a new formula is developed. New components could be added to recognize the states’ capacity to fund highway needs from state resources, the states' level of effort in meeting their own needs, and geographic differences in the cost of maintaining existing highway networks. Although similar factors have been applied in other programs, they have not been applied to highway programs in the past. But FHWA did provide a report to the Congress in 1994 that addresses measures for assessing how much of their available resources the states or local areas devote to surface transportation. We analyzed the effect of a series of hypothetical changes to the current formula. This analysis was based on comparing the actual fiscal year 1995 funding that the states received with what they would have received under the various alternatives. In this analysis, the states’ contributions to the Highway Trust Fund were based on estimates for fiscal year 1993—the most recent year for which data were available at the time of our analysis. We performed an analysis of how much of their available resources the states or local areas devote to surface transportation. FHWA interviewed officials from 34 states and the District of Columbia. We also held meetings with state transportation officials in our Washington, D.C., offices. In addition, we met with representatives from various transportation organizations. While we were interviewing, FHWA also conducted research on the current formula and on future apportionment issues in the U.S. and abroad. The results of the research were published in a book, "The State of the Interstate Highway System," published by the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The existing federal-aid highway formula is the vehicle for distributing billions of dollars annually for highway construction and repair and related activities to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Since the mid-1980s, a number of organizations (including GAO) have suggested fundamental changes in the formula for apportioning these funds. Chapter 2 of this report evaluates the current apportionment formula. Chapter 3 discusses a process by which the Congress may reconsider the formula during the next reauthorization. The task of revising the formula for distributing highway funds will be difficult because needs vary across the country and objectives conflict among themselves. The analysis presented in this report is intended to provide the Congress with formula alternatives that reflect the key objectives governing the current federal-aid highway formula. Many individual factors making up a formula are capable of supporting the principle of distributing funds. For example, relief of congestion is more pressing in urban areas of the country, whereas connecting rural areas is more important in sparsely populated areas. In 1986, Jack Faucett Associates issued a report evaluating alternative apportionment formulas for highway funds. Using this tool, the report showed, for example, that a state with a large number of vehicle miles traveled on the Interstate would also have a high requirement for repairs to the Interstate. Similarly, the states that contributed large amounts of revenue to the Highway Trust Fund, reflecting substantial use of motor fuels, were also also included in the formula. However, the Congress elected not to change the basic formula structure. The factors used to apportion certain highway funds were not closely related to the highway system. A state’s land area was originally included as a factor in the distribution formula in 1916. Land area was thought to provide a balance for the factor based on population and to the factors based on postal mileage and population. At the time of our report, the data on which these factors were based were already between 40 and 70 years old. The report detailed the following problems with the factors. The factors are more closely aligned with highway needs. a balance for the factor based on population and to reflect a state’s future highway needs. However, this approach resulted in large but sparsely populated states receiving larger apportionments than they otherwise would have. In addition, land area no longer bears a close relationship tofuture highway needs, namely the need for new construction, since the highway system is no longer growing rapidly throughout the country. Postal mileage was included as a formula factor in 1916 to provide a constitutional justification for federal involvement in highways (the power to establish post offices and post roads). By 1919, changes to the formula factor were made. post offices and post roads). By 1919, changes to the highway legislation had ended the need for this justification. Since postal mileage is computed on the basis of the distance traveled both on and off the federal-aid highway system, it is unrelated to either the extent of the highway network or its use. This problem has been exacerbated under ISTEA, since the population data underlying the states’ historical shares were derived every 10 years from the census. As a result, changes in the states' populations were accounted for only at 10-year intervals. ISTEA, since the population data underlying the states’ historical shares for ISTEA’s major funding calculations are, in part, based on 1980 population data, not the more current 1990 data. In our March 1986 report, we also identified those factors previously suggested to the Congress as consistent with basic federal highway programs and for which data were available. Our results supported lane miles as a direct measure of the size of the road network and thus as a reflection of the extent of the system to be preserved. noted by the Executive Director of AASHTO, the link between population and the states’ highway needs is questionable. While funds would be targeted to congested urban areas, the approach would do little to accommodate the needs of rural areas. Some state transportation officials from sparsely populated states believe that much of the traffic that occurs in densely populated areas is local. Officials from these states maintain that the promotion of interstate commerce should be a principal objective of the program. The approach does not recognize that goods produced in sparsely. populated areas ultimately must be transported to dense areas. with highway needs, particularly for major highways. However, the return-to-origin approach would not be universally attractive, as a number of states would lose funds. For instance, those states whose fuel usage is low relative to their land area and extent of highway network would be financially hurt. A prime argument made by officials from these states is that the national interest requires highways to span the wide expanses of large, sparsely populated states that are the source of goods for citizens in the population centers. Federal funds should target the highways that tend to carry national, not local, traffic. Factors reflecting a system’s extent and use in isolation do not provide a complete picture on the states’ needs. Introducing neutral factors, such as population, into the formula further diversifies the mix of factors and alters the amounts the states receive. The analysis that follows focuses on two of these factors: interstate commerce and the state of the highway system in the state where the funds are to be spent. of 64 percent in Massachusetts. The disadvantages of basing a formula on actual needs can be remedied through the use of proxies of need, such as those reflecting the extent or usage of a highway system. Such proxies have the advantage of being relatively objective and neutral. There is debate among the states and other transportation experts on what factors can appropriately serve as proxies for distributing highway funds. Some insight can be gained from the Faucett study performed for FHWA in 1986 and discussed in chapter 2. the system’s usage could be at least partially counteracted by building incentives into the formula or by creating appropriate performance standards. A host of other factors—such as population, climatic conditions (daily mean temperature, annual snowfall, and annual precipitation), and per capita income—could also be used to determine how highway funds are distributed. Yet, as the Faucett study demonstrated, a low correlation exists between highway needs as reported by FHWA and climatic variables. The Executive Director of the Surface Transportation Policy Project supports the use of population levels for distributing highway funds. Population and population density would be preferable alternatives as proxies. These proxies were recommended because they were perceived as avoiding the perverse effects tied to a system’s extent and usage. Population data, however, also have limitations. As noted by the Executive Director of AASHTO, the link between highway funding and traffic congestion is not as clear-cut as it first appears. The formula uses factors such as vehicle miles traveled, lane miles, and fuel consumption, it encourages behavior that runs counter to the objectives of reducing congestion and improving air quality. amount of travel done under congested conditions, differences in physical terrain, and fuel purchases by transients in those states with lower fuel taxes, among other things. While vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption correlate well with system usage, they do have some drawbacks. New Jersey transportation officials, for instance, noted that such factors reward energy consumption and air pollution and penalize those who successfully enact measures to reduce the use of single-occupant vehicles. As in the case of the factors related to the system's extent, the disadvantages associated with measures of the system’s usage could be at least partially counteracted by. those states are often insufficient to construct, maintain, and operate such networks. Two additional arguments are made against the return-to-origin approach. New York transportation officials noted that formulas based on returning contributions to the Trust Fund to the state where they are raised meet neither federal or state transportation goals nor national policy. If the primary goal of federal apportionment formulas is to return revenues from motor fuel taxes to the place they were earned, these officials questioned whether there was a need for a federal program. a federal program. State officials have questioned the wisdom of selecting a formula factor that is geared predominantly to fuel use. They argue that such an approach rewards greater use of motor fuel and as such contradicts federal goals of improving air quality and conserving energy. Legislation could still specify that the returned funds be used in certain proportions for certain programs, such as the NHS. Moreover, the return could function as (1) a simple return of funds, in which states would be exempt from the formula. One possibility would be to use factors that relate to the states’ actual needs. In this approach, the states with the poorest highway conditions would be granted a larger share of the funds. However, a formula based on direct measures of need could prove problematic. The use of actual needs can foster a perverse incentive by potentially encouraging the states to spend more on roads and bridges than they would otherwise have been able to afford. The U.S. Federal Highway Administration is considering a new formula for distributing funds to states. can foster a perverse incentive by potentially encouraging the states to permit their highway infrastructure to worsen in order to capture a greater share of federal highway funds. This approach would reward the states with the poorest highway and bridge conditions while penalizing the states that have maintained these structures. In addition, the condition of highways and bridges varies considerably among the states. For instance, as of December 1993 the percentage of deficient bridges on the NHS ranged from a low of 8 percent in North Dakota to a high of 64 percent in Massachusetts. 10 percent of funds could be set aside before the remaining funds were distributed to the states. Payments drawn from this set-aside could be used to provide bonuses to advance quality-of-life objectives. These and similar objectives are all laudable; however, constraint in selecting the objectives may be warranted to prevent the dilution of funds that could result from attempting to meet numerous objectives. One approach to distributing the set-Aside moneys would be to direct the funds to specific objectives.  questions have been raised about the wisdom of essentially rewarding states for their nonattainment status. A second approach to directing set-aside funding towards specific goals is to treat the funds as incentive payments. Incentive payments, as the name implies, do not redress shortcomings, but instead reward desired behaviors or accomplishments. For example, shared set-Aside funding could be used to reward states that make notable and measurable improvements in the percentage of the state’s pavement condition rated high. Alaska and Hawaii could lose 50 percent or more of their highway funds under any of the scenarios. Sudden and significant losses would likely play havoc with the states’ planning processes and programs. To help temper the effects of changes in the formula, any new formula might include a component designed to place a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any individual state would be expected to bear as a result of the changes. For example, a maximum-loss cap of 20 percent might be established. found that vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption reflected the extent of highway use. We recognized that changing the factors used in certain highway apportionment formulas would result in some states’ receiving more or less funds than they did under the then-current formulas. We suggested that to lessen these impacts, a transition period could be provided during which the full effect of the formulas would be gradually introduced. (The advantages and disadvantages of certain formula factors are addressed in ch. 3.) We also recognized that each of these factors has its own advantages and advantages in establishing a formula. the use of mileage for apportioning future highway funds because such usage could reward expansion of the system. This type of apportionment factor would tend to encourage more highway construction, to the possible detriment of adequately preserving the existing network and of considering air quality. Several actions could be taken to counterbalance such tendencies. First, as part of the third component of the formula framework discussed later in this chapter, set-asides could be established to reward those states that meet certain preservation or maintenance goals. Money will be invested in transportation, state and local governments need to have greater authority and flexibility to decide which projects are most important. DOT has stated that it will provide an authorization proposal for such changes at an appropriate time. For some programs the dollar amount apportioned by formula has little practical meaning because the states have substantial flexibility to transfer funds from one program category to another. For example, with the Secretary of Transportation’s approval, up to 100 percent of a state’S apportionment for the Interstate Maintenance and percentage weights assigned to various factors. Congress will have to reach a consensus on the national objective(s) that are critical for the highway program to address. If an alternative formula is adopted, Congress will need to decide whether a formula is the appropriate vehicle for addressing these objectives. The Congress will also need to determine the most representative factors and corresponding weight to be assigned to those factors. The U.S. Department of Transportation has proposed changes in the system for delivering grants, as noted in chapter 2. Trust Fund, reflecting substantial use of motor fuels, were also shown to require more repairs of the Interstate. Equity adjustments were designed to address the concerns of the states that contribute a greater share of highway user taxes than they receive in federal-aid highway funds. In addition, another adjustment provides each state with each state’s own share of federal highway funds, as well as an equal share from the federal government. The correlation analysis was reported in terms of values between zero and one. The closer the value is to 1, the closer the correlation between the factor and the need for repairs. The 90 Percent of Payments Adjustment ensures a state that selected apportionments for the fiscal year and allocations in the previous fiscal year will equal at least 90 percent of its contributions to the Highway Trust Fund’s Highway Account. For years, the highway apportionment formula has endorsed, through one or more equity adjustments, the principle that the states ought to receive back a substantial portion of what they deposit into the Trust Fund. If the formula were restructured to encompass a pure return-to-origin approach, each states’ contribution would simply be returned to that state. and the deterioration of the highway associated with traffic loads, is a primary objective in the distribution of highway funds. The second component, calling for a return of funds to the state in which they were generated, supports a congressional objective of having the states receive a substantial return on the federal fuel and other tax receipts that they generate and contribute to the Highway Trust Fund. The third and fourth objectives discussed in this chapter could be met through formula components that would distribute funds set aside from the regular apportionment process. of the states’ contributions to the Highway Trust Fund’s highway account ranged from 83 percent for South Carolina to 707 percent for Hawaii. Because the majority of revenues credited to the Trust Fund derive from the federal fuel tax, the state contributions tend to be quite closely linked with fuel consumption. These contributions offer the same kinds of advantages and disadvantages as fuel consumption does. Returning the money to the states would be the equivalent of giving the state $1.5 billion in today's dollars. Federal-aid highway funds are apportioned among the states in 13 funding categories. Four programs account for 70 percent of the funds apportioning in fiscal year 1995. Factors that influenced the historical targets for funding are not closely related to the highway system’s needs, says FHWA report. Alternative factors, such as lane miles and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund, are more closely aligned with highway needs, FHwa report says.. Were available at the time of our analysis. We conducted our review from January 1994 through October 1995. of the funds. Funding is provided for eight programs, including the NHS and STP, and for five separate mechanisms to raise individual states’ funding levels to achieve certain goals for equity among the states. The calculations that determine the level of funding that each state receives for these various categories occur in a strict sequence, as illustrated in figure 2.1. During the first step of the calculation, for example, funding is provided to complete the construction of the Interstate Highway System. Funding for the other program categories is also based on separate calculations. regular apportionment process. A portion of formula funding could be devoted to social goals by, for example, directing a portion of funding to selected purposes such as improving air quality and conserving energy. A share of funding could also be set aside and used to protect the states’ historical funding shares. The formula objectives may be used singly or in combination and may further be targeted to specific program categories—such as the NHS—that are deemed to merit special attention. While we focus in this report on the existing, overarching highway objectives, new components could be added to recognize the states. The Congress has used funding adjustments to improve equity among the states. These equity adjustments occur towards the end of the 13-step apportionment process. In fiscal year 1995, the equity funding categories increased the amount of federal highway funds apportioned to 41 states and the District of Columbia. The amount of funding that the majority of states received through the highway formula process was ultimately increased by these equity adjustments. The changes, proposed in DOT’s fiscal year 1996 budget justification, were preceded by the statement that if less federal money will be invested in transportation, state and local governments highway funds. Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and Washington—and Puerto Rico did not receive funding through equity adjustments in fiscal year 1995. For the other 41 states and the District of Columbia, the total amount of federal highway funding apportioned was ultimately increased by equity adjustments. Funding for demonstration projects is distinct from apportionments to the states in that the authorized funding for such projects is not distributed by the federal government. For more information, visit the ISTEA website. can also yield a low payoff for a variety of reasons, including the fact that they frequently are not aligned with the states’ transportation priorities. For instance, in our 1991 report, we found that for 22 of the 66 projects reviewed, none of the authorized funds ($92 million) had been obligated, even though the projects had been authorized 4 years earlier. Figure 2.3 depicts the funding to each state for highway programs, and, if applicable, any modifications to that funding realized through either equity or debt. for Interstate Construction. These funds were excluded since the Interstate Construction program’s final apportionment was made at the beginning of fiscal year 1995. Under the second alternative, the total amount of funds ($18.1 billion) apportioned to the states would be returned. Under this alternative, 24 states would gain an average of $86 million, while 26 would gain on average $67 million. For these recipients, the average loss would be $73 million.Under the third alternative, all funds would be return to theStates, including funds for Interstate Construction and demonstration projects. Under a return-to-origin approach, $17.8 billion of the total $19.1 billion would be returned to the source. This amount would represent all the funds distributed to the states in fiscal year 1995. Under a distribution of funds, FHWA would oversee the programs for which the funds were returned. These funds were excluded since the Interstate Construction funds were not part of the original plan. Under the distribution, states would be exempt from any or most federal oversight, or (2) a return of funds. $79 million; the greatest loss would be $359 million (Pennsylvania) $1.6 million (Alabama) $79 million. The greatest loss is in Pennsylvania, and the smallest is in Alabama. $1,6 million in Alabama is the smallest loss in the United States. $59 million in Pennsylvania is the largest loss. $49 million is the biggest loss in Georgia, and $28 million in New Jersey. $18 million in Georgia is the lowest loss in all of the states. states’ combined losses in that year under all of the scenarios discussed in this report. The scenario resulting in the greatest adverse impact on the states produced a combined loss of $2.4 billion. Alternatively, other categories of funding, such as those supporting highway demonstration projects, could be redirected to provide safeguards against sudden losses. Reauthorization of the federal-aid highway program presents the Congress with the opportunity to review the objectives associated with providing federal highway funds and the accompanying formula for distributing the funds. Table 3.1 provides an outline of the factors to be considered in the two alternatives. The analysis focuses on two possible blends of proxies for need. The first alternative assumes that 100 percent of total highway funds are distributed to the states based equally on total lane miles and total vehicle miles traveled. Under the first alternative, 33 states would receive an average of $64 million more than they were apportioned in fiscal year 1995. 17 states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, would lose $111 million on average. dollar gain would be $102 million; $643 million would be the high end of the range (California) Twenty-seven states and the District of Columbia would receive less funding. In total, about 9 percent of the highway funds would be redistributed. While many social objectives are probably best addressed through means other than the highway apportionment formula, a portion of highway funds might nonetheless be retained to advance specific objectives and/or to counterbalance some of the potential disadvantages of the principal formula factors. states would gain an average of $86 million, while 26 states along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico would lose $74 million. A return-to-origin approach might be more appropriate for the STP, which already has characteristics. A significant advantage of blending these components is that programs of particular concern (notably, the NHS) could receive special attention through the use of carefully targeted formula factors. (State-by-state details are provided in app. VIII.). The current funding level for the STP represents about 40 percent of the total funds authorized for these programs. The two alternatives outlined in table 3.3 and described below maintain this distribution of funds. For purposes of illustration, the following two hypothetical distributions blend needs-based and return-to-origin approaches along the existing split between STP and two other primary highway programs—Interstate Maintenance and the NHS. Be more appropriate for theSTP, which already has characteristics that resemble those of a block grant program and which would thus lend itself to an approach under which funds are returned to the states. that the states received, on average, during fiscal years 1987-91 for the predecessor programs that ISTEA consolidated into these four new programs. In practice, the states’ funding shares for these programs remain fixed over time because the final program included in the four-part calculation, the STP,behaves as an adjuster. As a result, State A has 1.9 percent of the total funding available for the four programs in both fiscal years. State B is locked into a 1.75-percent share in both years, despite its gains in funding for the Interstate Maintenance and Bridge programs. In fiscal year 1995, 70 percent of the funding under the formula went to the four largest programs. Separate calculations determine each state’s share of funds for the Interstate Maintenance Program, Bridge Program, and NHS. But these program-specific calculations are essentially meaningless because each state's ultimate share of funding for all four programs is fixed. This means that any annual increase or decrease in a state's funding for the interstate maintenance program, bridge program, or NHS must be offset by a corresponding, reciprocal change in state funding. NHS must be offset by a corresponding, reciprocal change in the STP funds the state receives for that same year. Figure 2.2 illustrates this zero-sum game through a hypothetical example involving 2 years and two states. In the example, both State A and State B experience shifts in their apportioned funding between fiscal years 1993 and 1994. State A loses funds for the Interstate Maintenance and Bridge programs, while State B gains funds in both of these categories. However, for both states these shifts are rendered irrelevant because they are offset by the states’ STP funding. having the lowest return (apportionments compared with contributions), each state is brought up to the level of return for those states with the next highest levels of return. This process is repeated successively for each state until the funds authorized for this funding category in that fiscal year are exhausted. Finally, a fourth adjustment category, referred to as Hold Harmless, addresses a different objective—preserving the states’ historical funding share, recognizing the legislative compromises embedded in ISTEA. For example, this legislatively prescribed funding percentage is state’s funding was to be based on the historical share of funds the state received from major programs. In fiscal year 1995, equity adjustments accounted for $2.8 billion (16 percent) of the approximately $18 billion distributed to the states. Only nine states—Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and Massachusetts receive annually. These funding percentage shares can result in a state’s receiving an addition to the regular apportionments. For example, this legislatively prescribed funding percentage is 1.74 for Alabama, 0.41 for Delaware and 0.69 for Idaho. for the state in question would be reinstated to 80 percent of what the state would otherwise have received. The cap could be either permanent or established for a set period of time during the transition to a new funding amount. If the existing, intricate equity adjustments were replaced with a single, simple cap, the funds devoted to these equity adjustments in fiscal year 1995—$2.8 billion—would more than offset the states’ combined losses in that year under all of the existing arrangements. The funds devoted. to these Equity Adjustment Cap could be used to shield the states from severe losses. approach to distributing the set-aside moneys would be to direct funds to those states suffering from unique or concentrated needs in certain areas. A prime example of this approach is the existing Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) program, which directs funds to states with particularly severe problems in air quality. ISTEA provided CMAQ with a $6 billion authorization— approximately $1 billion annually for 6 years. It is directed to states that are suffering from severe air quality problems. air quality. It is directed to those states that are classified as nonattainment areas for ozone and carbon monoxide. Every state, regardless of its air quality status, is guaranteed an annual minimum apportionment of 0.5 percent of the program’s total funding. The advantage of such a program is that it focuses funding on precisely those areas with the greatest needs. The disadvantage is that, as occurs with the needs-based formula factors discussed earlier in this chapter, directing funding to states with specific needs can foster a perverse incentive. adjustments. The Congress can further adjust the federal highway funds a state receives by authorizing specific projects, commonly referred to as demonstration projects. Funding for these demonstration projects is not distributed by formula. Rather, the Congress requires that particular projects receive a specified amount of funding. The amount of federal funds authorized for demonstration projects has grown since 1982. While some demonstration projects address critical transportation problems and can be considered nationally significant, authorizing a large number of such projects could prove troublesome. The formula for apportioning federal-aid highway funds established in ISTEA is a complex arithmetic tool used by FHWA. authorizing a large number of such projects could prove troublesome. Demonstration projects often cost more than expected. Future finances could be drained if extra federal funds are needed to cover the cost of completing the projects. The federal funding and state matching funds together accounted for only 37 percent of the projects’ total anticipated costs, according to a 1991 report by the House Committee on Appropriations. The report was based on testimony in 1993 and 1995 before the Subcommittee on Transportation, House committee on Appropriations, and the House Transportation Committee.

ROUGE-1: 79.70, ROUGE-2: 72.90, ROUGE-L: 29.48
BERTScore: 63.16

==============================================
==================== [42/100] ====================
Summary:
 improvement related to the ability to work is evaluated two different ways, depending on whether the comparison point decision (CPD) was based on a prior disability listing or a residual functional capacity ( RFC) assessment. Meeting or equaling the prior listing: In this case, a disability examiner will determine if the beneficiary’s same impairment(s) still meets or equals the previous listing. A disability examiner the disability examiner proceeds to next step, the fourth step. Unlike step two, the examiner compares the beneficiary's condition to the prior list. A disability examiner compares the beneficiary’s condition with the list of impairments in effect at the time he or she was first awarded disability benefits. If the impairment(s) meets or equals a prior listing, then benefits are continued. If not, then the examiner proceeds with the CDR evaluation. Residual functional capacity assessment: In this case, the examiner compares. the beneficiary's previous functional capacity to the current functional capacity for the same impairment. If functional capacity. for basic work activities has improved, then. the examiner finds that the medical improvement is related to listing. capacity to the current functional capacity for the same impairment. If functional capacity has improved, the improvement is related to the ability to work. If the current assessment does not show improvement, then the disability examiner proceeds to step five. The fifth step is to determine whether an exception to medical improvement applies. The law provides for certain limited situations when the DDS may discontinue a recipient’s benefits even though medical improvement has not occurred. The specific group I exceptions are (a), (b), (c) and (d) has not occurred. The individual is the beneficiary of advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology (related to the ability to work) If an exception applies, the examiner continues through to step six. If evidence shows that any prior determination or decision was in error, the expert continues through to the next step. If the individual’s impairment(s) is not as disabling as it was considered at the time of the CPD, the examer continues to step seven. The eighth step is to determine if the beneficiary has the ability to do other work. At this step, the disability examiner considers the complete vocational profile (the beneficiary’s age, education, and past relevant work experience) together with the beneficiary's RFC. If he or she does not have the ability, disability benefits are discontinued. If the beneficiary is able to do the work, the evaluation continues to the eighth step. The eighth step of the disability evaluation is the final step. It is the time when the examiner decides whether or not the beneficiary can continue to receive disability benefits.  assessing medical improvement may be more difficult in cases that involve certain types of psychological impairments, such as depression. Evidence of these impairments is generally more subjective than evidence of many physical impairments. According to some of these officials, an assessment of functionality is more subjective because it relies more on the beneficiaries’ account of their own conditions than on laboratory findings. Some officials reported that the severity of psychological. impairments can fluctuate over time, making it difficult to assess whether improvement has. taken place. support psychological impairments, such as evaluations for depression, rely less on laboratory findings and more on clinical judgment. Certain tests for physical impairments tend to be less open to interpretation. The potential difficulty of assessing medical improvement in beneficiaries whose disability is based on certain types of psychological impairment is especially relevant, given that the proportion of all individuals in the disability programs whose disability has grown in recent years. SSA is responsible for assuring the safety and security of people with disabilities in the U.S. list of disabilities that SSA maintains. The list describes impairments that, by definition, are so severe that they are disabling. If the individual’s current impairment(s) does not meet or equal a current listing, then the DDS proceeds to step three in the evaluation process. The third step is to determine if improvement in the individual's medical condition has occurred. This improvement is any decrease in the medical severity of the impairment(S) that was previously listed. If this improvement is not found, the individual continues to receive benefits. starting point for conducting a CDR and requires examiners to find evidence of medical improvement since this last decision. Some DDS directors reported that it may be difficult to assess medical improvement in cases where the prior disability decision was based on incomplete or poorly documented evidence. For example, in one of the CDR cases we reviewed, a beneficiary had his benefits continued because the rationale for the prior Disability Decision was vague, according to the examiner who reviewed the case with us. As a result, medical improvement could not be shown and benefits were continued. examiner conducting the initial CDR determined that medical improvement was shown and discontinued the individual’s benefits. On appeal to reconsideration 6 months later, a different DDS examiner conducted a review using the same medical evidence as the original examiner. The examiner conducting the appeal concluded that the beneficiary continued to experience pain consistent with the back condition. However, we had no basis for determining which decision was correct. The amount of judgment involved in the decision-making process increases when the process involves certain types of impairments that are difficult to assess. we interviewed noted that, in an effort to process cases in a timely manner, ALJs sometimes issue quick decisions in which most of the evidence is on tapes that are not transcribed or placed in the beneficiary’s case file. In such instances, it is unlikely that the DDS examiner would have complete information for conducting a CDR and determining if medical improvement had taken place. Several officials told us that guidance instructs ALJs to include enough information in their decisions so that the decisions will be legally sufficient. the guidance does not specifically instruct ALJs to include all of the evidence that will be needed to assess medical improvement at a future CDR. SSA is developing requirements for training examiners to ensure they understand the information needed to make accurate and adequately documented decisions. The agency has adopted guides for decision writing at the appeals level, and is in the process of developing guides for use at the DDS level. It is also developing guides to be used at the CDR level to help examiners make better decisions. decrease in the medical severity of the impairment(s) that was present at the time of the most recent favorable medical decision. If improvement has not occurred, the disability examiner skips to the fifth step in the evaluation. If an exception applies, the examiner continues through to step six of the evaluation process. The sixth step is to determine if the current impairments are severe. If the DDS determines that the beneficiary’s current impairment is not severe, benefits are discontinued without further development. In SSA guidance, disability examiners may incorrectly decide to continue or discontinue benefits. SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed for examiners to determine if a beneficiary has improved medically. Other factors, such as inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the decision process for assessing medical improvement may make it more difficult to determine whether a beneficiary remains eligible for benefits, the authors say. The authors say SSA the practice of disregarding minor changes is not an impediment to making a disability determination. Inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the process for assessing medical improvement are two additional factors that make it challenging to assess medical improvement. While these problems raise concerns about the consistency of decisions when determining if medical improvement has occurred, the ultimate impact of presuming that an individual has a disability on CDR decisions is unknown because we were unable to empirically test how the presumption of a disability impacts CDR decision to continue or discontinue benefits. The standard establishes the prior decision as the starting point for conducting a CDR and requires examiners to develop guides for use at the DDS level. standard, and some said this confusion stems from unclear SSA guidance. SSA instructs examiners to disregard “minor’ changes in a beneficiary’s condition. This guidance does not adequately describe what constitutes a minor change, officials say. Some DDSs may be inconsistently defining what constitutes minor change. For example, only changes that would not affect a beneficiary's ability to work should be considered minor. However, this explanation of minor changes is not included in the agency's guidance. be inconsistently defining what constitutes a minor change. Of the 52 DDS directors who answered a question on “minor” changes, 21 reported that the practice of disregarding minor changes is not an impediment. DDSs differed on the extent to which the guidance to disregard minor changes impacts CDRs. In doing so, our review suggests that some D DSs may be inconsistently applying the standard as to what constitutes medical improvement. The review was published in the Journal of the American College of DDS. guidance instructs examiners to ensure a “reasonable relationship” between the amount of improvement and the increase in the ability to perform basic work activities. The guidance does not require a specific amount of increase in functioning. The DDS directors we surveyed reported that they interpret this guidance differently. 17 of 49 directors reported that a large or very large increase in a recipient’s ability to dobasic work activities is required. 24 reported thatA moderate increase is required; and 8 reported that any increase at all is required, we found. agency believed that the report was unclear with regard to whether this part of the recommendation applied only to guidance for determining if there has been any medical improvement. As stated in the draft report, our discussion of medical improvement encompasses both elements (improvement in a beneficiary’s medical condition and its relation to the ability to work). However, we did further clarify this throughout the entire report to minimize any confusion on this matter. Additionally, SSA indicated that clarification of this guidance would be helpful. In survey responses, 31 DDS directors responded that in practice, CDRs are conducted with the presumption that a beneficiary continues to have a disability. Some directors also noted that they make this presumption because the beneficiary was found disabled when initially awarded benefits, and examiners must show medical improvement to remove them from the programs. Since a majority of DDSs are conducting CDRs with a presumption that beneficiaries have a disabilities, some may be evaluated under this higher standard, and some may have their benefits erroneously continued. or low likelihood of medical improvement. In general, beneficiaries with a high score are referred for full medical CDRs. Beneficiaries with lower scores are, at least initially, sent a questionnaire, known as a “mailer.” Full medical CDR involve an in-depth examination of a beneficiary’s medical and possibly his or her vocational status. This may include a review of the recipient's case file, physical and psychological condition, and medical evidence by a disability examiner and physician. A majority of DDSs incorrectly presume that a beneficiary continues to have a disability. This may make it more difficult for examiners to determine if a beneficiary has improved medically. SSA regulations and policy require that CDR decisions be made on a “neutral basis.’ SSA defines neutral basis as a review that neither presumes that a beneficiaries (1) is still disabled because he or she was in the military, or (2) that the beneficiary has not improved in any way. Two DDS directors inaccurately noted that the standard requires that a beneficiary’s improvement be great enough so that it actually enables the individual to work. One of these directors commented that because SSA guidance on this aspect of the standard is open to broad interpretation, it is difficult to document improvement. As a result, some DDSs may be inconsistently applying the standard that could potentially impact decisions to continue or discontinue benefits. However, we were unable to determine how much improvement is required. for SSA when determining whether beneficiaries continue to be eligible for benefits. We asked the directors about particular elements of the standard and how these elements, alone or in combination with other factors, impact CDR outcomes. We determined that the survey data are sufficiently reliable. Because this was not a sample survey, there are no sampling errors. However, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce errors, commonly referred to as nonsampling errors. For example, difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted, in the ensure that CDRs be conducted on a neutral basis. However, it believed that more adjudicator training in this area would likely have little impact on discontinuing benefits. SSA suggested that we provide additional context for some of the statistical information presented in our discussion of the proportion of DDS directors who are incorrectly applying the neutrality standard. We cannot predict the impact. additional guidance and training would have on continuing or discontinuing. benefits. But, as the report points out, there are large numbers of D DS directors. who are wrongly applying the neutral standard and, in our view, would benefit from additional guidance. difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted, in the sources of information that are available to respondents, can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results. We took steps in the development of the questionnaire, the data collection, and the data analysis to minimize these nonsampling errors. For example, social science survey specialists designed the questionnaire in collaboration with GAO staff with subject matter expertise. Then, the draft questionnaire was pretested with a number of state officials to ensure that the questions were relevant and clearly stated. to ensure that the questions were relevant, clearly stated, and easy to comprehend. The questionnaire was also reviewed by an additional GAO survey specialist. Since this was a Web-based survey, respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire. This eliminated the need to have the data keyed into a database thus removing an additional source of error. We conducted three pretests of this survey with DDS directors in three different states. We modified the survey to take their comments into account. We also provided SSA with provided additional technical comments, which have been incorporated in the report as appropriate. Unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report. At that time, we will make copies available to other parties upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http//:www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. take their comments into account. We also provided SSA with a copy of the survey and incorporated its technical comments into the final version. To augment information from our state survey, we conducted independent audit work in three states (California, Massachusetts, and Texas) to examine how SSA policies and procedures are carried out in the field. We selected locations for field visits based on the following criteria: (1) geographic dispersion; (2) states with high levels of SSA participation; and (3) state populations. about how frequently this occurs. Of the directors who answered our survey question on insufficient documentation, 33 responded that they encounter cases with insufficient documentation infrequently or very infrequently, and 17 responded that such cases occurred more often. 15 directors commented that cases decided on appeal were the most likely to lack adequate documentation. One possible explanation for this may be streamlined processes at the appeals level. For example, one ALJ we interviewed noted that, in an effort to process cases, in some cases the appeals process is streamlined. SSI serves people with disabilities on the basis of need, regardless of whether they have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund. At the end of calendar year 2005, the SSI program served about 6.8 million people and paid about $36 billion in federal cash benefits throughout the year. These cash benefits are paid from general tax revenues. SSI benefits generally can be discontinued for the same reasons as DI benefits, although they also may be discontinued if a person no longer meets SSI income and resource requirements. Disability Insurance (DI) is an insurance program that provides benefits to workers who become unable to work because of a long-term disability. Workers who have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund are insured under this program. At the end of calendar year 2005, the DI program served about 8.3 million workers with disabilities, their spouses, and dependent children. DI paid out about $85 billion in cash benefits throughout the year. The Social Security Administration (SSA) administers two programs that provide benefits to people with disabilities. June 15, 2006. Social Security Disability Insurance: SSA Actions Could. Enhance Assistance to Claimants with Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Other. Impairments. May 31, 2005. High Risk Series: An Update. January 2005. SSA’s Disability Programs: Improvements Could. Increase the Usefulness of Electronic Data for Program Oversight. December 10, 2004. Disability Insurance. Should Strengthen Its Efforts to Detect and Prevent Overpayments. GAO-04-929. Washington, D.C.: September 10,2004. More Effort Needed to Assess Consistency of Disability Decisions. If he or she does not have the ability to do other work, benefits are continued. The following team members made key contributions to this report: Kelly Agnese; Jeremy D. Cox; Susan E.M. Etzel; Stuart M. Kaufman; Luann M. Moy; George H. Quinn, Jr.; Daniel A. Schwimer; Salvatore F. Sorbello; Wayne T. Turowski; Vanessa R. Taylor; and Rachael C. Valliere. Between fiscal years 1999 and 2005, each year an average of about 311,000 recipients (about 32 percent of all recipients who were removed from the disability programs) died. In addition, about 444,000 beneficiaries (about 45 percent) were removed for other reasons. These include about 54,000 DI beneficiaries who SSA determined had earnings in excess of SGA, and about 379,000 SSI beneficiaries who were taken off the SSI program for all reasons other than death and medical improvement (see fig. 2) In 1981 and 1982, about 45 percent of those individuals who received a CDR had their benefits discontinued. There was no statutory requirement for SSA to show that a beneficiary had improved medically in order to remove him or her from the programs. By 1984 SSA placed a moratorium on all CDRs. To address concerns that some beneficiaries were being inappropriately removed, Congress enacted the Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984. The GAO and SSA analyzed data on CDR outcomes over a 7-year period for fiscal years 1999 to 2005. SSA also removes beneficiaries for failing to cooperate during a CDR. For example, a beneficiary may fail to appear for scheduled meetings with disability examiners or physicians. An average of about 13,800 individuals (or 2.8 percent of all CDRs conducted between fiscal years 1999 and 2005) were removed annually because SSA determined that they had improved medically. About 10,300 individuals ( or about 2.1 percent) were removal each year for failure to cooperate with SSA. The percentage of beneficiaries removed from the programs remained fairly constant from 1999 to 2005. the statistical information presented in our discussion of the proportion of beneficiaries removed from the disability programs each year. For example, SSA commented that the disability discontinuation rates in the early 1980s may not have been representative. We revised the report to take into account these suggestions. The Commissioner’s comments have been reproduced in appendix III. SSA also provided additional technical comments, which have been incorporated in the report. The report has been updated to include the comments made by SSA and the Commissioner. Full medical CDRs are the agency’s primary tool to determine whether a beneficiary has improved medically. Between fiscal years 1999 and 2005, an average of about 26,000 individuals each year (about 5.3 percent) were removed from the disability programs as a result of receiving a medical CDR. More people leave the programs when they die, convert to full retirement benefits, or leave for other reasons. Some of the officials we interviewed stated that the medical improvement standard may artificially limit the percentage of recipients who are found to have improved. However, we were unable to identify any empirical data regarding the impact of the standard. total, we conducted in-depth interviews with 80 SSA and DDS managers and line staff responsible for conducting medical CDRs. We documented management and staff views on the challenges associated with applying the medical improvement standard. In particular, we documented views on (1) the impact of the standard on CDR outcomes, (2) the effectiveness of SSA policies and procedures for applying the standard, and (3) the degree to which factors external to the standard create challenges when applying it. To further assess how the standard is applied in practice, we took a nonprobability sample of 12 CDR case files from the DDSs in California and Texas. We asked CDR supervisors to provide several cases that were (1) discontinued for medical improvement, (2) continued because the beneficiary was clearly disabled, and (3) ambiguous cases. These case files serve to illustrate the factors external to the standard that create challenges when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. prior decision was in error. In order to be removed from the disability programs for one of the exceptions, disability examiners must also show that the individual has the ability to engage in SGA. SSA does not conduct CDRs on all beneficiaries each year. At the time beneficiaries enter the DI or SSI programs, DDSs determine when they will be due for CDRs based on their likely potential for medical improvement. The most cost-effective method of conducting a CDR is based on statistical formulas that use data on beneficiary characteristics. the purposes of our study, we only assessed DI and SSI adult beneficiaries who left the programs as a result of receiving a full medical CDR. We did not include children or “age 18 re-determinations” in our analysis. We verified the statistical data on CDR outcomes for internal logic, consistency, and reasonableness. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of the review. We also met with knowledgeable SSA. We concluded that the results of the study were consistent with our expectations. Some studies indicated that many beneficiaries of the disability programs no longer had a disability and could work. To ensure that only eligible beneficiaries remained in the programs, Congress passed a law requiring SSA to conduct continuing disability reviews (CDR) beginning in January 1982. State Disability Determination Services (DDS) examiners began conducting medical CDRs under the same criteria used to evaluate initial disability claims. In 1981 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, the CDR evaluation process for adult beneficiaries began. continue even after the person reaches full retirement age. The Social Security Act’s definition of disability for adults is the same under both programs. People are generally considered to be engaged in SGA if they earn above a certain dollar level. For 2006, SSA considers countable earnings above $860 a to be SGA for that period of time. The SSA defines SGA as ‘substantial gainful activity’ for that time period. For more information, go to: http://www.ssa.gov/sSA/ssa-disabilities/sGA-disability. continued or discontinued. These case files serve to illustrate the difficulties examiners face when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. In addition, we interviewed seven disability policy experts from national disability research and advocacy organizations. We spoke with individuals affiliated with the following organizations American Association of People with Disabilities, Center for Health Services Research and Policy at George Washington Center for the Study and Advancement of Disability. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services website. We spoke with disability experts about the effect of the standard on CDR outcomes. We conducted our work from October 2005 through June 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We spoke with representatives from the National Association of Disability Examiners, the National Council of Disability Determination Directors, and the Social Security Advisory Board. We also spoke with experts from the George Washington Center for the Study and Advancement of Disability Policy, Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities, Disability Law Center, Disability Policy Collaboration. SSA’s Office of Quality Performance conducts quality reviews of disability determination outcomes. If SSA finds that the individual no longer has a disability and discontinues benefits following a CDR, the individual has the right to appeal the CDR decision, first to another reviewer for a reconsideration, second to an administrative law judge, then to the Appeals Council, and finally to federal courts. During these reviews, physicians evaluate the evidence to ensure that the decision adheres to the medical improvement standard. We conducted a national Web-based survey of all 55 Disability Determination Services (DDS) directors in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Western Pacific Islands, and the federal DDS. DDSs are the agencies responsible for conducting periodic CDRs to determine if beneficiaries’ medical conditions have improved and if they are able to work. The purpose of this survey was to assess the extent to which the standard impacts outcomes of CDRs and determine if the standard poses any special challenges for SSA. The Social Security Administration generally agreed with our recommendation, but expressed reservations about the need for further guidance on the use of exceptions. SSA should also work with DDSs to ensure that CDRs are conducted on a neutral basis, without a presumption that beneficiaries continue to have a disability. The agency also noted that a broader application of the error exception could lead to a substitution of judgment by an adjudicator for the original finding of disability in instances where a person’s medical condition had not substantially improved. SSA is responsible for assuring that individuals who truly have a disability that prevents them from being able to work continue to receive benefits. SSA has a stewardship responsibility to identify those beneficiaries who have improved medically and are no longer eligible for benefits. The medical improvement standard is intended to help SSA accomplish both of these responsibilities. However, several factors associated with the standard pose challenges for ensuring that the standard is implemented in a consistent and fair manner, the authors say. They say SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed to meet the standard. Congress enacted the Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984. The act included a provision requiring SSA to find substantial evidence demonstrating medical improvement before ceasing a recipient’s benefits. SSA resumed CDRs in January 1986 using this standard, which is among the first steps of the CDR evaluation process. Other factors, including inadequate documentation of evidence, are more difficult to address in the short term, the authors say. But SSA is taking actions intended to address some of these problems. This report provides additional details about our analysis of the medical improvement standard (the standard) The standard poses challenges for the Social Security Administration (SSA) when conducting medical continuing disability reviews (CDR) See appendix IV for a listing of major contributors to this report. You or your staff have questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7215. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of the report. Disability advocates differ in their views on the clarity of SSA guidance on medical improvement. Clear guidance is especially important in view of the judgmental nature of the disability determination process. SSA indicated that clarification of this guidance would probably have little noticeable impact on the number of cases in which SSA finds that a disability has ended. However, we continue to believe that it is important for DDSs to consistently apply this aspect of the medical improvement standard and that, towards that end, additional guidance would be useful. the examiner finds that the medical improvement is related to the ability to work and proceeds with the CDR evaluation. The act allows SSA to discontinue benefits even when the beneficiary has not improved medically if one of the specific “exceptions’ to medical improvement appliest. In order to be removed to self- report information on their medical condition, treatments, and work activities. SSA will find that disability has ended and discontinues benefits if it determines that the person’s impairments are not severe or the person can do past work or other work. The act provides for exceptions to medical improvement that could result in additional individuals having their benefits discontinued. Most of the disability examiners whom we spoke with on our site visits told us that they were uncertain about when to apply the exceptions. SSA policies allow for various exceptions, including when the prior decision was in error or when persons benefit from education or training programs that could help the individuals work. However, we found that while the examiners and the SSA are aware of the exceptions, they are unsure when they should be applied.

ROUGE-1: 72.07, ROUGE-2: 65.99, ROUGE-L: 25.21
BERTScore: 54.91

==============================================
==================== [43/100] ====================
Summary:
and size and scope of operations. The ANSPs were commercialized between 1987 and 2001 and have been operating since then as performance-based organizations. We interviewed government officials, ANSP executives and representatives, union officials, and representatives of aviation stakeholders. We synthesized information from our interviews with information from the literature to arrive at some general lessons on the commercialization of the five air navigation service providers we reviewed. Unless otherwise noted, we converted the local currencies to make it easier to read. High salaries of air traffic controllers make it difficult to recruit them for regulatory positions. Obtaining baseline measures before commercializing a country’s air navigation services will allow the government and others to assess the new ANSP's performance in the areas of safety, cost, and efficiency. Some of the countries whose ANSPs we reviewed did not collect baseline data or measure performance as extensively as the commercialized AnSPs have since done. We interviewed government officials, ANSP executives and representatives, union officials, and representatives of aviation stakeholders in each country. The UK and Germany are members of EUROCONTROL, a European organization responsible for regulating the safety of air navigation. According to information from each of the ANSPs we reviewed, air navigation safety has not declined since commercialization. All five AnSPs have taken steps to control costs, and have improved efficiency of their operations by implementing new technologies and equipment. At a minimum,Safety has not eroded since commercialized, according to the available data from most AN SPs, the authors say. UK established such an authority before commercialization, and Germany is planning to develop one. For all five commercialized ANSPs, the safe movement of aircraft remains the primary goal. Despite differences in ownership structures, all operate as businesses rather than as government organizations and are self-financing. All are largely monopoly providers that are subject to some form of price- setting constraint achieved through economic review or procedural guidelines. In some instances, government policy requires that the ANSP consider safety in some cases. with EUROCONTROL’s safety requirements, to all of their operational activities. This system forms the basis for risk assessment, safety assurance, safety control, and safety monitoring through standards that comply with national and international obligations. The five commercialized ANSPs vary in the extent to which they are owned by the government—wholly, partially, or completely. Airservices Australia employs a systemic Safety Management System that complies withnational and international requirements. To promote safety, the system requires activities such as operational risk assessments, surveillance, audits and incident investigations. Each ANSP generally offers en route, approach control, and terminal (or aerodrome control) air traffic services. In some countries, the ANSP may not be the sole provider of approach control and terminal services. All but Germany’s DFS also offer oceanic air navigation services. all five ANSPs are responsible for providing air navigation service to both civil and military aviation. In addition, the nation's air navigation operator may also provide oceanic services to military aircraft. enterprises in 1987, including air navigation services, rail services, and postal services. The government also reformed electricity as a state-owned enterprise in 1994 and telecommunications in 2004. Commercialization was generally intended to relieve the government of a fiscal responsibility. According to ICAO, the government should still regulate the safety of the ANSP’s operations, but it should be encouraged to be as competitive, efficient, and cost-effective as any other commercial business. In the five countries whose air Navigation services we reviewed, the AN SP continued to provide nationwide services after commercialization and, with limited exceptions, remained the. services to both civil and military aviation. The ANSPs may offer other air navigation-related services, such as meteorological, training, and consulting services, and charge for these services. The governments of all five ANPS are members of ICAO. All five ANSPS are also members of the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), a voluntary international trade organization whose mission is to represent the interests of commercialized AnSPs. In addition, the UK and Germany areMembers of EUROCONTROL.  NAV CANADA can alter operations in accordance with business principles, but must demonstrate that the changes meet the required level of safety. All five ANSPs are subject to external safety regulation. A separate authority conducts safety regulation and issues relevant certificates or licenses to air traffic controllers and technicians. In New Zealand, for example, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is an independent regulatory authority that establishes civil aviation safety and security standards and monitors adherence to those standards. In Australia, theCivil Aviation Safety Authority regulates and promotes aviation safety. some instances, government policy requires that the ANSP consider safety in any and all decisions affecting operations and service. For example, according to DFS officials, German legislation requires DFS to observe ICAO’s standards and recommended safety practices. Similarly, in Canada, legislation requires NAV CANADA to maintain a fixed level of safe operations. Under a performance-based approach to safety regulation, Transport Canada, as the regulator, establishes the requirements in law and standards, and NAVCANADA must demonstrate compliance. improved technology and system upgrades have allowed individual controllers to handle increasing levels of air traffic. Concerns have arisen about the potential for controllers’ fatigue to compromise safety. Data are not available to assess this potential, but some ANSPs have taken steps to limit and monitor controllers' workload. For example, the UK’s CAA has regulated the hours of civil air traffic controllers, and its Safety Regulation Group must be notified of any breach by NATS or by controllers. For more information, visit airtrafficcontrol.org. Germany faces a similar challenge as the government prepares to develop a safety regulatory authority in accordance with the Single European Sky initiative. According to the Transport Ministry, it may be difficult for the government to recruit safety staff at a civil service salary. CAA managers with responsibilities for regulating the safety of NATS’s operations also raised concerns about recruiting staff. Accordingto these officials, regulators need to be able to carry out timely safety inspections during the first 6 months after commercialization. It is hoped that the new safety authority will be in place by the end of this year. because data for assessing performance are typically unavailable for the time before commercialization. An independent audit was conducted on the annual financial reports of each of the five ANSPs. To identify any changes in safety since commercialization, we collected and analyzed information provided by each ANSP and by its independent safety regulator. We interviewed officials from these regulators, and we relied on safety data from the AN SPs and their audited annualfinancial reports. The independent auditors found that the annualfinancial statements were unqualified and fairly presented in all material respects. financial information available to the public to ensure transparency. Financial statements are typically subject to audits by independent third parties to ensure that adequate accounting records have been maintained. All five commercialized ANSPs rely on user charges as their primary source of revenue and on capital markets for additional funding. In addition, the UK and Germany report their data to EUROCONTROL, whose Performance Review Commission collects data for benchmarking and publishes comparative studies of members’ performance. Before commercialization, governments funded air navigation. evaluated. We determined that the data from each country were sufficiently reliable to identify any major changes in safety since each ANSP was commercialized. In addition to the contact named above, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Samantha Goodman, Brandon Haller, David Hooper, Hiroshi Ishikawa, Joseph Kile, Jennifer Kim, and Richard Scott made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. example, stresses the importance of having transparent financial data available for economic oversight. CANSO and EUROCONTROL are working to standardize performance measures and compare ANSPs across dimensions such as safety, cost, and efficiency. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Please call me at (202) 512-2834 if you or your or your family member would like a copy of the report. we reviewed. Unless otherwise noted, we converted the local currencies of each country into U.S. dollars. We adjusted for inflation using the Gross Domestic Product price index of the Congressional Budget Office’s economic projection for 2005. We did not compare performance before and after commercialization or across countries. Such comparisons are generally not feasible because data for assessing performance are typically unavailable for the country at the time of the comparison. We used purchasing power parity historical series for each country in the relevant years for the currency. In some countries today, the ANSPs charged the same fee for air navigation services at every airport, regardless of its size or location. Under this arrangement, called network pricing, services at heavily used airports subsidize services at small or remote airports. Air services Australia and Airways Corporation of New Zealand have adopted an alternative pricing scheme, called location- specific pricing, under which the fee for some service matches the cost of providing that service to a specific location. If an airline decides that it does not want to pay the increased fees, it may discontinue service to the location. need to recover its costs may be at odds with a small or remote community’s need for scheduled air service. Providing air navigation services for such communities may not be commercially viable because it typically generates less revenue than providing services for larger communities. Even though the minimum cost of an air navigation service is the same, regardless of the location, the cost per plane is often higher at small and remote locations. The cost of the service is spread among fewer operators, usually with smaller planes. The impact of location-specific pricing on remote communities and small operators is difficult to predict. Costs may go up, but charges may not necessarily be prohibitive. Airservices Australia is seeking to control costs at some locations by deploying new lower cost technologies to serve remote communities. For example, Air Services Australia is planning to install Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast ground stations. These ground stations will allow air traffic surveillance services over remote areas. The ANSP may ultimately be forced to take a financial loss if it is not able to fully recover its costs. for instance, subsidizes service to some regional areas under the Location-Specific Tower Subsidy Program. Transport Canada is legislatively required to maintain service to remote locations in the northern region. In addition, NAV CANADA charges the same price for services toremote locations as for services for the rest of the country. The price is based on a formula that considers weight and distance. We have derived a number of lessons from our research on the commercialization of air navigation services in the five countries we selected. Airservices will increase charges over the next 5 years at general aviation and regional airports. Although the increases will be gradual, the plan has raised concerns about further price increases and any future need to close or reduce services at these locations. Some fear that needed air services to remote bush locations will be lost, while others fear that secondary services, such as flight school training, will be affected. The impact of location-specific pricing on remote bush airports is not yet known, according to Airservices. Before commercialization, governments funded air navigation services through annual appropriations. Each ANSP collects and manages its own revenues, charging fees for services. The air navigation fees cover operating and capital costs associated with both en route and approach control services. In Canada, aircraft or flights dedicated to search and rescue, air ambulance operations, and firefighting services are all exempt from air navigation service charges. If an ANSP generates revenues from charges in excess of its costs (i.e., operating profits), it may rebate them to the users, lower the charges for the next year, or pay some form of compensation. charges for oceanic control. The ANSPs may also charge for terminal-related services. In the UK and Germany, for example, private firms may provide terminal services. These terminal charges are distinct from the landing fees typically charged by airports, which are usually weight-based. According to ICAO policies, the AN SPs may choose to charge a flat fee for services or additional fees in particular circumstances, rather than charging the weight-distance fees typically assessed to larger air carriers. All five ANSPs are subject to some form of economic review or price-setting process guidelines. In Australia, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) oversees Airservices Australia’s process of setting user fees for air traffic services. Airservices must notify the commission whenever it wants to raise fees. The commission then evaluates the ANSP and sets its own guidelines for user charges and prices. The five countries reviewed have taken different approaches to reviewing their ANSP's user charges. ICAO recognizes the need for an independent mechanism to provide economic regulation of air navigation services. According to ICAO, the objectives of economic regulation should include the following: Ensure nondiscrimination in the application of charges. Ensure the transparency and availability of all financial data used to determine the basis for charges. Assess and encourage efficiency and efficacy in the operation of providers. Establish standards for reviewing the quality and level of service provided by air navigation service providers. The objective is to ensure that there is no overcharging or other anticompetitive practice. In the UK, CAA exercises economic regulation over NATS. CAA’s Economic Regulation Group sets price caps for 5-year periods, basing them generally on the retail price index. The German Transport Ministry reviews and approves any changes in user fees, but it does not independently evaluate the price-setting process or pricing changes. According to the Transport Ministry, Germany plans to create an independent economic regulatory authority by the end of the year. The European Commission is also set to set up an independent regulatory authority. operating profit after taxes and the cost of capital. A portion of any EVA above a certain level is returned to users in the form of a rebate. For example, in its 2004 Annual Report, Airways reported its net operating profit after tax as about $8.3 million. The resulting EVA was approximately $3.9 million. Of this amount, $1.8 million was returned to customers in theForm of a Rebate. According to the aviation industry, the EVA mechanism has  ACCC rejected one of two proposals by Airservices for a temporary fee increase to address the revenue losses that followed September 11 and the SARS outbreak. The airline industry had objected to the second set of proposed increases, citing a need for longer term price certainty. ACCC directed Airservices to focus on 5-year pricing plans to encourage long-term planning, emphasizing that the robustness of the airlines should be taken into account when a price is set. The Canadian Transportation Agency reviews the price-setting process against an established set of statutory principles. NAV CANADA’s price-setting process is limited only by statutory charging principles. As a nonshare capital corporation, surpluses are reinvested in the business or used to lower charges to customers. NAV CANADA was able to raise its fees unilaterally, without having to negotiate increases with representatives of the airlines or other interests. Its board approved the fee increases to balance revenues and expenses as required by legislation. The CTA rejected an appeal of the increases brought by certain operators.  NAV CANADA estimates that it is saving the airlines approximately $80.3 million annually in reduced aircraft operating costs. Airservices Australia, for example, reported lower unit costs resulting from the increases in controllers’ productivity that followed the introduction of TAAATS. In Germany, Lufthansa stated that except in business years 2001 through 2003, the airline paid in ticket taxes for air navigation services. The airlines are now paying 20 percent less in user fees than they formerly paid inticket taxes when the government provided air navigation service. Commercialization has sometimes meant an increase in fees for general aviation operators. Before commercialization, many only paid taxes on fuel. Some countries, such as Canada and New Zealand, have tried to make the fees affordable for small businesses. The fees paid during the initial commercialization of Germany’s air navigation service in 1993 were less than they were during the first few years of commercialization in 1993. In business years 2001 through 2003, the airline paid less in user fees than it paid in the early 1990s. Zealand, have tried to make the fees affordable for small operators by charging a flat fee. NAV CANADA, for instance, charges general aviation operators a flat annual fee of $58. Some governments have provided for air navigation services at small, remote general aviation and regional airports, viewing such services as a public good. Australia, for example, subsidizes service to some regional areas under the regional air service scheme. According to the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association–New Zealand, Airways Corporation of New Zealand charges general Aviation operators a fee of £68 for 50 landings. Before commercialization, air navigation services under government control faced increasing strains. Many were underfunded, as evidenced by freezes on air traffic controllers’ wages and insufficient funds to replace aging technologies. Technology replacement programs often cost more, took longer, and delivered less than promised, and stakeholders complained about performance and customer service. In some instances, the country as a whole faced widespread fiscal problems and the commercialization of air navigation Services was simply part of a larger movement to reform government enterprises. For instance, the New Zealand government established 14 state-owned enterprises in 1987, includingAir navigation services, rail services, and In Germany, DFS mainly finances its capital expenditures by drawing on a capital market program. DFS can also draw on an annual credit line of around $175.9 million from its bank. The ANSPs may also charge fees, as applicable, for other services, such as aeronautical information, consulting, and training. For example, a DFS business unit offers consulting services in air traffic system design and implementation.is currently drawn. The German air traffic service is one of the largest in the world. In Germany, DFS also lost revenue during the industry downturn, but to a lesser degree. DFS reported a loss of more than $36.4 million in 2001, when air traffic declined by 0.9 percent over the previous year. In 2002, it sustained a loss. of over $23.2 million. To address these deficits, D FS modified investments, canceled projects, and ultimately raised fees, increasing financial pressures on the airlines.body, would remain fixed until the next regularly scheduled review when prices may be adjusted, upward or downward, and benchmark levels set. years and is planning to consolidate these two radar centers into a single center by 2006. DFS also relocated the Dusseldorf control center to the Langen control center in 2002 (see fig. 1), a year earlier than planned. The supervisory board, rather than a parliamentary committee, now makes major investment decisions, it has been able to make key strategic decisions that would have previously been made by the parliamentary committee. It has also integrated operations and consolidated facilities, moving 17 approach units from airports and integrating them into four air traffic control centers. Before September 11, NAV CANADA banked up to $66.3 million in its rate stabilization fund to protect against future losses. With the industry downturn, this fund was quickly exhausted and, after the SARS outbreak in 2003, the fund reached a cumulative deficit of about $96.9 million. DFS has begun to consider the benefits of a reserve fund, but German legislation governing air navigation service charges must be changed before DFS can develop such a reserve. The fee increases had the inadvertent effect of disrupting the business cycles of air carriers, which faced the same difficult economic circumstances. If costs exceed revenues, ANSPs use different strategies to meet those shortfalls. NAV CANADA established a “rate stabilization fund’ which it used to store revenues when the aviation industry was healthy. The fund was capitalized by operating profits earned before September 11, 2001, but depleted during the economic downturn caused by the events of September 11. It could then be used to cover costs and keep rates stabilized when the industry was ailing. It was also used to keep revenues in reserve to protect against future losses. Commercialized ANSPs rely primarily on user fees to cover their costs. An industry downturn presents a fundamental financial risk for such AN SPs. The industry downturn that began in about 2000 and intensified after the events of September 11, 2001, and the SARS outbreak of 2003 brought this to a head. The following paragraphs summarize these lessons.selected. to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. 11, 2001, and the SARS outbreak of 2003 brought this lesson home to at least four of the five commercialized ANSPs we selected for review. NATS, with the greatest debt load, was the most vulnerable, but even NAV CANADA, with a multimillion-dollar contingency fund, eventually had to take extraordinary measures. Besides being burdened with debt, NATS was vulnerable to the industry, according to the report. The report was based on a review of Airservices, DFS, NATs, and NAVCANADA. the economic downturn caused by the events of September 11 and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak of 2003. To pay for capital projects, the five ANSPs can either use current operating revenues or borrow funds. All five can borrow funds through access to debt financing and private capital. For example, NAV CANADA has a borrowing capacity of about $2.4 billion, of which $1.8 billion is currently drawn. In Germany, DFS mainly finances its capital. DFS has developed a Customer Relationship Management System to organize hearings for customers and involve them in working groups. This approach to involving stakeholders is consistent with a Single European Sky directive that member states establish a mechanism for consulting with stakeholders. In Australia, the aviation community (i.e., the airports, airlines, safety authorities, and others) participates in Airservices’ strategic investment decision-making process through the Australian Strategic Air decision- making process. For more information, visit DFS’s website. Before commercialization, the German government did not consult with users and other stakeholders when it acquired and deployed new air navigation technologies. DFS has also reported that consulting with its customers before investing in any modernization efforts has been beneficial. Once an initial investment decision has been made, ANSPs have further reported that it is beneficial to involve stakeholders throughout the design and acquisition process. For example, Airservices Australia reported that, since commercialization,. air traffic controllers play a much larger role in the acquisitions process and have come to understand the linkage between. example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand noted that its investment decisions are very much driven by customers’ needs. Airways said it consults closely with the airlines before deciding to acquire new systems and to implement technology upgrades. According to Airways, if the airlines say they do not want to make a particular investment and the investment adds no value for the customer, Airways will not spend the money. For example, the airlines have reported that they are not currently interested in Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast, so Airways has no immediate plans to invest in the technology. acquisitions process and have come to understand the linkage between service delivery costs and the costs of new equipment. In Airways’ experience, it is essential for controllers, manufacturers, and the ANSP to reach agreement in order to establish realistic expectations for system design from the very beginning. In some instances, an ANSP’s need to recover its costs may be at odds with the need to ensure consistency in requirements and to maintain a thorough understanding of the project’S ongoing specifications. fiduciary responsibilities to shareholders. The members of this board may represent key stakeholders, such as the airlines, employees, general aviation, and the national government. As in a corporation, an executive officer implements the ANSP board’s policies and is, in turn, accountable to the board. For example, in the UK, government appointees, the airlines and BAA (the airport consortium) are represented on NATS’S board of directors. In Germany, DFS employees, government ministries, and private sector are representation on a supervisory board. the chief executive officer and are directly responsible for various aspects of the ANSP’s day-to-day operations. Airservices Australia is structured around three market-oriented business groups. While the supervisory board and its executive officers have decision- making responsibility, stakeholders, including employees, the airlines, general aviation operators, are also involved. The managers of these five groups form the Executive Committee and work with the chief executive Officer to advise the board as well as carry out the board's policies. The UK’s NATS is a public-private partnership (i.e., a cooperative venture between the public and private sectors) The government holds the largest share of NATS (49 percent) The remaining shares are divided among a consortium of seven UK airlines (42 percent), NATS staff (5 are appointed by the airline industry, 3 by the government, 2 by employees such as air traffic controllers and engineers, and 1 by general and business aviation) (See table 2) consortium of seven UK airlines (42 percent), NATS staff (5 percent), and a private airport company (4 percent) By 2006, Germany plans to change the ownership of DFS, selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors and reorganizing it as a public-private partnership. NAV CANADA is a nonshare capital, private corporation—that is, it has “members” instead of shareholders. The corporation has 4 members representing government, airlines, noncommercial users, and the unions. being burdened with debt, NATS was vulnerable to the industry downturns. Nearly all of its costs (95 percent) were fixed, limiting its ability to cut costs. NATS’s revenues depended heavily on North American air traffic. North American flights accounted for 14 percent of its flights and 44 percent ofIts revenues. When transatlantic traffic declined after September 11, NATs’re revenues declined 15 percent. However, the combination of lost revenue and lost market share was too much for NATS to overcome. NATS was facing insolvency in early 2002, leading it to implement operational cost savings, obtain a temporary loan credit, refinance its debts and renegotiate prices for users. Under its new regulatory structure, NATS now has a system in place to mitigate the effects of an industry downturn through automatic price increases that are triggered by reductions in air traffic. These price increases go into effect when traffic falls below a benchmark level, according to NATS. New equity partner (BAA, plc) go into effect when traffic falls below a benchmark level, limiting NATS’s revenue loss to 50 percent of the revenue that would have been generated if the benchmark level of traffic had been reached. In effect, this automatic trigger mechanism spreads the risk of traffic downturns between NATS and its airline customers. Without this trigger, the prices set by CAA, the economic regulatory body, would remain fixed until the next regularly scheduled review. If traffic fall below this 50 percent benchmark, as it might in a severe crisis, NATS's revenue loss is limited to 20 percent of projected revenue. offers consulting services in air traffic system design and implementation. In 2003, DFS’s consulting service generated revenue of about $2.8 million. In the UK, NATS competes with other service providers to provide terminal services at UK airports. NATS, like DFS, consults and offers training for other ANSPs worldwide in implementing safety management systems, solving airspace capacity problems, and commercializing AN SPs. From this business unit, NATs generated profits of about. $11.7 million in 2003 and about $14.8million in 2004. NTS reduced its net operating costs by almost $161 million from 2002 through 2004. For example, it consolidated two operations into one at a new air navigation services center, called the Swanwick Center. According to NATS, after placing this new center in service, it reduced its staff costs by nearly $20.1 million and its costs for services and materials by about $18.5 million between 2002 and 2004. In the UK, NATS has been able to make key strategic decisions that would have been difficult when DFS was under government control. services and materials by about $18.5 million between 2002 and 2003. Between 2003 and 2004, NATS reported, it reduced its operating costs for air traffic services by another $21.4 million through cost control measures. All five ANSPs said they have improved productivity through modernization through investments in upgrading or replacing air navigation facilities and equipment. For example, Airservices Australia reported increases in controllers’ productivity following the introduction of the Australian Advanced Air Traffic System (TAAATS) (see fig. 2) TAAATS replaced handwritten, paper flight progress strips with screen-based information that is updated automatically. DFS is also eliminating systems that depend on paper strips and expects productivity gains and cost savings to follow. In New Zealand, according to the union that represents air traffic controllers, individual controllers are now able to handle much more flight activity because of improved technology. Besides improving productivity, modernization—together with airspace redesign—has produced operational efficiencies, including fewer and shorter delays, ANSPs say. Commercialization has allowed the ANSPs to implement modernization projects more efficiently. NATS, for example, reduced its average delay per flight from 2.7 minutes in 2002 to 0.74 minutes in calendar year 2003, while handling almost 2.1 million flights. Formerly, the uncertainty associated with the annual appropriations from national governments made it difficult to plan over multiple years. Access to cash flow and borrowed funds has allowed them to plan and execute projects more efficient and has improved their ability to deliver projects on time, within budget, and on time. Be notified of any breach by NATS or by controllers. In New Zealand, as air traffic has increased, some airspace sectors have been subdivided so that controllers are responsible for a smaller piece of airspace. To lower their personnel costs, all five ANSPs have reduced their administrative staff or flattened their management organizations. For example, NAV CANADA closed most of its regional administrative offices and reduced its management staff by 20 per cent to save money. In Australia, DFS has undertaken a study of controllers’ stress and strain, which has led to internal regulations on the maximum working hours allowed. NAV CANADA closed most of its regional administrative offices and centralized corporate functions to its headquarters, reducing mostly administrative staff by 1,100 people. Airways Corporation of New Zealand also reportedly reduced its personnel costs by eliminating some middle management and administrative positions. In general, the ANSPs have not reduced their air traffic controller staffs. To lower their facility operating costs, all five AN SPs have closed, relocated, or consolidated facilities. For example, Airways Corporation  reported consolidating four radar centers into two over 8 years and is planning to consolidate these two radar centers. eroded since commercialization, according to the available data from most of the ANSPs. For example, data from DFS show a decrease in the number of aircraft proximity incidents in Germany, from 23 in 1995 to 8 in 2003, 3 of which were attributed to DFS. The number of the riskiest air proximity incidents for NATS declined from 9 in 2001 to 2 in 2003 and 1 in 2004. Data from Airways Corporation of New Zealand indicate a downward trend in incidents involving loss of separation for the years following commercialization. the years following commercialization. NAV CANADA’s annual report for 2004 also cites a decrease in the rate of loss-of-separation incidents. According to some, the separation of operating and regulatory functions has strengthened safety regulation and diminished any potential conflict of interest. Additionally, stakeholders have told us they believe the air navigation system is as safe as it was when the government provided air navigation services. The Canadian Air Navigation System is operated by the Canadian Air National Guard and the Canadian Armed Forces. NATS was extremely vulnerable to the decline in air traffic after September 11. DFS is currently undergoing a valuation of its key assets in preparation for selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors in a formal competitive bidding process. Some countries that commercialized their ANSP had difficulty retaining a sufficient number of staff to carry out safety regulation. In Canada, many of the safety staff moved to the newly established NAV CANADA after commercialization, leaving the government regulator, Transport Canada, with insufficient staff.  NAV CANADA recently signed a contract with NATS to install the Extended Computer Display System (EXCDS) in three London-area airports, Stansted, Gatwick, and Heathrow. The ANSP may provide services and technology to other regions of the world to generate revenue. For example, Airservices Australia manages the upper airspace in the Solomon Islands. Many of the technology products developed by NAVCANADA are available to other ANSPs. The company spent $1.2.million in 2004 on research and development. Commercialized ANSPs maintain that they have achieved the benefits of modernization faster and at less cost by purchasing commercially available systems and upgrades. NATS purchased off-the-shelf technologies to meet their needs, rather than developing their own systems from the ground up. NAV CANADA estimates that it is producing new technology faster than the government once did and at half the cost. For example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand deployed its new oceanic system, FANS1, in less than a year. The technology products developed by NAV CANADA are available to outside organizations, such as NATS, enabling them to reduce their costs and avoid development risks. Each of the five commercialized ANSPs is its country’s sole provider of en route services and, as such, functions as a monopoly. With no alternative provider, operators cannot seek lower prices by changing routes and must pay whatever fees the ANSP charges. Since user fees constitute an ANSP's primary source of revenue, economic monitoring and regulation by an independent third is needed. developing their own systems from the ground up. NATS purchased its oceanic system and automated tower/terminal control system from NAV CANADA. To achieve further purchasing efficiencies, some commercialized European ANSPs have developed an alliance to procure systems. For instance, Germany has developed a strategic alliance with Switzerland and the Netherlands for the joint procurement of a new radar system. Through their cost control initiatives and modernization efforts, some of the AN SPs have been able to lower their unit costs and lower their charges to major commercial airlines. The Airline Group provided approximately $1.4 billion, including about $112.2 million from the group’s own resources. The group used this sum to acquire NATS and meet associated transaction costs, leaving cash assets of approximately $6.0 million in the business. NAV CANADA purchased all of the ANSP assets from the Canadian government. Instead of going through a formal competitive bidding in 1996, NATS fell short of the $2.3 billion estimate developed in 1995 by a third party.  NAV CANADA purchased the air navigation system in 1996 for about $1.5 billion. It used a $2.9 billion line of credit provided by a syndicate of banks at the time of the purchase. Each ANSP makes and carries out its own strategic, operating, and financial decisions. A supervisory board oversees policy making and operations and, when applicable, has fiduciary responsibilities to shareholders. The members of this board may be appointed by the Canadian government or by the ANSP. Airservices’ strategic investment decision-making process through the Australian Strategic Air Traffic Management Group. In Canada, NAV CANADA’s stakeholders (i.e., associations, unions, and airports, including international and U.S. representatives) are involved in the NAVCANADA Advisory Committee. As commercial organizations, the ANSPs follow corporate practices. Each ANSP has established performance measures and gathers and reports financial and other performance data. The ANSP also publishes an annual report, which makes financial information available to the public to ensure transparency. stations, which will allow air traffic surveillance services over remote regions of Australia where no surveillance currently exists. To protect taxpayers’ interests, Canada and the UK needed to have an appropriate valuation of their facilities and equipment before wholly or partially selling these assets to their newly established ANSP. According to its Office of the Auditor General (OAG), Canada did not properly value its ANSP assets and infrastructures. The approximately $1.5 billion value that the government negotiated with NAV CANADA in 1996 fell short of the $2.3 billion to $ 2.4 billion. Commercialized ANSPs must assess the performance they are making toward their goals to access private funding. Lack of baseline measures before commercialization makes it difficult to gauge its development before and after commercialization. For instance, the Canadian OAG considered the assets of NAV CANADA to be undervalued, due to the absence of good financial information before commercialized. ICAO, for example, stresses the importance of having transparent financial data available. The ANSP industry needs to develop performance measures and benchmarks.

ROUGE-1: 83.02, ROUGE-2: 74.88, ROUGE-L: 24.04
BERTScore: 61.13

==============================================
==================== [44/100] ====================
Summary:
the advice and consent of the Senate; and inferior officers, whose appointment Congress may vest "in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments" In Edmond , the Court noted that "[g]enerally speaking, the term 'inferior officer' connotes a relationship with some higher ranking officer or officers below the President" The Court's decisions appear to focus on the extent of the officer's discretion to make autonomous policy choices and the authority of other officials to supervise. The most thorough elucidation of the definition of "Officers of the United States" can be found in judicial interpretations of the Appointments Clause. In interpreting the Clause, the Court has made clear distinctions between "Officers" whose appointment is subject to the requirements of the Clause and non-officers, also known as employees. The amount of authority a president has to appoint an officer is a key issue in impeachment proceedings. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue by the end of the year. as employees, whose appointment is not. The amount of authority that an individual exercises will generally determine his classification as either an officer or employee. As established in Buckley v. Valeo , an officer is "any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the United States" Employees are viewed as "lesser functionaries subordinate to the officers of the U.S," who do not exercise "significant authority" The Supreme Court has further subdivided "officers" into two categories: principal officers and inferior officers. The Constitution explicitly makes "[t]he President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States" subject to impeachment and removal. Congress has seemingly shown a willingness to impeach Presidents, federal judges, and Cabinet-level executive branch officials. A question which precedent has not thus far addressed is whether Congress may impeach and remove subordinate, non-Cabinet level executive branch Officials. In all of American history, only three members of the executive branch have been impeached: two Presidents and a Secretary of State. branch have been impeached: two Presidents and a Secretary of War. While it seems that executive officials of the highest levels are "civil Officers," historical precedent provides no examples of the impeachment power being used against lower-level executive officials. One must, therefore, look to other sources for aid in determining precisely how far down the federal bureaucracy the impeachmentPower might reach. The general purposes of impeachment may assist in interpreting the proper scope of "civil officers of the United States" The congressional power of impeachment constitutes an important aspect of the various checks and balances that were built. Early interpretations suggest the impeachment power was arguably intended to extend to "all" executive officers. But who is an officer? The most thorough elucidation of the definition supervise and to remove the officer. The remaining question is whether inferior officers, or those officers who exercise significant authority under the supervision of a principal officer, are subject to impeachment and removal. This view would permit Congress to impeach and remove any executive branch "officer," including many deputy political appointees and certain administrative judges. There is some historical evidence, however, to suggest that inferior officers were not meant to besubject to impeachment. ignorance to suppose that every officer, however trifling his office, is to be impeached for every petty offense ... I hope every gentleman ... must see plainly that impeachments cannot extend to inferior officers of the United States." Governeur Morris, member of the Pennsylvania delegation to the Constitutional Convention, arguably implied that inferior officers would not be subject to impeachment. "certain great officers of State; a minister of finance, of war, of foreign affairs, etc. ... will be amenable by impeachment to the public justice" Early constitutional commentators also arguably suggest a broad interpretation of "civil Officers of the United States" Joseph Story addressed the reach of the impeachment power in his influential Commentaries on the Constitution. Story: All officers of the U.S. who hold their appointments under the national government are properly civil officers within the meaning of the constitution, with the exception of officers in the army and navy. The separation of powers and good government. The role of the judiciary in a democracy. The duties of judges and prosecutors. A conviction on an article of impeachment requires a two-thirds vote of those Senators present. If the respondent is convicted on one or more of the articles against him or her, the Presiding Officer will pronounce the judgment of conviction and removal. No formal vote is required for removal, as it is a necessary effect of the conviction. The Senate may subsequently vote on whether the impeached official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the United States. If this option is pursued, a simple majority vote is needed. individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the Senate. The House of Representatives shall chuse their Speaker and other Officers; and shall have the sole Power of Impeachment. —Article I, Section 2 The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States, shall be removed from Office on Impeachments for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors . —Article II, Section 4.  impeachment applies only to the "President, Vice President, and all civil Officers of the United States" The grounds for impeachment are limited to "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" The decision to impeach an individual rests solely with the House of Representatives. The House has the power to remove an individual from office if it so chooses. The impeachment process can take up to two years. The Senate has the option of impeaching an individual for up to 10 years. individual rests solely with the House of Representatives. Conviction of an individual requires a two-thirds majority of the present Senators on one of the articles brought by the House. When conducting the trial, Senators must be "on oath or affirmation," and the right to a jury trial does not extend to impeachment proceedings. The immediate effect of conviction upon an article of impeachment is removal from office, although the Senate may subsequently vote on whether the official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the United States. offense, known as articles of impeachment. The House has impeached 19 individuals: 15 federal judges, one Senator, one Cabinet member, and two Presidents. If the Senate, by vote of a two-thirds majority, convicts the official of the alleged offenses, the result is removal from office of those still in office. The Senate has conducted 16 full impeachment trials. Of these, eight individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the Senate. This report briefly explores the history of impeachment in the United States. The Constitution sets forth the general principles which control the procedural aspects of impeachment. Both the Senate and the House have designed procedures to implement these general principles. This section provides a brief overview of the impeachment process, reflecting the roles of both the House and the Senate during the course of an impeachment inquiry and trial. Impeachment proceedings may be commenced in the House of Representatives by a vote of the House of Representatives. The Senate has the power to impeach in the Senate, while imbuing the Senate with the power of trying impeachments. may be commenced in the House of Representatives by a Member declaring a charge of impeachment on his or her own initiative. The impeachment process may be triggered by non-Members, such as when the Judicial Conference of the United States suggests that the House may wish to consider impeachment of a federal judge. A Member presenting a memorial listing charges under oath, or a Member depositing a resolution in the hopper, which is then referred to the appropriate committee. An independent counsel advises the House. of any substantial and credible information which he or she believes might be relevant to impeachment. The focus of the impeachment inquiry is to determine whether the person involved has engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Usually an initial investigation is conducted by the Judiciary Committee. However, it is possible that this investigation could be carried out by a select or special committee. If a subcommittee or task force is charged with investigating a possible impeachment, the Members can vote to recommend articles of impeachment. If the full committee, by majority vote, determines that grounds for impeachment exist, a resolution impeaching the individual in question can be passed. substantial and credible information which he or she believes might constitute grounds for impeachment, by message from the President, by a charge from a state or territorial legislature or grand jury, or by petition. Resolutions regarding impeachment may be of two types. A resolution impeaching a particular individual, who is within the category of impeachable officers under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution, is usually referred directly to the House Committee on the Judiciary. At the conclusion of debate, the House may consider the resolution as a whole, or may vote on each article separately. The House may vote to impeach even if the House Judiciary Committee does not recommend impeachment. H.Res. 803 authorized the House Judiciary Committee to investigate fully whether sufficient grounds existed for the House to impeach President Nixon. It specified powers which the Committee could exercise in conducting this investigation, and addressed funding for that purpose. The resolution was agreed to by the House of Representatives and signed into law by President Richard M. Nixon on June 25, 1974. The House of Representative voted to impeached Nixon on July 18, 1974, a vote that was followed by a vote to censure him on July 25, 1978. of the Constitution, a vote to impeach by the House requires a simple majority of those present and voting, upon satisfaction of quorum requirements. In recent practice, managers have been appointed by resolution, although historically they occasionally have been elected or appointed by the Speaker of the House pursuant to a resolution conferring such authority upon him. The House will also adopt a resolution in order to notify the Senate of its action. The Senate, after receiving such notification, will then adopt an order informing the House that it is ready to receive the managers. The Senate will issue a writ of summons to the respondent, informing him or her of the date on which appearance and answer should be made. On the date established by the Senate, the respondent may appear in person or by counsel. In the latter event, the proceedings progress as though a "not guilty" plea were entered. The respondent may demur, arguing that he or she is not a civil official subject to impeachment, or that the charges listed do not constitute sufficient impeachment. When pleadings have concluded, the Senate will set a date for trial. The Senate will determine questions of competency, relevancy, and materiality. The Senate has not adopted standard rules of evidence to be used during an impeachment trial. Presiding Officer possesses authority to rule on all evidentiary questions. Final arguments in the trial will be presented by each side, with the managers for the House of Representatives opening and closing. When the presentation of evidence and argument by the managers and counsel for the respondent has concluded, the Senate as a whole meets in closed. Under Article I, Section 3, clause 6 of the Constitution, the Chief Justice presides over the Senate impeachment trial if the President is being tried. The full Senate may receive evidence and take testimony, or may order the Presiding Officer to appoint a committee of Senators to serve this purpose. If the latter option is employed, the committee will present a certified transcript of the proceedings to the full Senate. The Senate will determine questions of competency, relevancy, and relevency. The House of Representatives impeached President Clinton for perjury and obstruction of justice. The Senate acquitted President Clinton on both charges. The House Judiciary Committee report argued that perjury by the President was an impeachable offense. The report rejected the notion that conduct such as perjury was "more detrimental when committed by judges and therefore only impeachable when commits by judges" The two articles of impeachment were approved by the House, the Senate acquitted Clinton onboth charges.. A number of individuals have also been impeached for behavior incompatible with the nature of the office. this behavior, and making false and misleading statements to agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation about the activity. Judge Kent resigned before the Senate trial was completed. Finally, one might classify some of the articles of impeachment brought against President Clinton as grounded on alleged behavior considered incompatible with the nature of the office of the Presidency. Both the first article, for allegedly lying to a grand jury, and the second, for alleged obstructing justice by concealing evidence in a federal civil rights action brought against him, noted that by doing this, "William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of the presidency" by doing this, "William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of his office, has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed his trust as President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the rule of law and justice" A number of individuals have been impeached for official conduct for an improper purpose. The first type of behavior involves vindictive use of the office. For example, in 1826, Judge James Peck was impeaching for charging a lawyer with contempt, imprisoning him, and ordering his disbarment for criticizing one of his clients. The House has impeached several individuals for abusing or exceeding the powers of their office. In 1868, amidst a struggle over Reconstruction policy, the House impeached President Andrew Johnson on allegations that he violated the Tenure of Office Act. President Johnson was acquitted by a margin of one vote in the Senate. In 1974,. the House Judiciary Committee recommended articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon on the theory that he abused the powers. and purpose of the office; and (3) misusing the office for an improper purpose or for personal gain. The articles alleged that the President, "using the powers of his high office," attempted to obstruct the investigation of the Watergate Hotel break-in, conceal and protect the perpetrators, and conceal the existence of other illegal activity. President Nixon resigned before the House voted on the articles. One of the articles of the Articles of impeachment alleged that he used the power of the office of the Presidency to violate citizens' constitutional rights, "impair" lawful investigations, and "contravene" laws applicable to executive branch agencies. President Andrew Johnson and President Richard Nixon were impeached and convicted for perjury and false statements in matters distinct from their official duties. In contrast, the minority views from the report opposing impeachment reasoned that "not all impeachable offenses are crimes" The minority emphasized that the President was not impeachable for all potential crimes, no matter how minor. impeachment was reserved for "conduct that constitutes an egregious abuse or subversion of the powers of the executive office," the report said. The minority did not explicitly claim that the grounds for impeachment might be different. House on 16 articles, including involvement in a conspiracy to accept bribes in return for lenient sentences for defendants. Judge Hastings was convicted by the Senate on eight articles. In addition, Judge Walter L. Nixon Jr. was convicted in a criminal case on two counts of perjury to a grand jury concerning his relationship with a man whose son was being prosecuted. He was subsequently impeached in 1989 for his behavior, including making false statements to the grand jury and lying about the underlying events at his criminal trial. In Nixon v. United States, the Supreme Court ruled that a challenge to the Senate's use of a trial committee to take evidence posed a nonjusticiable political question. Judge Walter L. Nixon had been convicted in a criminal trial on two counts of making false statements before a grand jury and was sent to prison. He refused, however, to resign and continued to receive his salary as a judge while in prison. The House of Representatives adopted articles of impeachment against the judge and he was impeached. Secretary of War William W. Belknap was impeached in 1876 for allegedly receiving payments in return for appointing an individual to maintain a trading post in Indian Territory. Judge Charles Swayne was also impeached by the House and acquitted by the Senate. In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaching and convicted for using the office to acquire business favors from both litigants in his court and potential litigant. And the impeachments of Judges English, Louderback, and Ritter all involved "misusing their power to appoint and set the fees of bankruptcy receivers for personal profit" any President, Vice President, or other civil officer of the United States has been impeached by the House solely on the basis of conduct occurring before he began his tenure in the office held at the time of the impeachment investigation. It appears that federal officials who have resigned have nonetheless been thought to be susceptible to impeachment and a ban on holding future office. Secretary of War William W. Belknap resigned two hours before the House impeached him, but the Senate nevertheless conducted a trial in which BelKnap was acquitted. Senate nevertheless conducted a trial in which Belknap was acquitted. The Senate voted in favor of jurisdiction. That said, the resignation of an official under investigation for impeachment often ends impeachment proceedings. For example, no impeachment vote was taken following President Richard Nixon's resignation after the House Judiciary Committee decided to report articles of impeachment to the House. And proceedings were ended following the resignations of Judges English, Delahay, and Kent. The Constitution sets forth the general principles which govern impeachment proceedings in the United States. Judge Harry Claiborne was impeached for providing false information on federal income tax forms. Report: perjury by the President was "just as devastating to our system of government" Report: Both JudgeClaiborne and Judge Nixon were impeached and convicted for perjury and false impeached. The report concluded that judges are only impeachable for behavior incompatible with the nature of the office they hold. and therefore only impeachable when committed by judges."It is "devastating" for the judiciary when judges are perceived as dishonest," the report said. a violation of the "public trust" —conduct that is unlikely to be barred via statute. Many of the impeachments approved by the House of Representatives have included conduct that did not involve criminal activity. Less than a third have specifically invoked a criminal statute or used the term "crime" For example, in 1803, Judge John Pickering was impeached and convicted for, among other things, appearing on the bench "in a state of total intoxication" In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaches and convicted. for abusing his position as a judge by brought the "judiciary into disrepute, thereby undermining public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the administration of justice" Judge John Pickering was impeached and convicted in 1803 for, among other things, appearing in court "in a state of intoxication and using profane language" Judge Mark H. Delahay was impeaching in 1873 for his "personal habits," including being intoxicated on and off the bench. He resigned before he could be removed from office. In 1936, Judge Halstead Ritter was impeached and convicted for conduct that "br[ought] his court into disrepute" And a number of judges were impeached for misusing their position for personal profit. Some have suggested that the standard for impeaching a federal judge differs from an executive branch official. While Article II, Article I, and Article II of the U.S. Constitution provide for the impeachment of federal judges, they do not provide for their removal from office. being intoxicated on and off the bench. Various other activities incompatible with the nature of an office have merited impeachment procedures. In 1862, Judge West H. Humphrey was impeached and convicted for neglecting his duties as a judge and joining the Confederacy. In 1926 Judge George English was impeaching for showing judicial favoritism which eroded the public's confidence in the court. And in 2009, Judge Samuel B. Kent was impeaches for allegedly sexually assaulting two court employees, obstructing the judicial investigation of this behavior and making false and misleading statements to agents. Judge Archbald was impeached by the House and tried by the Senate in the 62 nd Congress. He was convicted on four articles alleging misconduct in his then-current positions as a circuit judge and Commerce Court judge. Judge G. Thomas Porteous is the first individual to be impeached and convicted based in part upon conduct occurring before he began his tenure in federal office. The articles of impeachment brought against him alleged misconduct in those positions as well as his previous position as U.S. District Court Judge of the Middle District of Pennsylvania. In 2010, Judge G. Thomas Porteous Jr. was impeached for participating in a corrupt financial relationship with attorneys in a case before him. The Senate convicted Judge Nixon on two of three articles. Judge Nixon was found guilty of making false statements to the grand jury about whether he had discussed a criminal case with the prosecutor and attempted to influence the case, as well as for concealing such matters from federal investigators. He was sentenced to 10 years in prison and 10 years of probation, plus a $100,000 fine. Most impeachments have concerned behavior occurring while an individual is in a federal office. However, some have addressed, at least in part, conduct before individuals assumed their positions. For example, in 1912, a resolution impeaching Judge Robert W. Archbald and setting forth 13 articles of impeachment was reported out of the House Judiciary Committee and agreed to by the House. The Senate convicted Judge archbald in January the following year. At the time that Judge ArchBald was in office, he was accused of helping bondsman develop corrupt relationships with state court judges. or undermine the integrity of office and even the Constitution itself. "[O]ther high crimes and misdemeanor[s]" are not limited to indictable offenses, but apply to "serious violations of the public trust" Congressional materials indicate that the term "Misdemeanor ... does not mean a minor criminal offense as the term is generally employed in the criminal law," but refers instead to the behavior of public officials. Similarly, the judiciary subcommittee charged with investigating Associate Justice Douglas of the Supreme Court concluded that "misconduct that damages the state" in federal office. Article IV alleged that Judge Porteous made false statements to the Senate and FBI in connection with his nomination and confirmation to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Articles I and II each alleged misconduct beginning while he was a state court judge as well as misconduct while hewas a federal judge. On December 8, 2010, he was convicted on all four articles, removed from office, and disqualified from holding future federal offices. On the other hand, it does not appear that any President, Vice President, or other civil officer of the United States of America has ever been convicted of misconduct. than the full Senate. The decision was vacated on appeal and remanded for reconsideration in light of Nixon v. United States. The district court then dismissed the suit because it presented a nonjusticiable political question. The case is still pending in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which covers New York City, New Jersey, New York state, and New Jersey. The trial is expected to begin in the coming weeks, with the jury set to begin deliberating in early June. The Court noted that while Article I, Section 5, does provide that Congress shall determine the qualifications of its Members, Article I,. Section 2, delineates the three requirements for House membership. Representatives must be at least 25 years of age, have been U.S. citizens for at least seven years, and inhabit the states they represent. Therefore, the Powell Court concluded, the House's claim that it possessed unreviewable authority was defeated by this separate provision specifying the only qualifications which might be used. this separate provision specifying the only qualifications which might be imposed for House membership" In other words, finding that the House had unreviewable authority to decide its Members' qualifications would violate another provision of the Constitution. The Court therefore concluded in Powell that whether the three requirements in the Constitution were satisfied was textually committed to the House, "but the decision as to what these qualifications consisted of was not" The Nixon Court noted that here, in contrast, leaving the interpretation of the word "try" with the Senate did not. distinguish the situation from Powell v. McC ormack , a case also involving congressional procedure where the Court declined to apply the political question doctrine. That case involved a challenge brought by a Member-elect of the House of Representatives who had been excluded from his seat pursuant to a House Resolution. The precise issue in Powell was whether the judiciary could review a congressional decision that the plaintiff was "unqualified" to take his seat. That determination had turned, the Court explained, "on whether the Constitution committed authority to the House to judge its Members' qualifications" aspect of the various checks and balances that were built into the Constitution to preserve the separation of powers. It is a tool, entrusted to the House and Senate alone, to remove government officials who either abuse their power or engage in conduct that warrants their dismissal from an office of public trust. At least one commentator has suggested that the Framers recognized, particularly with respect to executive branch officials, that there would be instances in which it may not be in the President's interest to remove a "favorite" from office. interest to remove a "favorite" from office, even when that individual has violated the public trust. As such, the Framers "dwelt repeatedly on the need of power to oust corrupt or oppressive ministers whom the President might seek to shelter" If the impeachment power were meant to ensure that Congress has the ability to impeach and remove corrupt officials, it would seem arguable that the power should extend to officers exercising a degree of authority, the abuse of which would be harmful to the separation of powers and good government. Some have argued that only criminal acts are impeachable offenses under the United States Constitution. Alexander Hamilton, in justifying not, however, comport with historical practice. According to this reasoning, impeachable conduct could include behavior that violates an official's duty to the country. Indeed, in the past both houses of Congress have given the power to try impeachments to the House of Representatives, rather than the Senate, for the first time in 1787. The debate during the Constitutional Convention indicates that criminal conduct was encompassed in the "high crimes and misdemeanors" standard. The Constitution bars the President from using the pardon power to shield individuals from impeachment or removal from office. In considering the use of the impeachment power, Congress confronts at least two preliminary legal questions bearing on whether an impeachment inquiry against a given official is constitutionally appropriate. The question is whether the individual whose conduct is under scrutiny holds an office that is subject to impeachment and removal, and second, whether the conduct for which the official is being impeached is the same one for which he or she has been convicted. could support an impeachment charge. Grounds for impeachment include abuse of the particular powers of government office or a violation of the "public trust" The purpose of impeachment is not to inflict personal punishment for criminal activity. Instead, impeachment is a "remedial" tool; it serves to effectively "maintain constitutional government" by removing individuals unfit for office, writes Julian Zelizer, a professor of constitutional law at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book "Impeachment: The Power to Impeach" The Constitution gives Congress the authority to impeach and remove the President, Vice President, and other federal "civil officers" A determination that such officers have engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Impeachment is one of the various checks and balances created by the Constitution, and is a crucial tool for potentially holding government officers accountable for violations of the law and abuse of power. Rooted in various constitutional provisions, impeachment is largely immune from judicial review. When considering impeachment matters, Members of Congress have historically examined the language of the Constitution and past precedents. The Constitution describes the grounds of impeachment as "treason, bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" While treason and bribery are relatively well-defined terms, the meaning of "high Crimes" is not defined in the Constitution or in statute. It was adopted from the English practice of parliamentary impeachments, which appears to have been directed against individuals accused of non-criminal conduct. In accordance with the understanding of " high" offenses in the English tradition, impeachable offenses are "constitutional wrongs that subvert the structure of government, or undermine the integrity of office" Congressional materials have cautioned that the grounds for impeachment "do not all fit neatly and logically into categories" The remedy of impeachment is intended to "reach a broad variety of conduct by officers that is both serious and incompatible with the duties of the office," the materials say. Congressional precedents reflect three broad types of conduct thought to constitute grounds for impeachment. They are improperly exceeding or abusing the powers of the Office; behavior incompatible with function and purpose of office; and misusing the office. a federal judge could be impeached for perjury or fraud because of the importance of trustworthiness and impartiality to the judiciary. The same behavior might not constitute impeachable conduct for an executive branch official. The impeachment and acquittal of President Clinton illustrates this difficulty. It is uncertain if conduct meriting impeachment and conviction for a judge would fail to qualify for a non-judicial officer. The House's rejection of nonpublic behavior as sufficient grounds for impeachment for the President appears to conflict with the past impeachment of federal judges on just this basis. Article III, Section 1, of the Constitution provides that federal judges "hold their Offices during good behaviour" One argument posits that judges can be impeached and removed from office if they fail to exhibit good behavior or if they are guilty of "treason, bribery, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" The House Judiciary Committee's Impeachment Inquiry asked whether the "good behavior" clause provides an additional ground for impeachment of judges and concluded that "[i]t does not" Congress appears to be that the phrase "good behavior" simply designates judicial tenure. Under this reasoning, rather than functioning as a ground for impeachment, the " good behavior" phrase simply makes clear that federal judges retain their office for life unless they are removed via a proper constitutional mechanism. For example, a 1973 discussion of impeachment grounds released by the House Judiciary Committee reviewed the history of the phrase and concluded that it was not a grounds for impeachment in the early 20th century. The phrase is still used today. interpretation of the word "try" with the Senate did not violate any "separate provision" of the Constitution. In addition, several other aspects of the impeachment process have been challenged. Judge G. Thomas Porteous brought a suit seeking to bar counsel for the Impeachment Task Force of the House Judiciary Committee from using sworn testimony the judge had provided pursuant to a grant of immunity. The impeachment proceedings were initiated after a judicial investigation of Judge Porteous for alleged corruption on the bench. to the Special Investigatory Committee under an order granting him immunity from that information being used against him in a criminal case. Judge Porteous argued that the use of his immunized testimony during an impeachment proceeding violated his Fifth Amendment right not to be compelled to serve as a witness against himself. The court rejected his challenge, reasoning that because theUse of such testimony for an impeachment proceedings fell within the legislative sphere, the Speech or Debate Clause prevented the court from ordering the committee staff members to refrain. Judge Alcee L. Hastings sought to prevent the House Judiciary Committee from obtaining the records of a grand jury inquiry during the Committee's impeachment investigation. Judge Hastings' argument was grounded in the separation of powers: he claimed that permitting disclosure of grand jury records for an impeachment investigation risked improperly allowing the executive and judicial branches to participate in the impeachment. Although ultimately acquitted, Judge Hastings had been indicted by a federal grand jury for a conspiracy to commit bribery. The House of Representatives voted to impeach President Barack Obama. House of Representatives adopted articles of impeachment against the judge. The Senate invoked Impeachment Rule XI, a Senate procedural rule which permits a committee to take evidence and testimony. Both sides then presented briefs to the full Senate and delivered arguments, and the Senate then voted to convict and remove him from office. The judge thereafter brought a suit arguing that the use of the committee totake evidence violated the Constitution's provision that the Senate "try" to find a solution to a problem. The case was settled out of court. take evidence violated the Constitution's provision that the Senate "try" all impeachments. The Supreme Court noted that the Constitution grants "the sole Power" to try impeachment "in the Senate and nowhere else" The Court reasoned that the "Senate alone shall have authority to determine whether an individual should be acquitted or convicted" In addition, because impeachment functions as the " only check on the Judicial Branch by the Legislature," the Court noted the important role of the Senate in the impeachment process. Judicial Branch by the Legislature. Court noted the important separation of powers concerns that would be implicated if the "final reviewing authority with respect to impeachments [was placed] in the hands of the same body that the impeachment process is meant to regulate" The Court was careful to distinguish the situation from Powell v. McC ormack , a case in which the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the impeached President. The lack of finality and the difficulty of fashioning relief weighed against adjudication of the case. the executive and judicial branches to participate in the impeachment process. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit rejected this "absolutist" concept of the separation of powers. "A merely generalized assertion of secrecy in grand jury materials must yield to a demonstrated, specific need for evidence in a pending impeachment investigation," the appeals court said. The decision was vacated on appeal, and the case is now back in the Senate for a hearing on whether to impeach President Obama. The committee concluded that, at least with regard to federal judges, impeachment was appropriate in several circumstances. The committee left unresolved whether non-criminal conduct outside of the judicial function could support an impeachment charge. The purposes underlying the impeachment were also left unresolved. The Committee concluded that the impeachment of a federal judge was appropriate if the conduct was connected with the judicial office or the exercise of judicial power. The purpose of the impeachment was to remove the judge from office for a period of time. The impeachment of the judge was not to remove him from office.

ROUGE-1: 80.47, ROUGE-2: 73.15, ROUGE-L: 28.58
BERTScore: 60.58

==============================================
==================== [45/100] ====================
Summary:
Jensen and Kletzer's most offshorable category accounted for 27.4% of all employment in services occupations in 2005. Service occupations having a larger percentage of bachelor's degree holders were ranked as more vulnerable to offshoring. Despite their vulnerability to being offshored, employment in these occupations grew slightly faster than overall service-providing employment in the 2001-2007 period. The skills and education of this most vulnerable group range widely: Fifteen are office and administrative support occupations with relatively low education or training requirements. professional services. They examined the task content of 457 service occupations to rank their relative vulnerability to being offshored. The measures of task content they used include whether the job requires face-to-face contact with others, is telecommutable or involves an IT-enabled work process. Jensen and Kletzer estimated that the following occupational groups had a large share of employment within their most offshorable category: computer and mathematical; architecture and engineering; legal; life, physical, and social sciences. Blinder estimated that a majority of occupations (533) and employed persons (92.6 million in 2004) are non offshorable. He considered the two categories, which included 22.2% of U.S. workers in 2004, too conservative an estimate. Blinder added to the conservative estimate those occupations in category III he ranked as most susceptible to being offshored to create a moderate estimate totaling 25.6% of all workers. His aggressive estimate includes all of category III and totals almost 40 million workers or 29.0%. More offshorable occupations are not low-end jobs, whether measured by wages or by education. The correlation between skill and offshorability is almost zero. Blinder and Krueger used three alternative survey methods to try to determine how many of the jobs that workers held in 2008 were vulnerable to being moved overseas. All three methods found that about one in four U.S. jobs are potentially Offshorable. This is about the same as Blinder's moderate estimate based on an entirely different approach (see the immediately preceding paragraph) 9.4% of total U.S. employment in 2000 was found to be in offshorable industries, according to one of their estimates. Both manufacturing and professional services industries were estimated to have above-average percentages of vulnerability to offshoring. Over 12% of employment in the case of manufacturing, and almost 14% in theCase of professional services. Moines, IA; Omaha, NE; and Wilmington, DE). Jensen and Kletzer developed a different geographically based approach to estimate the share of tradable (offshorable) and nontradable (nonoffshoring) jobs. Forrester Research, Inc. was the source of perhaps the first and most commonly cited statistics on offshoring of service sector jobs. Although 3.4 million jobs may sound like a large number, Forrester's forecasted loss of some 300,000 jobs per year on average through 2015 represents a very small share of the jobs typically created and destroyed each year in the United States. Researchers have mostly focused on determining which jobs are susceptible to being moved abroad and then on estimating U.S. employment in these potentially offshorable activities in a given year. A comprehensive regularly collected data series does not exist on the number of U.S. workers who have lost their jobs to offshore outsourcing. Empirical analyses have focused on determining those jobs with characteristics that make them susceptible to movement beyond U.s. borders. This approach may overstate the. number of jobs that actually have been or will be lost to offshoring because. it does not consider other factors that may affect employers' decisions about the. location in which work is performed. of jobs in 246 metropolitan areas that might be lost due to services offshoring over the 2004-2015 period. Five metro areas might lose somewhat more jobs (between 3.1% and 4.3%) by 2015: Boulder, CO; Lowell, MA; San Francisco, CA; San Jose, CA. Another 23 areas might have between 2.6% and 3.0% of their jobs offshored. Those metropolitan areas estimated to be affected by services off shoring. No database exists that provides a comprehensive answer to the question of how many workers have lost their jobs to offshoring. Technological change and deunionization appear to have accounted for relatively more of the so-called polarization of wages that occurred during the 1980s and 1990s. Relatedly, research suggests that the extension of task fragmentation to service activities accounts for the greater relative contribution to increased wage dispersion (inequality) in the United States in recent decades. The only data available on jobs lost to the out-of-country relocation of work is from the U.S. government. a given year. More than 14 million jobs in 49 service occupations, representing about 11% of total U.S. employment in 2001, have attributes that could allow them to be sent overseas. These attributes include no in-person customer servicing required; an IT-enabled work process that can be accomplished via telecommuting. A fairly wide gap between a job's pay in the United States compared to in a destination country. A destination country having few language, institutional, and cultural barriers. and a destination country having few language, institutional, and cultural barriers. The occupational groups identified as being vulnerable to offshoring include office support, auditors and tax preparers, computer programmers and software engineers. They are concentrated in such industries within the service sector as information, finance and insurance, and professional and business services. A study released by the Brookings Institution built upon the work of Bardhan and Kroll, Forrester Research, and others to develop projections of the share of jobs in 246 metropolitan areas that might be lost. Those metropolitan areas estimated to be most vulnerable to services offshoring tend to be very populous, having 1 million or more inhabitants. They generally have high concentrations of IT jobs (e.g., Boulder, CO; Huntsville, AL; and Lowell, MA) or IT-enabled back-office jobs such as data-entry keyers and telemarketers. Jensen and Kletzer: The U.S. needs to do more to protect jobs in the United States from being offshored. service activities may be its chief beneficiaries, using the profits gained from lower input costs to increase dividends to shareholders, raise stock prices through buybacks, and undertake more mergers and acquisitions. Still others note that the movement of services jobs to other countries may have different implications for the labor market and public policy. Factory workers (e.g., textile machine operators) have predominantly had less than 12 years of schooling or attained at most a high school diploma. Administrative support and professional workers much more. Administrative support and professional workers much more often have taken some college courses or obtained at least a bachelor's degree. The change in the skill (educational) level of jobs being moved abroad has led some to wonder whether the offshoring of service, unlike production, activities will result in a dwindling supply of entry-level jobs. They also question whether the existing trade adjustment assistance programs can satisfactorily meet the needs of comparatively low-skilled workers.high school diploma. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. workers that produce goods to the jobs of workers that provide services. Jobs at risk of being offshored thus are both those held by information technology (IT) workers and IT-enabled workers. One such event was addressing the so-called Y2K crisis: U.S. firms, in response to a tight supply of computer programmers in the United States, sought to offshoring programmers in other countries, such as Australia and New Zealand, to meet the demand for computer programmers. With English the language of the computer industry worldwide, IT services can be provided from many non-English-speaking, comparatively low-wage nations. Taken together, these developments have allowed U.S.-based companies to increasingly fragment tasks across borders in both manufacturing and information and business services. Firms no longer just ship goods between countries. They can now also locate intangible production tasks, such as research, design, management, and IT support across a number of different countries. Of the countries that provide IT services: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Czech Republic, Hungary, Jordan, Lithuania, Mexico, Slovenia, Russia, and Ukraine. In response to a tight supply of computer programmers in the late 1990s, turned to companies principally located in India to make the code fixes needed to avert problems with computer systems. Another development was the educational systems of low-wage foreign nations graduating an abundant supply of well educated (sometimes English-speaking) individuals. In some cases, the number of persons with IT and accounting skills reportedly exceeded the immediate needs of their local economies (e.g., China, Eastern Europe, India, and) Offshoring, also known as offshore outsourcing, has been taking place for decades. The extension of offshoring from U.S. manufacturers to service providers that became apparent in the past decade has heightened public policy concerns about the extent of job loss and foregone employment opportunities. The report synthesizes the information (both empirical and anecdotal) released since the early 2000s on offshore outsourcing's impact on U.s. employment to help policymakers evaluate the adequacy of the nation's retraining and income support programs for workers displaced by greater global economic integration. Many economists agree that trade and other forms of globalization can cause painful dislocations for those workers. Some question whether this scenario applies to services offshoring, however. Milberg et. al. suggest that companies engaged in off shoring of service activities may be its chief beneficiaries, using the profits to invest in new products and services. The study was published in the journal of the International Institute of Economics and Finance (IIE) and is published by the London-based Institute for International Economics. encourage U.S. firms to expand employment domestically rather than abroad. While some members of the public policy community also support the adoption by other countries of trade and labor policies, still others advocate for limited government intervention as the best means of promoting economic growth. This report does not attempt to sort through all the issues raised above, some of which are addressed in the above-referenced CRS reports. Instead, it begins by briefly examining the development of outsourcing by U.s. companies to provide context for the report. potential market for offshoring global IT and business processes work was realized through 2006. Some, therefore, are cautious about the future pace of moving abroad potentially vulnerable U.S. jobs. For example, Deloitte Consulting concluded that outsourcing will lose "holy grail" status. In the future, companies will not outsource because it is the latest management fad. Organizations will carefully define core, strategic, and "thought-leadership" functions and will outsource to protect them. will carefully define core, strategic, and "thought-leadership" functions and will keep those inhouse. Some organizations will decide to outsource only short-term. Many organizations will also engage in large scale re-insourcing thereby further eroding the outsourcing market. Dell, for example, returned some help services to the United States due to customer dissatisfaction. Other U.S. firms reportedly had to employ IT service providers to fix software produced abroad. Still other companies have begun returning call center operations and legal support work to the US. Since 2004, BLS has asked firms that let go at least 50 workers in layoffs that lasted 31 or more days whether the firms moved the laid-off workers' jobs out of the United States. In the third quarter of 2012, when more than 100,000 workers were separated in extended mass layoffs, firms told BLS that they let go fewer than 1,600 workers in actions involving the movement of work. Not surprisingly, then, the BLS series is better at picking up losses at manufacturers than at service providers. physical separation of design and production personnel; and a lack of safeguards on intellectual property outside the United States. Caterpillar, National Cash Register, Wham-O, Otis Elevator, and Buck Knives are examples of companies that have returned production and jobs to the U.S. Offshore providers of IT services, for example, were able to allay fears about security shortly after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Despite 9/11, U.s. firms still offshoring jobs. Despite 9/11, U.S. airline carriers have continued their outsourcing of maintenance jobs overseas. Concern periodically has arisen among U.s. outsourcers over unrest in some regions. Global providers of software services have responded by placing more of their clients' work in a variety of countries, including the "near-shore" markets of Canada and Mexico. Some individual U.K. employers also reportedly reportedly have increased outsourcing of work to other countries, such as Singapore, Brazil and the Dominican Republic. legal support work to the United States, specifically to firms located in rural low-cost areas. Some have credited "reshoring" for part of the sector's employment rebound since the 2007-2009 recession's end. Among U.S. manufacturers that responded to recent surveys, Perry found that about one-fifth had brought production back from overseas in 2011. He attributed what he regards as a nascent trend to "China's shrinking manufacturing wage and cost advantages" as well as "long delivery times and rising shipping costs" Short- and long-run labor market implications of offshore outsourcing remain unclear. Some observers claimed that the business practice explained much of the "jobless recovery" from the 2001 recession. Some within the public policy community have again asserted that offshoring is contributing to the slow rebound of the labor market from the 2007-2009 recession. While acknowledging that trade and other forms of globalization can cause job loss, they also acknowledge that the link between economic growth and job creation is still intact. The U.S. unemployment rate remains high more than three years after the end of the December 2007-June 2009 recession. opened facilities abroad during the 1970s and 1980s. U.S. companies reacted to the back-to-back recessions of the early 1980s by focusing on their core missions. Firms also restructured their operations by outsourcing jobs to employees of temporary help agencies, professional and business services establishments, and independent contractors located in the United States. The persistence of these changes over the years has been difficult to measure. But they have continued to have a positive impact on the economy and the economy as a whole. The 2001 recession prompted U.S. employers to achieve further efficiencies by taking advantage of technological innovations. The persistence of these changes over time indicates that domestic outsourcing of formerly in-house functions is a permanent reorganization of how work is performed in the United States. The now widespread dissemination of technologies that enable relatively low cost, good quality, and high speed transmission of voice and data communications has allowed U.s. firms to extend offshoring beyond the jobs of workers that produce goods. adjustment assistance programs can satisfactorily meet the needs of comparatively well-educated office workers. Congress historically has tried to promote U.S. job growth and assist workers who lose jobs through no fault of their own. The notion that offshoring depresses job growth in the United States appears to underlie support among some policymakers for measures meant to encourage firms to expand employment domestically rather than abroad. It is unclear whether the proposed measures would have the desired effect of increasing U.s. employment.

ROUGE-1: 79.63, ROUGE-2: 71.77, ROUGE-L: 27.30
BERTScore: 54.43

==============================================
==================== [46/100] ====================
Summary:
This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and returned via e-mail to USTSurvey@gao.gov. If you prefer, you may print copies of the questionnaire and complete them by hand. Please use your mouse to navigate by clicking on the field or check box you wish to answer. To select a check box or button, simply click on the center of the box. To change or deselect a checkbox response, simplyclick on the the response field. To answer a question that requires that you write a comment, click on the answer box ____ and begin typing. The box will expand to accommodate your answer. To help ensure consistency in survey responses from the various states, we provide definitions for terms in this survey at or near the point at which the term appears. Please consider these definitions when responding to survey questions. Have there been any reviews of the recent review? If so, e-mail: LaudermilkG@gao.gov. funding sources for cleanups. The practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling error. For selected survey questions, where we were able to, we independently corroborated survey data by comparing these data with EPA data. We then followed up with states and EPA as needed about discrepancies. We included a series of data reliability questions in the survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us. We accepted responses to the survey through mid-October 2006. We sent e-mail reminders and conducted follow-up telephone calls with nonrespondents. survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us by the respondents. We collected information about (1) the databases states used to provide survey data; (2) the internal controls on those databases; and (3) whether the data provided were actual or estimates. We also requested supporting documentation if states noted their database(s) had been reviewed for quality. We used a data collection the states’ database reviews and database limitations identified in their survey responses. We contacted state officials to clarify survey responses when necessary and used a centralized tracking document to record all changes. interviewed the officials to ensure that the (1) questions were clear and unambiguous. As a result of our pretests, we made changes to some of the survey questions. We sent an announcement on November 18, 2005, of the upcoming survey to state contacts (including the District of Columbia) and then e- mailed the survey as an attachment on January 19, 2006. We asked respondents to return the survey by e-mail, fax, or mail by the end of January 2006. to selected questions and the wide variance in the reliability of those responses. With these provisos, the survey data are sufficiently reliable as they are used in the body of the report. The survey data presented in appendix II are not reliable for state level comparisons. We conducted interviews regarding data reliability with a nonprobability sample of seven states (see next page for a further discussion of this sample of states). These interviews included in-depth questions focusing on topics such as the states’ database reviews and database limitations. We used a data collection instrument (DCI) to systematically and consistently record all available data reliability information. The DCI was then reviewed by an independent person who assessed the accuracy of DCI data entries and the reasonableness of the judgments on the reliability of states’ survey data. 17 states generally reported having fairly recent data quality reviews, several internal controls on the data, no significant data quality problems. There was wide variability in the level of oversight of the databases that states use to track underground storage tank information. use to track underground storage tank information. There was similar variability in the ways state officials described how they arrived at responses to certain questions. Some states provided explanations for their responses that were precise and grounded in reasonable mathematical or trend based assumptions, while others noted that their responses were educated guesses. Given the limitations in the information reported from some states, we determined that the survey data are not comparable by state, nor should they be reported using such terms as “actual” sums, budgets, or outlays. of the surveys, and verified the computer programs used to generate survey results. From the population of 51 state contacts who were asked to participate in our survey, we received 50 questionnaires for an overall response rate of 98 percent. We did not receive a questionnaire from South Dakota. We do not know if responses for South Dakota would have differed materially from those of the states that completed the survey. from the responses we received, we gathered information about (1) state databases used to track underground storage tank information. underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. A few states reported they were not able to provide us with data specific to federally regulated underground storage tanks for selected questions. Instead, they generally provided us with either data including a different universe of tanks or data prorated based on the number of federally regulated storage tanks in the state for these questions. Most survey questions that asked for data for a specific year referred to the federal fiscal year. If states were unable to provide data for theFederal fiscal year, we asked them to provide them with data for that year. We then attempted to contact all listed state officials via e-mail and asked them to tell us whether they or someone else in their state would be the most appropriate contact. In states where we were not able to contact the officials on EPA’s list, we sent the e-mails regarding the mostappropriate contact to officials named on lists of state contacts from two other professional organizations that also conduct surveys about underground storage tanks. Upon receiving this e- mail, a few officials identified more appropriate survey respondents. England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission and the Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste Management Officials. We pretested the survey with officials from four states between October 28, 2005, and December 21, 2005. States were selected for the pretests to ensure variation in size of workload and status of the state financial assurance fund. We then interviewed the officials to ensure that the questions were (1) questions were correct. We sent agency officials a draft of the survey and used their feedback to refine the survey. discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state based on the number of relevant topics they could discuss, as indicated by their survey responses. We interviewed all states that had scores at or above a threshold score that we determined, based on how many states we would need to discuss the relevant topics with to obtain sufficient information for the purposes of this report. We also conducted interviews with regional program officials from EPA’s Underground Storage Tank Program in six EPA regions to gather additional information. have identified the states that fall into each category. Overall, given the limitations in the information reported from some states, data reported by states and presented in this appendix should not be used to compare state programs. To aid in our continuing reviews of the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Underground Storage Tank program, we are currently surveying the 50 states as part of a study of how states operate. The GAO is an agency of the legislative branch that reviews federal programs on behalf of the U.S. Congress. does not consider the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner in various states. According to officials in two states, the information they report in the semiannual activity reports is based on estimates rather than actual performance. For example, a Maine official told us that the Maine official said that the state does not have a viable tank owner. The EPA develops information on states’ needs and performance from states�’ semiann annual activity reports on their tank numbers and cleanup activities. However, our survey disclosed several concerns regarding the accuracy of these reports, including the following: program officials found many sites being reported that were duplicates or involved releases that did not come from regulated tanks. A Maryland Department of the Environment official acknowledged that it has been reporting semiannual performance data incorrectly. An Oklahoma Petroleum Storage Tank Division official told us that the division had been reporting performance data on all tanks regulated by the state, including the aboveground storage tanks. The state also undercounted the number of “active tanks” by excluding tanks that were only temporarily out of service. EPA recommends that the regions review each state’s data submission for reasonableness. When any of the states’ data appear questionable, the regions are asked to follow up with the states to obtain an explanation or corrected data. In some cases regional officials were not aware of reporting problems with states in their regions that our survey disclosed. To ensure that states properly understand EPA's definition of the data reporting elements, at least one EPA region reminds its states of the EPA definitions each time a semiannual activity report is due. at most, helped confirm what regions already saw as problem states. States provided data with gaps or further clarifications needed in key areas, such as the number of release sites awaiting funding. EPA decided to collect data again in 2006 without changing its method. Results for 2006 were not available as of December 2006. The 2005 Act also included language providing that EPA may withdraw approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without the state’s approval. It was also included in the 2005 Act. performance. A Maine official told us that the data the state reports is generated by canvassing their regional staff. Because EPA reports call for data on releases rather than sites, Wyoming provides its best estimate of release data. An Arizona program official said the program was uncertain of EPA’s definition of “performance.’’ A Wyoming official said that the state tracks contaminated sites rather than releases. The state has found errors in the data reported in the past, the official said. 4. What are the known limitations of the current data (e.g., data elements that are known to be incomplete, incorrect, or out-of-date) for each of the databases you listed above? 5. Is there any additional information about the way your states’ data for UST management is collected, entered, stored, and quality reviewed that would help inform our interpretation of these data? In this survey we are concerned with federally regulated USTs, as defined by EPA. These tanks include “any one or combination of tanks” septic tank; (d) certain pipeline facilities; (e) surface impoundment, pit, pond, or lagoon; (f) storm- water or wastewater collection system; (g) flow-through process tank; or (h) liquid trap or associated gathering lines directly related to oil or gas production and gathering operations. 6. What are the cumulative data for the number of federally regulated USTs for your state, first as of September 30, 2004, and then as of Sept. 30, 2005? provided fairly precise and mathematically grounded explanations for their calculations. 26 states and the District of Columbia generally reported having some internal controls on the data, and/or some data quality problems. 6 states reported having few, if any internal controls and significant data quality issues. In tables 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 in this appendix, we have identified the states that fall into each category. Overall, overall, the U.S. economy is doing better than it has been in decades. . Have there been any reviews of the recent review? [Enter quality of the data? UST management? 4 digit year.]. What procedures are used to ensure all data contained in the databases you listed above are accurately recorded? a. What are the known limitations of the current data? A. What types of information do each of the databases contain? B. What type of information does each database contain? C. What kind of information is contained in each database? D. What is the current state of the UST database? MTBE was added to gasoline to fulfill requirements set in the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments to reduce certain types of emissions. Because MTBE dissolves easily in water and does not cling to soil very well, it migrates faster and farther through the ground than other gasoline components. MTBE’s health effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government says the health effects are not clear enough to make a judgment on their effect on public health. The EPA says MTBE is a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane. effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government has determined it to be a potential human carcinogen. The effects of exposure to MTBE include headaches; eye, nose, and throat irritation; coughs; nausea; dizziness; and disorientation. Low levels of MTBE can make drinking water supplies undrinkable due to its offensive taste and odor. Because of uncertainties about MTBE’s health effects, EPA has not set a national standard for MTBE in drinking water. EPA estimates that a release costs about $125,000 on average to clean up. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then fund any cleanup of the site. With regard to releases involving MTBE, EPA has reported that the additional cost for cleaning up these releases varies widely, from no additional cost to a substantial increase, depending on the history of the release. The cost can vary based on several factors, including the extent of contamination, the cleanup method selected and the presence of MTBE or groundwater contamination. EPA has stated that releases that have contaminated groundwater are generally more complicated and more expensive to clean up. 34 states provided estimates for the average public cost toClean up all releases. States’ estimates varied widely: about 60 percent of these states reported that it was more expensive for them to Clean up releases involving groundwater contamination. About 40 percent of states said it was cheaper to Clean Up Releases that have Contaminated Groundwater. The average cost of cleaning up a release in a state is about $1,000. EPA and states have made progress in cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks. Of the almost 450,000 releases confirmed as of fiscal year-end 2005, cleanups had been initiated for about 93 percent and completed for about 74 percent. As cleanups have progressed, methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE)—a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane—has been removed from the tanks. The removal of MTBE has been a key step in reducing emissions and raising octane. Congress also took action through the 2005 Act to reduce the use of MTBE in gasoline by eliminating the requirement from the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. States reported that completing the cleanup of approximately 54,000 known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would likely require substantial amounts of public funds from state and federal resources. The public cost of cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner, as well as the number of releases in states’ cleanup, is estimated to be in the tens of millions of dollars. A state official expressed concern that the state’s definition of cleanups initiated may not agree with the EPA definition. The state reports a site as “cleanup initiated” when the release has been confirmed and a case number assigned. According to the EPA, cleanup initiated requires the state or responsible party has evaluated the site and initiated physical activity (e.g., removal or treatment of the contamination, removal of the contaminated soil, or monitoring of the groundwater or soil being remediated) or monitoring of the groundwater or soil being remediated. Cleanup initiated should also be reported in situations where the state has evaluated the site and determined that no physical activity is necessary to protect human health and the environment. A Louisiana Underground Storage Tank Program official told us that a review of its files disclosed that the program had been reporting duplicate entries and releases that did not meet EPA’s definition. An Oregon Underground storage Tank Program Coordinator told us in the process of cleaning up its database information, program officials found many sites being reported that were duplicates. your state’s cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: 0. Is this number correct? Yes .................... No...................... a. What is the correct number? Please refer to this number when answering questions about your state's cleanup backlog in completing the remainder of this survey. Considering the number of releases in your state , how many have affected groundwater at levels requiring cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? groundwater .................................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in your state”s cleanup backlog that involve the release of MtBE? authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within 90 days. Officials generally preapprove cleanup work only at the sites where contamination is most severe. The most urgent category includes releases deemed emergencies. As of August 2006, less than 40 percent of the releases were being actively cleaned up. The remaining categories are ranked based on how soon the release is likely to affect human health and the environment, as well as its impact on groundwater. The state categorizes releases into one of four categories. our report is included as appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the EPA Administrator and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. it would cost to clean up approximately 54,000 known releases. States were unable to estimate the cost of cleaning up more than another 8,000 releases whose cleanup will require at least some public funds. States also reported that, overall, the proportion of releases cleaned up using public funds is likely to decline in the future. Some states that do not use their financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Columbia, may not be able to afford the cleanup. responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Arizona, expect particularly sizable declines. These states expect that owners or operators will use private sources of financial responsibility coverage to pay for the cleanup of most releases identified in the next 5 years. In 2005, these states confirmed a combined 8,000 releases, compared with their projections of an average of about 7,400 releases per year for the next five years. Most states use financial assurance funds to pay to clean up releases from underground storage. funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleaning up releases from USTs, both WITH and WITHOUT a viable owner. Is this an exact number or an estimate? Is this the total amount ($0) spent in the past year for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? Yes .................... No...................... d. Why is this amount different? Sites? Yes    Yes ................... No.............................. f. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year. How many new releases from federally regulated USTs did your state confirm in each of the last five federal fiscal years? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Are these numbers exact or estimated? Cumulative data, as of estimate? estimate? a. Active tanks ................. b. Closed tanks ............. c. Confirmed releases....... d. Cleanups initiated......... e. Cleanup completed ..... f. Emergency responses... 7. September 30, 2005? Arethese numbers exactor estimated? for which some amount of public funding will be required? 14. How did you estimate the number of releases that fall into each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups, how many would you estimate will require public funding amounts in the following ranges? $0 - $99,999 ............................................... b. $100,000-$499,000 .................................... c. $500,000-999,999 or $1,000,000 or more ................................... Number for which costs cannot be e. estimated....................................................  EPA computes your state’s “cleanup backlog” by subtracting the cumulative number of cleanups completed from the cumulativeNumber of confirmed releases. How did you estimate the number of new releases over the next five years that will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? 9. Estimated number of. new releases in the next year that will need at least. some amount. of public money to pay for clean-up c. 10. Based on the numbers you provided above, your state's cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: site cleanup costs will be paid for exclusively by responsible parties and the number of these releases for which some amount of public funding will be required. How did you estimate these average costs in public funding? 16. In the past year, what was the total amount spent (in actual outlays) to pay for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? If possible, provide this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05). Is this an exact number or an estimate? costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of threats to public health, welfare, or the environment. These costs include emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, the planning and design of corrective action, and the conduct, management and oversight of long-term remedial corrective actions. 13. Considering the number of releases in your state’s cleanup backlog as of September 30, 2005, what is your estimate of thenumber of these releases for which EPA-defined site cleanup costs will be paid for exclusively by responsible states? releases from USTs your state confirmed in each of the last five years? 8. How many of these new releases over the next five years do you estimate will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? 9. How did you estimate the number of new releases from federally regulated USTs that your state will confirm over theNextFive years? 10. How does your state compare to other U.S. states in terms of number of releases it has confirmed in the last 5 years? each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups of leaking federally regulated USTs that require some amount of public funding, what do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release? 16. What do you Estimates is the Average Cost in Public Funds to Fully Address Each release that involves MtBE at levels requiring cleanup? 17. Estimated cost in Public funds to Fully address Each Release that involves MountBE at Levels requiring Cleanup? 18. Estimated Cost in public Funds to fully Address Each Release That involves Mt BE at Levels Requiring Cleanup. 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... h. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? 18. Is there any additional information about the amounts of public funding listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? 19. Among the current sources of public. funding for LUST cleanups, which sources, if any, do you believe have a high probability of no longer being. available in the next 5 years, and why not? 20. For purposes of this survey, consider tanks among your state’s cleanup. these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. Your prompt response to this survey is very important. Without your state’s response, we will not be able to accurately report to the Congress on the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and the Surveymonkey app for the iPhone and the iPad. To answer some of our questions, you may need to coordinate your responses with other state agencies responsible for certain aspects of the program. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. been covered in this survey that you anticipate affecting the availability of public finding for cleanups in the next 5 years? 58. Are there any additional comments you wish to make regarding the issues in this Survey or other matters related to USTs? Thank you for completing the survey! Please save this file now and send an e-mail with your saved questionnaire file and supporting documentation as an attachment to: USTSurvey@gao.gov. In addition to the individual named above, Vincent P. Price, Assistant Director; Krista Breen Anderson; Jenny Chanley; Richard P. Johnson; Jerry Laudermilk; Jennifer Lutzy McDonald. Johnson; Jerry Laudermilk; Jennifer Lutzy McDonald; Anne McDonough-Hughes; Rebecca Shea; Carol Herrnstadt Shulman; Dominique Sasson; and Nico Sloss made key contributions to this report. Johnson: "I think we're in a good place right now. I don't think it's going to get any worse than it is right now" Johnson: 'I think the world is going to come around to what we're trying to do' The LUST Trust Fund is funded by a $0.001/gallon excise tax on gasoline and other motor fuels. By fiscal year-end 2005, the fund had collected about $3.7 billion in revenue. appropriations totaled about $1.2 billion, leaving a fund balance of approximately $2.5 billion. The fund balance has been growing at an average rate of about $129 million per year since 1987, Figure 11 shows. The tax has been in effect continuously since 1987 except for a short period in 1990. approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without withdrawing approval of the overall state underground storage tank program. EPA has formed a workgroup to examine the issue of how to assess the soundness of state financial assurance funds. The guidance had not been made final as of December 2006. Annual appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have averaged about $71 million in recent years. Typically, about 80 percent of the money is spent on underground storage tanks in the state where the tank is located. fiscal year 2005, EPA distributed about $58 million of LUST Trust Fund money to the states, or about $1.2 million per state. 45 states each reported spending an average of $24 million in 2005 to clean up contamination from leaking tanks. Nine states reported spending more than $2 million each in 2005 alone to cleanup contamination from tanks without a viable owner. The EPA headquarters uses a formula to determine the amount each state should receive and then divides the money among the regions.  Appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have been relatively stable since fiscal year 1998. Between fiscal years 1998 and 2005, annual appropriations from the trust fund have ranged from about $65 million to $76 million per year. EPA uses the balance of the annual appropriations to support cleanup activities on Indian lands and its own cleanup-related activities. Forty-eight states reported spending about $15 million on site cleanup activities in 2005, by far the largest single source of federal money for this purpose reported in our survey. largely of emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, and corrective actions. In fiscal year 2005, most of the states reported spending at least some of their LUST Trust Fund money in all three categories. However, some states focused their spending on just one or two categories. For example, 10 states reported they did not spend any of their money on cleanup activities. Regional officials told us that many states prefer to use their Luster Fund money to fund clean-up activities, rather than emergency responses. The 2005 Act authorizes appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund through fiscal year 2011 of $555 million per year for a variety of activities. This annual amount includes $200 million for cleanups of releases from leaking underground storage tanks. $100 million for activities including onsite inspections, groundwater protection, and enforcement. $55 million for delivery prohibition, operator training, and release prevention and compliance. An additional $50 million peryear is authorized from the general fund to cover administrative expenses and other activities. seriousness of exposure, and estimating resulting health risks; cleaning up contaminated soil and water; providing safe drinking water to residents at the site of a tank leak; providing for temporary or permanent relocation of residents; and providing reasonable and necessary administrative and planning expenses directly related to these activities. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (the 2005 Act), enacted in August 2005, expanded the permitted uses of the LUST Trust Fund. It authorizes states to use a portion of their LUST Fund money for inspections and other leak prevention purposes. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the tax on petroleum products that capitalizes the federal LUST Trust Fund. Under EPA policy, except in rare circumstances and in Indian Country, states will address underground storage tank releases. EPA will undertake a cleanup only when (1) there is a major public health or environmental emergency, (2) the state is unable to respond, and (3) no responsible party is able or willing to provide an adequate and timely response. According to EPA, over the past 10 years, on average, states have used roughly one-third of their Lust Trust Fund money. EPA's goals for the underground storage tank program included completing 14,500 cleanups. Money from the LUST Trust Fund is meant, in part, to address releases from tanks without a viable owner. In a November 2005 report, we recommended that EPA measure program performance against the national goals it establishes in accordance with the Government Performance and Results Act. On the basis of the states’ reports for fiscal year 2005, EPA reported that all the goals were met. The report was published in November 2005. The 1986 amendments to RCRA established the LUST Trust Fund to finance the cleanup of petroleum releases from underground storage tanks. Until recently, states could use these funds only for cleanup and related administrative and enforcement activities. Within this restriction, trust fund money could be used for the following general categories of activities: testing tanks for leaks when one is suspected; investigating a site to evaluate the source and extent of petroleum; assessing the number of individuals that may have been exposed to petroleum contaminants and the seriousness of exposure. adequate and timely response. In these circumstances, EPA’s involvement is to be limited to stabilizing the immediate situation. The expectation is that further cleanup will be conducted by the state under its cooperative agreement with the agency. States are responsible for overseeing cleanup work performed by the party responsible for the contamination and for performing the cleanup at sites where no responsible party can be found. In addition to the LUST Trust Fund, federal money from the Brownfields program can be used to clean up sites contaminated by petroleum under certain circumstances. certain circumstances. Only certain governmental organizations, nonprofit organizations, and nonprofit educational institutions are eligible for Brownfields cleanup grants. In fiscal year 2005, EPA provided eligible entities with about $22.3 million in Brownfields grants for cleaning up sites contaminated with petroleum. About $4.0 million of these grants were awarded for direct cleanup work, $13.3m for site assessments, and $5.0m for revolving loan fund programs. The grants are limited to sites whose expansion, redevelopment, or reuse of which may be complicated by the presence or potential presence of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant. EPA Region 5 official says states in their region initially used their LUST Trust Fund money to perform cleanups. But they soon decided that funding staff positions was more cost effective than performing the cleanup. By funding additional staff positions rather than cleanup activities, states were often able to identify the responsible parties and force them to do the cleanups, thereby avoiding the time and expense of pursuing cost-recovery. EPA generally relies on states to decide how to use these federal funds, within the permitted parameters. Some states view the cost recovery process as a deterrent to using the federal money for cleanup activities. Because they have state money available for cleanup efforts, states can use theFederal money for staff salaries. Some states actually require the use of state money for cleanups, and thus federal money is used for administrative or enforcement activities, particularly salaries. An EPA official in Region 4, however, took issue with states that do not use LUST.cleanups, thereby avoiding the time and expense of pursuing cost-recovery actions. This amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes......................... No .......................... b. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year 29. How much of the amount deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year was from each of the following sources? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 30. What do you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund? Are these amounts for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... b. On what date does the the UST program? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 44. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new capable tanks? If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert funds from the fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner? 49. According to EPA, states may sometimes not spend a given amount. to Q37. Accepting and paying all valid claims without restriction. Go to Q27 Accepted and paying claims with some restrictions ....... a. Is your state fund limiting the number of claims it accepts based on the amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Yes ....................... No......................... c. Isyour state’s financial assurance fund ONLY accepting claims for releases that occurred before or after a certain date (e.g., an eligibility sunset date)? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates this type of fund.......................... Skip to Q47. owner, and (2) funds that are devoted solely to the cleanup of contamination from tanks without a viable owner. In this survey we ask about both types of funds as applicable to your state. Has your state EVER had a state financial assurance fund, as defined in (1) above? Yes ....................... No......................... Skip to Q37. What was the status of your state’sfinancial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Not applicable, never had this type of fund. Fund is no longer active. No decision made to stop collecting claims ........ 36. What was the status of your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? . Not applicable, never had this type of fund.......................... Skip to Q47. State Fund Dedicated to Tanks without a Viable Owner 37. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? a. The state's financial assurance fund is capable of meeting future demands upon it, but not able to meet any. you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? 41. What was the overall balance of your state’s fund dedicated. to tanksWithoutViableOwner.com as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? date)? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? 27. How much was deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 28. Please describe the deductible amount(s) paid by responsible parties and any maximum amount the stateFinancial assurance fund will pay for each release from a federally regulated UST. viable owner ONLY accepting claims for releases that occurred before or after a certain date (e.g., an eligibility sunset date)? No...................... Yes .................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable.] [Enter mm/dd/yy.] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? 38. How much was deposited into your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? What was the overall balance of your state’s financial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Obligated........................................ 32. During the past 5 years, what amount of funding, if any, did your state divert for purposes other than those related to the UST program? g. If applicable, for what purposes did your states divert funds from the fund for? 33. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? Reimbursed ................................. g. If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert UST financial assurance funds? 34. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new claims against the state financial assurance fund after a certain date? Date after which claims will no longer be accepted No decision made to stop accept claims......... 35. As a result of your state's decision to stop collecting revenues for the state Financial Assurance Fund, how did you pay back the money? How did you repay the money you received? Cleanup of leaking underground storage tanks can affect the percentage of releases in a state that are cleaned up using at least some public funding. One such approach is whether a state has chosen to set up a financial assurance fund that provides financial responsibility coverage for tank owners. For example, in North Dakota, where nearly all tanks are covered by the state’s fund, the state expects that more than 95 percent of releases will be cleaned up with public money. Six states reported that they had a state fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner. resources from other types of state funds, such as financial assurance funds, or from the federal LUST Trust Fund. Four states reported that they may wait until the property on which the leaking tank is located is purchased and rely on the new owner to clean the site up. States may have releases from tanks without a viable owner in their backlog because the owner or operator responsible for the tank failed to maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. Maintaining adequatefinancial responsibility coverage ensures that money will be available to clean up releases. Lack of timely cleanup is a concern because the longer pollution from releases is left in place, the greater the potential for it to spread. States reported that they primarily use financial assurance funds to pay the costs of cleaning up leaks from underground storage tanks. Concerns have been raised about whether tank owners have incentives to prevent releases when they can rely on the bulk of the cleanup costs. EPA estimates that releases cost about $125,000 to clean up, on average, most state financial assurance Funds charge a deductible of $25,000 or less.  tank owners may be less likely to voluntarily report releases if they know that reporting a release could lead to a mandatory cleanup. To ensure that funds are available to clean up releases in a timely and appropriate manner, state financial assurance funds must be financially sound. In the event of a release, tank owners covered by these funds usually pay a relatively small deductible, while the funds provide sometimes large sums of public funding to complete the required cleanup. Because these deductibles are often small, they may not provide an incentive for tank owners to prevent releases from occurring. State laws addressing when a specific owner or operator is considered to be responsible for a release can affect who pays for cleanups. Michigan program officials previously told us that the state’s causation standard exacerbates the funding problem for tanks without a viable owner. Proving responsibility becomes difficult in cases where releases have occurred in the past and ownership of the property has changed. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then must then be held responsible for cleanup. The state must first prove that the present owner/ operator is responsible. The 2005 Act requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of their underground storage tanks on a 3-year cycle. For those states that currently inspect sites less frequently, the additional inspections could lead to a spike in the number of releases discovered. State financial assurance funds may also be affected by future natural disasters, such as hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005. For example, officials in Texas told us that underground storage tank facilities in their state are inspected about every 10 years, on average. Releases in this state that may not have otherwise been found for as long as 10 years may be discovered much sooner, leading to an increase in confirmed releases. that money will be available to clean up releases from underground storage tanks. This money, in turn, contributes to timely completion of cleanup and thus reduces the risk to human health and the environment posed by releases that are not cleaned up in a timely manner. We asked states about the number of cases they had encountered in the past 5 years in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility coverage. In general, states that we talked with more in-depth about financial responsibility said replaced underground tanks located near sources of drinking water or to require evidence of financial responsibility. potentially, the risk posed by the sites increases so much that they require more urgent cleanup. The farther these contaminants are allowed to spread, the greater the chance becomes that they will contaminate drinking water and other sensitive resources. In addition, when state financial assurance funds do not pay cleanup claims on a timely basis, tank owners may not be able to afford to clean up the sites. The longer contamination from these releases is left in place, thegreat the potential becomes for the contamination to spread. beginning after the state has inspected tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the cleanup of releases from underground storage tanks. State financial assurance funds may face additional challenges to remaining financially sound in coming years for the following reasons: Financial assurance funds might take on additional liability from tank installers and manufacturers, and they may be required to provide coverage for the costs of cleanup directly related to releases caused by improper tank manufacture or installation. If these challenges are not addressed, then EPA would be concerned about the financial soundness of the fund. EPA indicated it has issued draft guidelines that would require inspections of underground storage tanks to assess compliance with financial responsibility requirements. EPA indicated that it would strengthen its oversight by improving a recently developed monitoring tool and by developing guidance for its oversight process. Regarding our recommendation that EPA assess the relative effectiveness of public and private options for financial responsibility coverage, EPA indicated it would improve its oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds. The agency indicated it will strengthen its Oversight of State Assurance Funds by improving its monitoring tool. purposes of this survey, consider tanks among your state’s cleanup backlog without a viable owner to be those tanks where, as of September 30, 2005, the responsible party was unknown, unwilling, or unable to perform the needed cleanup. For how many releases in your state's cleanup backlog has the state not yet determined whether a responsible party is known, willing, and able to perform cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 23. In the past year, how much public funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleanup projects? as well as the number of releases in states’ cleanup backlogs that lack a viable owner, is not fully known. States reported that cleaning up known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would cost an estimated $12 billion in public funds from state and federal sources. Some states expected all releases in their backlogs to be cleaned up using at least some public funds, while other states did not expect public funds to be used to clean up any releases. The approach that different states use regarding who pays for the cleanup of leaking underground tanks can affect the amount of public funds used. Just over half of the approximately 117,000 releases that states reported in our survey had not yet been fully cleaned up will be cleaned up using at least some public funds. Tank owners or operators will pay the entire costs to clean up another 34 percent of these releases, according to state officials. The full extent of releases from tanks without a viable owner is unknown. The public cost of cleaning up releases from Tanks Without A Viable Owner is also not fully known, the survey found. It would cost a total of $2.7 billion to complete the cleanups of known releases. The objectives of this review were to provide information on states’ estimates of the cost in public funding from state and federal sources to clean up known releases. The survey was focused specifically on federally regulated underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. We provided states with the definition of public funding described previously in this section, and we asked them to respond to all survey questions about such funding according to this definition. For the purposes of this clean up releases from tanks they either own or operate—this money would be considered to be provided by the responsible party. 50 states as part of a study of how states finance the cleanup of leaking underground storage tank (LUST) sites. We will use the information gathered in this survey to provide the Congress with information about the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. We are aware of similar survey efforts conducted in the past year by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation and by EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks. We have discussed our survey with these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. Your prompt response to our survey was helpful. Public funding: Includes any funding controlled and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Do not include funds spent by federal, state, and local governmental agencies to clean up releases from tanks they either it will cost to complete the remainder of the cleanups for all of these releases? None ................. Go to Q25. a. How did you estimate the cost for the backlog of releases from USTs without a viable owner? A. What is your interpretation of your responses to questions about the scope and type of UST cleanups in your state? In those cases where a state fund is dedicated solely to coverage of tanks without a viable responsible party, the survey provides a separate space to answer questions about such a fund. Responsible party funding: Includes both direct expenditures by responsible parties and indirect expenditures. EPA-defined site cleanup costs: “All costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of the problem’s source.” The survey does not provide specific cost data for these types of cleanup costs. The survey is open to the public. The 2005 Act included language providing that, if a state diverts resources from its financial assurance fund, EPA may not distribute a certain portion of LUST appropriations to that state for enforcement purposes. This provision affects only the 37 states whose financial assurance funds still provide financial responsibility coverage for new releases. Officials we interviewed in Pennsylvania and South Carolina were uncertain about the 2005 Act’s impact on future diversions. Two states even commented in their responses to our survey that they anticipated diversions in 2006. Of the 43 states that have had financial assurance funds, 16 reported in our survey that they had diverted a total of nearly $435 million from their funds between 2001 and 2005. Officials in most of these states reported that the diverted amounts went to the state’s general fund or to offset state budget shortfalls. A few states reported using diverted funds for specific programs, such as Brownfields grants and been addressed, was delayed, according to state officials. In the largest case of a diversion reported to us, for example, the Pennsylvania financial assurance fund loaned the legislature $100 million in 2002. diverted funds for specific programs, such as Brownfields grants and loans, a lead- based paint removal program. Officials we interviewed in two states where diversions occurred reported a negative impact on the state program’s ability to clean up sites. In Florida, for example, $20 million was diverted in 2002. As a result, financial assurance fund managers had to adjust the threshold for cleanup, meaning that the cleanup of less urgent releases, which otherwise would have been addressed, was delayed. As late as June 2006, the impact of the flooding caused by these hurricanes on Louisiana’s financial assurance fund was not yet fully known. If all underground storage tanks that could have been affected by the flooding turn out to have had releases, the workload of the state assurance fund would increase by 25 percent, an official says. Payouts from the state assure fund would increased by approximately $4 million per year, according to this official. Diversions from state financial assurance funds may also limit some states’ ability to. Over one-fifth of states’ public spending to clean up releases from underground storage tanks in 2005 came from these financial assurance funds. Florida’s fund last provided financial responsibility coverage for new releases on December 31, 1998. Seven states and the District of Columbia have never had funds that providedFinancial responsibility coverage. In these states, tank owners and operators use other ways of demonstrating financial responsibility.primarily through private insurance, according to state officials. In 2005, Florida spent almost $150 million on cleanups in 2005. Florida estimates average cost of $380,000 in public funds to fully address each release requiring public funds. As of August 2006, less than 40 percent of the releases in these categories were being actively cleaned up. The state fund is only able to actively conduct cleanup work at about one-third of the 12,000 remaining sites. The approximately 8,000 other sites in the fund’s backlog await cleanup. funds are not enough to pay for all of the cleanups that need to be done. Florida may have spent more than $1 million per year on such sites in the past. New Jersey, Texas, and Utah also told us that public funds could be used in cases involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage. Florida officials noted that the state attempts to recover these funds from the tank owners but indicated that such efforts have not always been successful in thePast. to fully address each release requiring public funds. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. State taxes on gasoline and other fuels accounted for about $1.3 billion (92 percent) of this income to state funds. States reported that financial assurance funds also received revenues totaling about $42 million (3 percent) from fees paid by tank owners and operators. Many states have maximum limits on the overall balance of their funds. Generally, if a state’s maximum limit is reached, its financial assurance fund may not be available for cleaning up underground storage tanks.. Only four states’ financial assurance. funds collected tank fees but not gasoline taxes. 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion, according to estimates. Four states did not have or did not report a fund balance. The top five states account for more than half of the total balance in these funds. Because many state assurance funds also pay to clean up releases from other types of tanks, the entire balance of any one state’s financial assurance fund may not be available for clean-up. The full report is available at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/money/state-assurance-funds-report. Officials in nine states reported that their funds limit the amount of cleanup work they finance based on funding availability. The situation of three such funds, as described by state officials, follows. North Carolina. The revenues to the state’s financial assurance fund have not been sufficient in recent years to address all of the fund's high- risk sites. As of February 2006, the state was only authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within the next six months. The state was not authorizing work that was not within the six-month period. State financial assurance funds can provide substantial amounts of funding for cleaning up releases. But funds in some states may not have sufficient resources to do so. Generally, if a state’s maximum limit is reached, its fund ceases collecting revenues from one or more of its revenue sources until the fund balance drops below a minimum threshold. For example, Idaho has not collected certain fees for its fund since 1998 when the balance of its fund exceeded $30 million. The fund will again begin collecting revenue from these fees once its balance drops to $15 million. Some states have provided cleanup funds to address releases from underground storage tanks. Four of these states reported paying for such cleanups from state sources in 2005. At federal fiscal year-end 2005, state financial assurance funds in 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion. In the state of Washington, for example, the state’s reinsurance program helps owners and operators of underground storage Tanks obtain affordable pollution liability insurance by assuming part of the risk for each loss. Most states have, or have had, financial assurance funds. As of September 30, 2005, 37 states had funds that met federal requirements for financial responsibility. A state assurance fund is financially sound if it provides reasonable assurance that money is available to pay for cleanup costs and other liabilities. Unless EPA improves how it monitors the soundness of state assurance funds, it will not be aware of deficiencies in coverage before they occur or in sufficient time to take action to avoid funding shortages, which could delay the cleanup. EPA would be concerned about the soundness of a state financial assurance fund if the funding levels or claim processing time caused undue delays in cleaning up releases. In Texas, for example, claims substantially exceeded revenues during the early years of the state’sfinancial assurance fund. By 1992, the fund had a backlog of unpaid bills totaling about $170 million. This amount exceeded the fund’S annual income by approximately 300 percent, and new claims arriving daily added to the backlog. In order to catch up, 7 states and the District of Columbia have never had financial assurance funds that were approved by EPA to provide financial responsibility coverage. Only about one-third of states check coverage on an annual basis, while the remaining states generally reported they check less frequently or not at all. EPA lacks assurance that states are adequately overseeing and enforcing financial responsibility provisions, the authors say. The authors say EPA should provide specific guidance to the states as to whether or how frequently they should verify financial responsibility Coverage for new releases. annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Owners or operators that choose private insurance for financial responsibility coverage must pay annual premiums to maintain coverage. EPA does not provide states specific guidance on whether or how frequently states should engage in routine verification of financial responsibility Coverage. Most states reported to us that they attempted to checkFinancial responsibility coverage on a regular basis. Only about one-third of the states reported that they required annual proof that tank owners or operators were maintaining coverage. The remaining states generally report that they checked this coverage. The remaining states generally reported that they checked this coverage less often or not at all. States that do not check financial responsibility coverage on an annual basis may not know if owners or operators are maintaining required coverage. If the required coverage is not in place when a release occurs, funds may not be available to pay for cleanup in a timely manner. Many states could not provide information on the extent of inadequate financial responsibility in their states for the past 5 years. If states do not verify coverage on a routine basis, it may be difficult for them to know whether owners or operator will have the required Coverage in the event of a release. Twenty-three states reported cases of inadequate coverage in the past 5 years. Only 7 states and the District of Columbia reported no cases. 19 other states reported that they did not know the number of cases involving inadequate coverage. The number of case involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage may indicate a problem with the system, experts say. The federal government says it has no plans to change the way financial responsibility is defined. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services says it does not provide financial responsibility insurance. used in these types of situations in the past. Some options that owners or operators can choose for coverage either require annual updates or are often renewed annually. Owners or operators that self-insure, or choose to demonstrate that they have sufficient assets to cover costs resulting from a release, must prepare an annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Checking financial responsibility coverage helps to ensure that an owner or operator has the required paperwork to demonstrate coverage. For more information, go to www.insureyourself.com. Officials in several states indicated that penalties were not usually imposed simply if multiple releases occurred. Rather, most states imposed penalties on the basis of evidence that the tank owner did not comply with applicable regulations or failed to report a release. For example, New Hampshire officials indicated that, while the state has authority for administrative fines and civil penalties in cases involving multiple releases, such actions are not automatically imposed. Instead, fines and penalties may be assessed if a tank owner is found to have released more than one tank. Fines and penalties may be assessed if a second release results from a tank owner’s recalcitrance in achieving and maintaining compliance with operational regulations. EPA approves state financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage. According to EPA guidance, the agency can withdraw this approval if a fund no longer provides coverage that ensures timely and adequate cleanup of releases. Of the 20 states that provided comments in response to our survey question regarding multiple releases, none indicated that increased penalties were imposed simply based on the occurrence of a secondrelease. government or the state (local government only) ......................... k. A dedicated fund (localgovernment only) ............................................. l. ................ 52. Is there any additional information about how you calculated the number of tanks covered by the various financial responsibility mechanisms that would help inform our interpretation of your responses? 53. Which of the following describe your state's procedures for determining whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? 56. Does your state ever impose penalties on responsible parties for multiple releases from federally regulated USTs? Yes ....................... No......................... Go to next question. How frequently, if at all, does your state check whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? At least annually ................................................................................................ Every 1 to 2 years .............................................................................................. Every 3 years or longer...................................................................................... State does not check financial responsibility..................................................... ........................................................................... 55. Over the past 5 years, how many cases has your state encountered in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility? Is this an exact number or an estimate of the number of cases? Have active federally regulated USTs in your state demonstrate financial responsibility? Please list the number of tanks covered by the various available financial responsibility mechanisms below. Is this an exact number or an estimate? a. State financial assurance fund......... b. Financial test of self-insurance ....... c. Corporate guarantee ........................ d. Insurance coverage.......................... e. Surety bond ..................................... f. Letter of credit................................. g. Trust fund set up by owner or operator ........................................ h. Bond rating test (local government only) ............................................. i. Financialtest (localGovernment only) ......................... k. Guarantee from another local government or the state (local Government only) daily added to the backlog. In order to catch up, the fund temporarily slowed down some cleanup work. Even though the fund stopped accepting new releases after December 22, 1998, state officials expect it to remain in place at least until 2008. In 2005, EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks began collecting information from states on various aspects of their financial assurance funds. Officials in four of the six EPA regions we interviewed conducted fund soundness oversight primarily by discussing the financial position of the state assurance fund with relevant state officials. The goals of this effort included providing a better tool to monitor state financial assurance funds’ soundness. According to some EPA officials, however, the data collected were of limited usefulness. One region’s program manager did not expect that the agency's effort would provide any new information, except data to document what he already knew. An EPA headquarters official, who is closely involved with the effort, agreed that the information collection, at most, helped confirm what regions already saw as problem. the federal fiscal year, we asked them to provide us with the starting date of their alternative reporting year. As a result, we present such data in the report as 2005 data. In addition to conducting a survey to address our three objectives, we also interviewed agency officials in a nonprobability sample of eight states. Specifically, we talked with this group of states about topics such as their use of LUST Trust Fund money, restrictions within their state financial assurance fund, and other topics. We selected this sample of states in order to discuss as many of our topics of interest as possible within a limited number of interviews. To select the states, we first reviewed all states’ responses to survey questions related to the relevant topics to determine which states would be able to discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state to determine its level of interest in each topic. We selected the states to discuss topics such as fund money, diversions from their state financial assurance funds, and cases of inadequate financial responsibility coverage in their state. solvency of states’ financial assurance funds. To obtain further information about the federal funding to address these releases, we interviewed Department of the Treasury officials. We interviewed EPA headquarters and regional officials to determine the process by which EPA distributes LUST Trust Fund money. We gathered documentation regarding appropriations of money from the fund to EPA, states' expenditure of fund money, and the balance of the fund and its annual revenues. We selected these sources based on EPA officials’ indications that they were the most appropriate sources for the purposes of this report. Treasury’s financial statements and internal controls. These audits were conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We found the data elements that we used in this report from Treasury's financial statements sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review. We conducted our work from June 2005 to December 2006. As described in appendix I, our assessment of the reliability of the data provided by states in their surveys found wide variability in the data. We also discussed the reliability. of Treasury”s LUST Trust Fund data with knowledgeable EPA and Treasury officials. EPA’s distribution of LUST Trust Fund money to states depends on data that may not be accurate. States are not required to report data to EPA on the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner. In addition, developing national data on the extent to which releases remaining to be cleaned up are attributed to tanks without viable owners would be useful to both EPA and the Congress. We recommend that the Administrator, EPA, take the following four actions: Ensure that states verify, on a regular basis, that tank owners and operators are maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage. In 2005 report, we recommended that EPA collect available information from states. This information would improve EPA’s ability to determine how to most efficiently and effectively distribute LUST Trust Fund dollars to the states. In our survey, 37 states and the District of Columbia reported data on the number of tanks without viable owners that had known releases. We provided EPA with a draft of this report for its review and comment. EPA agreed with our recommendations and provided information on the agency's plans and activities to address each of them. information about (1) states’ primary sources of money for addressing releases from leaking underground storage tanks, (2) these sources’ future viability, and (3) the federal funding available to address these releases. We selected these regions primarily because survey responses from one or more states in these regions raised questions about similar data they had reported to EPA. We spoke with regional officials about these apparent discrepancies, as well as about the regions’ processes for distributing money from the LUST Trust Fund. a viable owner. EPA currently allocates resources to the states without taking into account the number of such releases in each state. In our November 2005 report, we recommended that EPA collect available data from the states. In commenting on this recommendation, EPA expressed concern about placing an undue burden on states. in our response, we explained that we were not suggesting that states should try to try to find a viable owner for a tank that had no viable owners. We were simply suggesting that EPA take a look at the available data and make a decision. EPA regional officials consider the components of the state formulas, along with additional factors, to determine the actual amount to be distributed to each of the states in their region. Additional factors that may be considered, according to EPA regional officials, include states’ actual need for money in light of such things as funding carryovers from prior years. For the most part, the EPA Regional officials whom we interviewed stated that deviations from the formula distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor. The total for the states within each region. EPA headquarters uses a formula to distribute LUST Trust Fund money to the regions. The formula includes a minimum of $300,000 per state and a need-based amount. It also includes a performance-based bonus to states that meet or exceed the national averages for the numbers of cleanups initiated and completed. The distribution formula does not consider the number of releases from tanks without tanks without water in them, the EPA says. The distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor, the agency says. Tanks include “any one or combination of tanks (including underground pipes connected thereto) that is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances, and the volume of which is 10 percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. This term does not include any. farm or residential tank of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes.’’ “ tank used for storage heating oil for consumptive use on the premises where stored.”

ROUGE-1: 77.73, ROUGE-2: 71.18, ROUGE-L: 19.61
BERTScore: 51.20

==============================================
==================== [47/100] ====================
Summary:
The Corps provides funding to USGS to operate stream gauges that provide data for the Corps’ water planning and management activities. This data is also available for use by all federal and state agencies, as well as others interested in water information. Reclamation policy officials told us, in response to a SECURE Water Act requirement to consult with federal and. state agencies. The data is used to produce the climate change information upon which the Corps bases its adaptation planning. The Corps has a formal agreement to provide $18 million in fiscal year 2013 according to Corps officials. a SECURE Water Act requirement to consult with federal and applicable state agencies to develop a monitoring plan for acquiring and maintaining water resources information. Reclamation staff are currently identifying information needs and plans to work collaboratively with data collecting agencies, including NOAA, USGS, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, to develop the plan. The Basin Study Program activities, including the WWCRAs and Basin Studies, are also contributing to the planning effort by providing valuable information about how the agency’s monitoring needs are changing as a result of climate change. change, and they will be included in future reports that are due to Congress every 5 years. Reclamation is partnering with nonfederal entities to conduct focused assessments, known as Basin Studies, to identify specific water resources vulnerabilities. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way in western states. All three of Reclamation’s completed Basin Studies projected climate change to result in warming and changes in precipitation. The agencies plan to continue such collaborative approaches going forward. it established to meet the requirements of the SECURE Water Act. Reclamation reported to Congress in 2011 its assessments of the potential effects of climate change on water supplies in the major river basins in the West. According to agency officials, Reclamation is now conducting WWCRAs that focus on future water demand and will combine this information with its water supply assessments. These combined assessments will be included in Reclamation’s next SECURES Water Act report that is due in 2016. These assessments will also be updated based on the latest climate science. Law requires Reclamation to analyze extent to which changes in water supply will impact several areas. Reclamation’s ability to deliver water to its customers, hydroelectric power generation, fish and wildlife habitat, and recreation. Law also requires it to assess specific risks to the water supply of each of its major river basins, including risks related to, among other things, changes in snow cover and changes in ice levels. The law also requires the agency to develop strategies to address potential water shortages and other impacts. To address projected imbalances in supply and demand, the studies are to identify adaptation strategies. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way. Some studies entirely cover the major Basin Study in 2012, while other studies cover subbasins or tributaries within the boundaries of the major river basins. Reclamation officials told us they next intend to initiate feasibility studies for adaptation strategies identified in completed Basin Studies by making funds available to nonfederal partners. address projected water supply and demand imbalances. The study noted that the purpose of identifying these strategies was not to select a single, best strategy. Each approach has positive and negative implications that should be considered in future planning efforts. Agency officials and study participants told us that Reclamation has formed workgroups to further refine the strategies and identify options that should then be evaluated through feasibility studies. In contrast, the Yakima River Basin Study identified a more specific set of strategies that could be used in the future. Policy officials, as well as basin stakeholders representing environmental and tribal interests, told us that the Basin Studies represent Reclamation’s first concerted efforts at holistic planning in the river basins. A state water manager told us a prior river basin planning effort had largely been unsuccessful due to the lack of involvement or opposition. Several stakeholders commended Reclamation for working to ensure that the views of a wide range of people were taken into account in the planning process. The basin studies are expected to be completed by the end of the year. working to ensure that the views of a wide range of stakeholders, including environmental and tribal interests, were considered in the Basin Studies. In addition to the individual named above, Elizabeth Erdmann, Assistant Director; Brad Dobbins; Richard Johnson; Mick Ray; Jeanette Soares; Lorelei St. James; and Sarah E. Veale made key contributions to this report. Nirmal Chaudhary, John Delicath, Cindy Gilbert, and Armetha Liles provided additional technical assistance. Most of Reclamation’s water infrastructure facilities are more than 50 years old. Federal funding over the past 20 years has consistently been inadequate to maintain the Corps’ infrastructure at acceptable levels of performance and efficiency, according to a 2011 Congressional Research Service report. With limited budgetary resources and aging infrastructure, Reclamation's maintenance and rehabilitation is a high priority, the report says. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for maintaining the nation's water resources infrastructure. The Corps has been in existence since the Civilian Conservation Corps was formed in 1864. report, with limited budgetary resources and aging infrastructure, Reclamation’s maintenance needs are likely to increase, as is competition for limited funding. Despite the ongoing challenges of operating and maintaining aging infrastructure under budgetary constraints, it is important that the Corps and Reclamation address the challenge of managing climate change risk in order to limit the fiscal exposure of the federal government. climate change poses a significant financial risk to theFederal government, including, but not limited to its role as the owner or operator of extensive infrastructure. operator of extensive infrastructure vulnerable to climate impacts. State and local authorities are responsible for planning and implementing many types of infrastructure projects. While implementing adaptive strategies to protect infrastructure may be costly, there is a growing recognition that the cost of inaction could be greater. As stated in a 2010 National Research Council report, increasing the nation’s infrastructure is a priority for the U.S. government. It will be difficult to manage given expected budget pressures, which will constrain not just ad hoc responses, but other federal programs. The Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) provides water to over 31 million people and irrigation water to one out of five western farmers on 10 million acres of farm land. Reclamation is also the second largest producer of hydropower in the United States. According to agency records, Reclamation has an estimated value of approximately $164 billion. The agency is organized into five regions to carry out its mission and operations, as shown in figure 1. The U.S. produces 60 percent of the nation's vegetables and one-quarter of its fresh fruit and nut crops. into five regions, as shown in figure 1. According to agency records as of 2011, Reclamation’s asset inventory includes 476 dams and dikes, creating 337 reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 245 million acre-feet of water. Reclamation also includes 53 hydroelectric power plants that it owns and operates. These plants provide an average of more than 40 megawatt hours of energy per year. In 2011, the agency estimated that the replacement value of its assets was approximately $90 billion. Division and district geographic boundaries are generally aligned with watershed boundaries. The Corps’ Civil Works Program is implemented through nine business areas that represent the diversity of the nation’s water resource management needs as follows: Navigation, Environment, Recreation, Flood and Coastal Storm Damage Reduction, Hydropower, Regulatory, Emergency Management, and Recreational and educational opportunities.as shown in figure 1. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for managing the nation's water resources for navigation, environment, flood and coastal storm damage reduction, and recreation. As of September 2012, the Corps' inventory includes 702 reservoirs and 75 hydropower facilities. The Corps has constructed and continues to operate, maintain, and rehabilitate a wide variety of water management infrastructure. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers provides leadership, strategic planning and performance measurement in four business areas: Water Supply, Recreation, Emergency Management and Executive Direction and Management. It also provides training, support and equipment for the military, law enforcement, fire and emergency services, among other things. facilities with 353 generating units that produce hydroelectric power for homes, businesses, and communities. In 2012, the National Research Council reported that the Corps’ infrastructure had an estimated value of approximately $164 billion. For flood reduction, the Corps inventory includes 14,501 miles of levee systems. For recreation, the inventory includes 54,879 miles of lakeshore and recreation areas that support 370 million annual visitors, 270,000 jobs, and $16 billion of economic activity. related to, among other things, changes in snow cover and the timing and quantity of runoff. Reclamation’s climate adaptation efforts fall within the larger effort by Interior to implement Executive Order 13514. In 2013, Interior adopted a policy directing the agency to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its operations, policies, programs, and planning. See appendix I for more information on the Corps’ and Reclamation's efforts to adapt to the changing climate in the U.S. West. For over 230 years, the Corps has led the development and stewardship of much of the nation’s public water resources. The Corps’ Civil Works Program plans and manages water for transportation, recreation, energy, wildlife habitat, aquatic ecosystems, and water supply. It has constructed and continues to operate, maintain, and rehabilitate a wide variety of water management infrastructure, including reservoirs, hydropower facilities, commercial inland waterways, harbors, and levee systems. In June 2011, in response to the implementing instructions for Executive Order 13514,. the Corps established its adaptation policy statement for addressing the effects of climate change. in the Interagency Climate Change Adaptation Task Force (Task Force), which was already developing a strategy for adaptation to climate change. In October 2010, the Task Force delivered a progress report to the President through the Council on Environmental Quality containing overarching policy goals to advance climate adaptation. The Task Force recommended the development of a national action plan to strengthen climate change adaptation for freshwater resources. Based on the work of the Task force, the Council of Environmental Quality was formed in October 2010. The Council ofEnvironmental Quality was established in November 2010. adaptation is an element of the proposed responses to climate change that is gaining more attention. Policymakers are increasingly viewing adaptation as a risk-management strategy to protect vulnerable sectors and communities that might be affected. Climate change adaptation planning frameworks generally consist of four key elements that are reviewed and revised as needed as new information emerges. These four elements are the following: Establish a mandate to address climate change with clearly articulated adaptation goals, objectives, and measures of success toward meeting goals. Assess and understand the risks, vulnerabilities, and opportunities posed by climate change. In 2009, Congress passed the SECURE Water Act, requiring Reclamation to establish a climate change adaptation program. Since 2009, the Corps and Reclamation have taken steps to assess water resource and infrastructure vulnerabilities and develop guidance and strategies for adapting to climate change. Officials from both agencies told us that as they develop the necessary guidance, they plan to implement specific adaptation strategies and share costs with state and local partners. In a 2010 National Research Council report, increasing the nation’s ability to respond to a changing climate can be viewed as an insurance policy against climate change risks. The extent to which limited budgets and existing infrastructure maintenance backlogs will affect the implementation of adaptation strategies remains to be determined. Both agencies have already initiated cost-sharing and resource-leveraging measures. The Corps is conducting pilot studies nationwide to support the development of adaptation guidance and a portfolio of adaptation approaches. Reclamation is conducting Basin Studies—focused assessments within basins to develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is conducting basin studies in the Great Lakes and Mississippi basins. the implementation of practical, nationally consistent, legally justifiable, and cost-effective adaptation strategies. Corps Civil Works officials told us that the pilots conducted to date have been largely focused on informing the development of policy and guidance. Reclamation officials said no structural or operational adaptation strategies have been implemented in response to the agency’s vulnerability assessments. The agency said its efforts to update guidance will be informed by the adaptation strategy feasibility studies as they are completed. The pilots are still in the early stages, officials said. As recommended by the Task Force in 2010, the Corps and Reclamation are taking a phased approach to climate adaptation. Both agencies have also begun integrating what they have learned into their policies and program guidance. The Corps is currently developing guidance for implementing coastal and inland adaptation strategies. Reclamation officials told us they began to incorporate climate change adaptation considerations into its policies and guidance in 2013. The agency’s goal is to create a policy and guidance framework that will support the implementation of practical, nationally consistent, legally justifiable, and cost-effective. Costs with state and local partners. Since 2009, the Corps has broadly assessed how climate change could affect its missions. A phased assessment of the vulnerability of coastal projects is under way. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different approaches to adapting to climate change. Ultimately, the corps plans to combine the coastal and inland assessments into a unified methodology, officials say.. In addition, Corps Civil Works officials told us that they are developing syntheses of literature to provide up-to-date information about regional climate impacts. The Corps is developing and testing a methodology for nationwide, watershed-level vulnerability assessments of its inland missions, operations, programs, and projects. The agency officials expect to complete the first phase of screening assessments in 2013, with more refined assessments to be completed in 2014. The nationwide watershed- level vulnerability assessments will help them make initial screening-level determinations of where adaptation strategies are needed or not needed, and then to prioritize accordingly. The Corps also identified a number of adaptation priorities, including coastal project vulnerability assessments. U.S. Global Change Research Program: Changes in the climate in the United States have altered and will continue to alter the water cycle. Climate-related changes are expected to continue and increase in intensity in some areas of the nation. A 2011 federal interagency review of the potential impacts of climate change on water resources identified four interrelated areas of concern for water resource management. Both agencies are dealing with aging water management infrastructure with limited funding for maintenance and construction. It is uncertain how and to what extent changes in theClimate will affect particular water resources in the future is uncertain. resources identified four interrelated areas of concern for water resource managers. Assuring an adequate water supply for multiple needs, such as drinking water, agriculture, energy production, industrial uses, navigation, and recreation. protecting life, health, and property in the face of risks posed by protecting the quality of freshwater resources. protecting coastal and ocean resources as rising sea levels and changes in storm frequency, intensity, and duration impact coastal infrastructure. Adaptation—defined by the National Research Council as adjustments in natural or human resources.  Basin Studies are to develop long-term projections of water supply and demand that take into account specific climate change risks identified in the SECURE Water Act. The studies will analyze how well existing water and power infrastructure are meeting current demands. The completed Basin Studies also identified, with varying degrees of specificity, possible adaptation strategies to address the projected effects of climate change on water resources. The study concluded that without additional water management actions, a wide range of future imbalances in supply anddemand are plausible. climate change to result in warming and changes in precipitation that will alter the snow cover and runoff that supply water to the river basins. The changes may be difficult to predict with certainty for any particular location and time. For example, the Colorado River Basin study projected that snow cover will decrease in the basin as more precipitation falls as rain, rather than snow, and warmer temperatures cause earlier melting. The study concluded that without additional water management actions, a wide range of water resources will be affected. for water resource managers. For example, the Corps partnered with NOAA’s National Ocean Service to create an online sea level change calculator. According to Corps officials, this collaboration allowed the rapid integration of climate science into engineering guidance for coastal projects. Corps Civil Works officials also told us that collaboration with the Federal Emergency Management Agency contributed to the development of a post-Superstorm Sandy sea level rise tool to help affected communities, residents, and other stakeholders consider risks from future sealevel rise in planning for reconstruction. The Corps-hosted Federal Support Toolbox is now publicly available online. According to Corps Civil Works officials, the website is a “one stop shop” for technical resources to support water management. The website states that the toolbox is an evolving tool. The Corps and NOAA are coleading actions to implement the Task Force recommendation to develop a federal Internet portal to provide current, relevant, and high-quality information on water resources and climate change data applications and tools for assessing the vulnerability of water programs. Corps’ analysis included an assessment of whether the potential effects of climate change on the Corps’ business areas would likely be negative, positive, or a mix of both. Increasing air temperatures may have an effect on glaciers that could negatively impact Corps business areas such as navigation, flood and coastal storm damage reduction, ecosystem restoration, and emergency management. The effect of increasing air temperatures on river ice could have both positive and negative impacts on those same four business areas. As part of the high-level analysis, the Corps also identified a number of other potential impacts. The Corps launched a pilot study with the goals of determining whether tools and data are available for the Corps to provide reliable estimates of future flooding. This pilot study’s results supports the Corps’ effort to design an approximately $1.8 billion flood risk reduction project on the Red River of the North, where flooding has increased in magnitude and frequency since 1942. Corps officials told us that climate data indicated a trend of flooding consistent with climate change projections. In accordance with existing Corps risk analysis guidance, the pilot study leader convened an expert panel to review climate information. participation in other Corps pilots—into the guidance. Corps officials told us that the information developed by the Corps’ climate change adaptation pilots is also contributing to subsequent Corps studies. For example, the climate change and modeling data for a pilot study of sediment impacts to Cochiti Dam and Lake in New Mexico is contributing to ongoing studies in the Albuquerque District. One is the Santa Clara Pueblo Watershed Assessment, which is studying observed climate trends and projected climate changes to address likely future changes to watershed hydrology. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different methods and frameworks for adapting to climate change. The 15 pilots are led by 13 different Corps districts and address project planning, engineering, operations, and maintenance for 6 different Corps business areas. As of September 2013, the Corps has completed 5 of these studies, and 10 others are ongoing. The Corps plans to initiate 1 additional pilot in 2013. According to the Corps’ September 2012 report on its climate change adaptation pilots, each study addresses a central question designed to help the Corps. Research’s COMET Program and the Western Water Assessment to produce training courses for federal and nonfederal resource management professionals. The agencies implemented an online course on incorporating climate change into water resource planning, which was a prerequisite for participating in the first two pilot residence courses. The courses address climate impacts on surface hydrology and on water demand for irrigated crops. According to the program's website, the online course was designed to provide students with water resourceplanning knowledge, while the residence courses were designed to teach students about climate impacts. and tools needed into categories and identified the users’ most pressing needs within each category. USGS and NOAA will jointly prepare the companion documents, incorporating perspectives from other federal and nonfederal representatives of the scientific community. The Corps and Reclamation are coordinating with the data collecting agencies and sharing some costs associated with their efforts. According to the documents, the CCAWWG agencies plan next to prepare two companion documents to identify a scientific strategy for meeting the research needs identified in the two initial documents. management agencies for a specific purpose can be used by the science agencies for alternative objectives. Outside of CCAWWG, as mentioned elsewhere in this report, the agencies have also followed key collaborative practices, such as the Corps leveraging resources to fund maintenance of the USGS’s stream- flow monitoring networks. Reclamation establishing joint strategies with state agencies and others to conduct Basin Studies. We provided a draft of this product for review and comment to the Departments of Defense and the Interior. The Department of Defense provided technical comments that were incorporated, as appropriate. USGS alone has deactivated or discontinued almost 1,700 surface-water stream gauges. Corps Civil Works officials told us that stream gauge data is extremely important, not only to the Corps’ ongoing operations, but also because science agencies use the data to produce the climate change.and sharing some costs associated with their efforts. According to the 2009 CCAWWG study, at the same time as the need for observational data to support climate adaptation is increasing, the observational networks crucial to increasing understanding are shrinking. Under Interior’s 2013 Climate Change Adaptation Policy, Reclamation is to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its policies and practices. Reclamation has similarly included collaboration as a key element of its adaptation policy, plans, and performance metrics. The Corps and Reclamation have collaborated together and with others in accordance with best practices for collaboration among agencies. For example, in their key collaborative effort, CCAWWG, each agency’S role is well defined; the Corps provides water engineering and management expertise, and their partner agencies provide partner agencies. Reclamation is coleading two of Interior’s Landscape Conservation Cooperatives in the Colorado River Basin area. The Cooperatives will focus on developing and communicating science to inform climate adaptation strategies for ecological regions, or “landscapes.” The Corps is engaged in collaborative efforts with external partners to integrate climate science into planning tools for water resource managers. For example, the Corps partnered with NOAA’S Regional Integrated Sciences and Assessment program.climate science into water management tools. The CCAWWG study identified a number of challenges faced by the Corps and Reclamation. The agencies have Reclamation in adapting to climate change, and the agencies have taken a variety of actions to address these challenges. We found that the agencies are addressing these challenges, making collaboration a key element of their efforts, and doing so in a manner generally consistent with best practices for sustained collaboration. The CCA WWG agencies are collaborating to produce a series of documents identifying their common data and tool needs and a strategy for meeting them. The Corps and Reclamation are collaborating as coleaders in developing and implementing a training program as recommended by the Task Force’s National Action Plan: Priorities for Managing Freshwater Resources in a Changing Environment. The Toolbox is an evolving and comprehensive water resources data portal with direct links to valuable databases, innovative programs and initiatives, and state-of-the-art models and tools. These agencies—joined by NOAA, USGS, and the Environmental Protection Agency—are collaborating with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research and the Western Water Assessment. Congress and the Executive Office of the President have directed federal agencies to address the potential impacts of climate change. The Corps and Reclamation have similar yet distinct roles in managing water for a wide variety of purposes. In addition to the water management challenges posed by climate change, both agencies are dealing with other issues. The agencies are collaborating in a number of efforts to incorporate climate science into water management tools. The U.S. Department of Agriculture and USGS will initiate the required monitoring plan in 2014. Since 1902, Reclamation has carried out its mission to manage, develop, and protect water and related resources in 17 western states. Some of the pilots are being conducted collaboratively with federal, state, and university partners. Corps officials expect the pilot projects to provide a body of knowledge and tested methods that will serve as the foundation for its guidance and future adaptation efforts. See appendix II for additional information on the locations and results of the Corps’ pilot studies. The agency has led or provided assistance in constructing most of the large dams and water diversion structures in the West. students with water resource planning knowledge, while the residence courses offer opportunities for gaining hands-on experience in applying that knowledge. The Corps and Reclamation have collaborated with each other and other agencies in a manner that is generally consistent with practices that we have previously identified as important to helping enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies. In 2005, we reported that collaboration—broadly—was important to the success of the agency's water planning program. The program is designed to provide a professional development and training series that will help managers assess climate change impacts. The Corps and Reclamation have made collaboration a key element of their adaptation policies and plans. The Corps’ climate adaptation policy states that collaborations are the most effective way to develop strategies to identify and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Reclamation has reinforced accountability for collaboration through agency performance management systems. Running throughout these practices are a number of factors, such as leadership, trust, and organizational culture, which are necessary elements for a collaborative working relationship. For more information, visit the Corps' website or Reclamation's website. most effective way to develop strategies to identify and reduce vulnerabilities to potential future climate change. As stated in the Corps’ 2012 Climate Adaptation Plan and Report, it is the objective of the agency to facilitate and promote closer and more fruitful interagency cooperation. To reinforce accountability, the draft performance metrics for climate adaptation in the 2013 Army Campaign Plan includes a target for the number of products developed in collaboration with other partners. The goal is to promote sharing of impact and adaptation data and information between federal, state, and local partners. collaboration among federal agencies. In 2005, we reported that collaboration can be enhanced and sustained by engaging in eight key practices. These include defining and articulating a common outcome; establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies; identifying and addressing needs by leveraging resources; agreeing on roles and responsibilities. We also reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through agency accountability through the reporting of results to the public. We report on the results of these efforts in a new book, "Collaboration Among Federal Agencies," published by Oxford University Press. were incorporated, as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretaries of Defense and the Interior; the appropriate congressional committees; and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841.  GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) is composed of four program areas including Civil Works, Military Construction, Real Estate, and Research and Development. To carry out its Civil Works missions nationwide, the program is organized into eight geographic divisions composed of 38 districts, as shown in figure 1. Division and district geographic boundaries can be found in the appendix III of this report, which is available on the GAO website.

ROUGE-1: 76.81, ROUGE-2: 69.24, ROUGE-L: 26.38
BERTScore: 59.83

==============================================
==================== [48/100] ====================
Summary:
GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list, known as “Today's Reports,” is posted on the Web site daily. as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site daily. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.htm, E-mails: fraudnet@gao,gov, or 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system). General Accounting Office exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The agency's commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to get your hands on a GAO report is to go to the agency's website. Have a question about the report? Send it to iReport. Price per print for an 8- by 10-inch print ranges from $4.50 for one to nine prints to $1.75 for each print in quantities of over 50. The specified charge for clerical search and processing is $13.25 per hour with a minimum charge of $8.30. Existing fees vary significantly among the archives. For example, the charges for a paper copy made by archive staff ranged from no charge by the Air Force Historical Research Agency, to no charge. might be significantly understated. For example, the Institute’s early proposal, based on total direct and indirect costs, shows a total fee of $10.50 for mailing a requester 10 paper copies of an item. The total fee under Appendix 2 for the same order would be $3.90, itemized as follows. In this case, the fee under appendix 2 appears to be about one-third of the Institute's proposal. Comptroller officials noted that Appendix 2 provided for a minimum clerical search and processing charge of $8.30. All of the four primary archives charge fees for providing historical information to requesters. None of the fees were in accordance with the mandated DOD user fee schedule. These arrangements, by reducing budgetary pressures, have lessened the benefits that an archive could achieve from implementing Section 1085. Such arrangements, the costs of reproducing photographs and responding to requester would come from the archive’s budget, and the fees collected from the customer would be deposited in Treasury's Miscellaneous Receipts and would not be available to offset the costs. $3.50 minimum specified in the DOD’s User Charge fee schedule. The Marine Corps fees, which are based on FOIA, resulted in any requester receiving up to 2 hours of search time and 100 pages without a charge. With the exception of the Marine Corps, the archives did not have a clearly identified basis for their fee schedules. The archives also appear to have different practices regarding which requesters are charged and under what circumstances fees will be waived. Archives officials said that fees are often waived for military personnel, veterans, government employees, and others. Military archive officials reported collecting about $81,000 during fiscal year 2000. The Air Force reported the most collections (about $46,000) and the Marine Corps reporting the least ( about $2,000). However, these amounts are probably much less than amounts that should be collected if updated fee schedules are established and effectively implemented because of the need for cost containment. The collections reported by the four primary military archives are not indicative of potential future collections under updated fee schedule. The fee schedule was last issued in 1998, but is the same as the schedule first issued in 1986. The Army Military History Institute arranged for a contract, through a nonappropriated fund account, to reproduce requested photographs with fees collected for the photographs reimbursing the fund. The Naval Historical Center refers those requesting its photographs to the Naval Historical Foundation, a nonprofit foundation, which reproduces the photographs and charges the customer. DOD Comptroller officials had no information as to the amount of funds collected throughout DOD using the fee structure mandated in the DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4, Appendix 2. no charge by the Air Force Historical Research Agency, to no charge by. the Marine Corps Historical Center for the first 100 pages and a charge of. $0.15 for each page thereafter. In general, the archives do not impose a minimum charge for providing information. This could result in requesters receiving copies of documents free or for less than a dollar as opposed to the $3.50 minimum specified in the DOD’s User Charge fee schedule. The Army Military History Institute charges $0,25 per page, the Naval Historical Center charges $ 0.30 per page. minimum clerical charge in the above comparison would result in a higher fee under Appendix 2 than under the Army Military History Institute’s proposal. However, the officials had no information as to whether the minimum clerical charges had been or would be included in a fee involving a request for paper copies of an item. Further, if a search charge is appropriate, the Institute's proposal includes a $25 hourly research charge as opposed to the $13.25 hourly charge for clerical search and processing. In the mid-1990s, the Army Military History Institute began developing proposed legislation for charging and retaining fees to defray costs of providing historical information to the public. The Institute, whose mission is to preserve the Army’s history, was experiencing a significant increase in requests from the public while resources available to respond were decreasing. For example, the annual number of requests increased from about 13,000 in 1987 to 20,600 in 1995 and to 35,800 in 2000. During the same period, the number of staff members decreased from over 40 to over 30. period, the number of staff members decreased from over 40 to 33. As a result, backlogs and waiting times increased. Congress enacted Section 1085 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001. The Act authorizes the charging and retaining of fees by one designated primary archive in each of the four military departments. The four designated archives are the Air Force Historical Research Agency at Maxwell AFB, Alabama; Army Military History Institute at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania; Marine Corps Historical Center at Washington. at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania; Marine Corps Historical Center at Washington Navy Yard, D.C.; and Naval Historical Center. Section 1085 does not specify a fee structure or the fees that are to be charged, but states that fees are not to exceed the costs of providing the information. The Section also states that fee is not to be charges for information that is requested (1) to carry out a duty as a member of the armed forces or employee of the United States or (2) under FOIA. Section 1085 does not apply to the DOD offices, organizations, museums, and archives other than the four designated archives. The User Charge Statute and FOIA will continue to be the basic authority for these activities to charge fees for providing information. If a request is not identified as a FOIA request, the fees should be determined under the User charge Statute as specified in FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4. Fees collected under both the User Charge and FOIA for general information must be deposited in the Treasury as Miscellaneous Receipts. Research Agency had tasked key stakeholders with determining a fee structure. However, they have not established a target date for implementing the Section. Section 1085 permits each of the four archives to develop its own fee schedule provided that the fees charged do not exceed the costs of providing the information. Officials at the Naval Historical Center and the Marine Corps Historical Center have not decided whether to implement a fee system. They have taken no specific actions toward implementation and have received no implementation guidance from their headquarters. One of the factors affecting Section. five copies of an 8- x 10-inch photograph shows a total fee of $105 (pull fee per item of $5 and $20 for each copy) The total fee under Appendix 2 would be $22.50 ($4.50 per copy) or less than one-fourth of the Institute’s proposal. DOD reported that about $670,000 was recovered through assessed fees in fiscal year 2000, less than 2 percent of the reported $36.5 million in costs associated with providing information under FOIA. Fees for search, review, and duplication of documents are to be based on direct costs. Fees will be waived or reduced when the information is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of DOD, and fees shall be automatically waived when assessable fees total $15 or less. Under the User Charge regulation, only members of the U.S. Armed Forces, in their capacity as Service members, are exempt from charges. Archive officials also said that fee waivers were used extensively for FOIA requests. use of outdated fees schedules, the archives and other providers of public information throughout DOD have not collected a million dollars or more annually in user fees and have treated public requesters inconsistently. DOD has not revised its fee schedules under the User Charge Statute and FOIA since 1986. To provide consistency throughout DOD, an archive implementing Section 1085 could use DOD’s user fee schedule in lieu of establishing a new fee schedule unless specific justification exists for the new schedule. Such implementation is necessary for the fair and equitable treatment of the public. requested to include user fee schedule compliance as a part of their standard reviews, where applicable. Because archive officials were unaware of the FMR fee schedule, we continue to believe that the more substantive actions that we recommended are warranted. We are sending copies of this report to the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller); the Director, Freedom of Information and Security Review; and interested congressional committees. Copies of thisReport will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (202) 512-9505 if you have any questions. documents shall be provided without charge or at reduced charge when a DOD component determines that a waiver or reduction of fees is in the public interest and likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of DOD. DOD last revised its User Charge Statute fee schedule for copying, certifying, and searching records in March 1986. At that time, DOD revised its user fees instruction and added a schedule of fees and rates for services related to copying, certification, and search records. The instruction stated that this schedule was to be used for such services throughout DOD. used for such services throughout DOD. The same fees were included in the DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4, Appendix 2, issued in March 1997. Although the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 and OMB Circular A-25 require a biennial review of charges for services, DOD Comptroller officials were not aware of any reviews having been done. Fees being developed by the Army Military History Institute indicate that the fees mandated in Appendix 2 might be significantly understated. For example, the Institute’s early proposal, DOD policy is that when a service is provided that conveys special benefits to recipients, above and beyond those accruing to the public at large, a reasonable charge shall be made to each identifiable recipient. The policy provides that a charge will be imposed to recover the full cost to the federal government of rendering a service or the fair market value of such service, whichever is higher. Appendix 1 of Chapter 4 lists benefits for which no charge has been imposed so far. The cost of this article has been updated to reflect the new policy.

ROUGE-1: 72.77, ROUGE-2: 68.74, ROUGE-L: 27.06
BERTScore: 52.86

==============================================
==================== [49/100] ====================
Summary:
to torture may be treated separately under regulations implementing the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Article 3 of the Torture Convention prohibits the return of any person to a country where there are "substantial grounds" for believing that he or she would be in danger of being tortured. The alien must meet the three elements necessary to establish torture: the torture must involve the infliction of severe pain or suffering, either physical or mental. must be intentionally inflicted; and 3. the torture must be committed by or at the acquiescence of a public official or person acting in an official capacity. An applicant for non-removal under Article 3 has the burden of proving that it is more likely than not that he would be tortured if removed to the proposed country. If credible, the applicant's testimony may be sufficient to sustain this burden without additional corroboration. All evidence relevant to the possibility should be considered when deciding whether to remove an applicant. in large part on the credibility of the claim and the likelihood that persecution would occur if the alien is returned home. A third dimension that overlays these concepts is the matter of "mixed motives" for persecuting the alien. The INA states that "the term credible fear of persecution means that there is a significant possibility," taking into account "credible fear" and "well-founded fear" Each of these standards are discussed below. The standards are fundamental to establishing the standards for asylum. possibility , taking into account the credibility of the statements made by the alien in support of the alien's claim and such other facts as are known to the officer, that the alien could establish eligibility for asylum. Integral to expedited removal, which is discussed below, the credible fear concept also functions as a pre-screening standard. The standards for "well-founded fear" have evolved over the years and been guided significantly by judicial decisions, including a notable U.S. Supreme Court decision. Foreign nationals arriving at a U.S. port of entry who lack proper immigration documents are placed in expedited removal. If they express a fear of persecution, they receive a "credible fear" hearing with a USCIS asylum officer. If found credible, they are referred to an EOIR immigration judge for a hearing. If the asylum officer finds that an alien does not have a credible fear, the alien may request that a judge review that finding. The number of "c credible fear" claims that USCIS has considered has steadily increased. fear" claims that USCIS has considered has steadily increased from 4,712 in FY2005 to 5,454 in FY2009. Consistent time series data on "credible fear" claims are not available before FY2005. On November 13, 2002, the former INS published a notice clarifying that certain aliens arriving by sea who are not admitted or paroled into the United States are to be placed on a waiting list. On that day, the U.S. placed more than 1,000 aliens on the list. "Credible fear" typically comes up when an alien arrives without proper documentation and is put into expedited removal proceedings. Those deemed to have a credible fear proceed to a defensive asylum hearing with EOIR. Given the ebbs and flows of asylum seekers over time that Figure 1 , Figure 2 , and Figure 3 depict, the representativeness for "credibleFear" claimants is not clear, but it is likely to be higher than for other categories of asylum seeker. More Western Hemisphere nations are among the top 10 source countries for "Credible Fear" claimants than among the U.S. asylum caseloads. or paroled into the United States are to be placed in expedited removal proceedings and detained (subject to humanitarian parole) This notice concluded that illegal mass migration by sea threatened national security because it diverts the U.S. Coast Guard and other resources from their homeland security duties. The Attorney General expanded on this rationale in his April 17, 2003, ruling that instructs EOIR immigration judges to consider "national security interests implicated by the encouragement of further unlawful mass migrations ..." in making bond determinations. migrants who arrive in "the United States by sea seeking to evade inspection." The case involved a Haitian who had come ashore in Biscayne Bay, FL, on October 29, 2002. The BIA had upheld his release, but the Attorney General vacated the BIA decision. All foreign nationals seeking asylum are subject to multiple background checks in the terrorist, immigration, and law enforcement databases. Those who enter the country legally on nonimmigrant visas are screened by the consular officers at the Department of State when they apply for a visa. DHS' Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officer must summarily exclude a foreign national arriving without proper documentation. Unless the alien expresses a fear of persecution if repatriated, the CBP officer is allowed to exclude them without placing them in removal proceedings. This procedure is known as expedited removal. According to DHS immigration policy and procedures, CBP inspectors, as well as other DHS immigration officers, are required to ask each individual who may be subject to expedite removal the following series of "protection questions" Immigration and Customs Enforcement asks the following series of "protection questions" to identify anyone who is afraid of return. If the foreign national expresses a fear of return, the alien is supposed to be detained by Immigration and Customs enforcement. The questions include: Why did you leave your home country or country of last residence? Do you have any fear or concern about being returned to your homecountry or being removed from the United States? Would you be harmed if you were returned toyour home country? DoYou have any questions or is there anything else you would like to add? Department of State when they apply for a visa, and all foreign nationals are inspected by CBP officers at ports of entry. Those who enter the country illegally are screened by the U.S. Border Patrol or the ICE agents when they are apprehended. When aliens formally request asylum, they are sent to the nearest USCIS-authorized fingerprint site. They have all 10 fingers scanned and are subject to a full background check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Distinct from asylum law and policy, aliens claiming relief from removal due to torture may be treated separately. to the proposed country, all evidence relevant to the possibility of future torture is required to be considered. However, if a diplomatic assurance (deemed sufficiently reliable by the Attorney General or Secretary of State) that the alien will not be tortured is obtained from the government of the country to which the alien would be repatriated, the alien's claim for protection will be dropped. For many years, most foreign nationals who sought asylum in the United States were from the Western Hemisphere, notably Central America and the Caribbean. The intent of the persecutor is subjective and may stem from mixed or multiple motives. The courts have ruled that the persecution may have more than one motive. An applicant for asylum begins the process either in the United States, if he or she is already present, or at a port of entry while in the country. The asylum seeker must demonstrate in mixed motive cases that even though his/her persecutors were motivated for a non-cognizable reason, one of the central motives was the asylum seeker's race, religion, nationality or social group. In the individualized instance, if the asylum seeker demonstrates that there is a reasonable possibility of suffering such persecution as an individual if he or she were to return to that country. In the group identity instance, of persecution is deemed reasonable. Given the sheer number of asylum seekers from the PRC in FY2009, it is not particularly surprising that thePRC led in granting asylum to so many people from the country in the last few years of the last decade of the 1990s and early 2000s. guided significantly by judicial decisions, including a notable U.S. Supreme Court case. An asylum seeker has a well-founded fear of persecution if he or she is unable or unwilling to return to that country. The regulations also state that an asylum seeker "does not have aWell-foundedFear of Persecution if the applicant could avoid persecution by relocating to another part of the applicant's country" The regulations state that the asylum officer or immigration judge shall not require the alien to provide evidence that there is such a fear. not require the alien to provide evidence that there is a reasonable possibility he or she would be individually singled out for persecution if (A) The applicant establishes that there's a pattern or practice in his or her country of nationality or, if stateless, of persecution of a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion; and (B) the applicant establishes his/her own inclusion in, and identification with, such group. Defensive applications for asylum are raised when a foreign national is in removal proceedings and asserts claim for asylum as a defense to his/her removal. EOIR's immigration judges and the BIA, entities in DOJ separate from the USCIS, have exclusive control over such claims. Applicants/aliens seeking asylum via the defensive application method may be detained until an immigration judge rules on their application. The applicant/alien is not detained due.the mandatory detention requirements while their applications are being adjudicated. There is broader authority under the INA to detain aliens for other grounds. Two avenues exist to seek asylum: "affirmative applications" and "defensive applications" In both processes, the burden of proof is on the asylum seeker to establish that he or she meets the refugee definition specified in the INA. An asylum seeker who is already present, or at a port of entry while seeking admission, differs from a potential refugee who begins a separate process wholly outside of the United States. The asylum officers either grant asylum to successful applicants or refer to immigration judges those applicants who fail to meet the definition. argument that greater congressional oversight might politicize the process. Because none of the studies that documented the disparities had access to the case facts and evidence, the rationale for decisions remains unknown. Immigration removal proceedings are civil in nature and, thus, do not entail the right to legal counsel that criminal proceedings do. Foreign nationals can be represented by counsel when they appear in immigration court, but according to the statute, "at no expense to the taxpayer" in the U.S. or any other country. court, but according to the statute, "at no expense to the Government" The issue of asylum seekers' access to counsel, especially during removal proceedings, has arisen in recent years. Many maintain that few can adequately represent themselves and that charitable and pro bono legal projects cannot afford to serve all asylum seekers. Many cite the GAO study, which found that asylum seekers were three times as likely to obtain asylum than non-asylum seekers. Some offer that providing legal counsel is an option for addressing the disparities in outcome. number of observers, while the immigration courts have experienced a substantial increase in caseload, EOIR has not received a commensurate increase in resources. Some are pushing for an increase in funding for immigration judges and law clerks, which they assert would improve the quality of judicial hearings. Others, however, contend that the problems related to disparities in asylum decisions lie less in the funding shortages and more in thequality of immigration judges. Some recommend higher recruitment standards for immigration Judges and more training, particularly training in the culture of asylum seekers' homelands. of asylum seekers' homelands. Establishing mechanisms to foster communication among asylum offices is offered as an option to improve consistency. A further recommendation is to consider cases in pairs or panels of three asylum offers. Despite concern over the disparate decisions, there is an argument that greater congressional oversight might politicize the process. Still others maintain that the USCIS asylum officers also display disparate outcomes among similarly situated asylum cases, and that enhanced training and research support should be available for the asylum corps and immigration judges. application form, the information received during the interview, and other information related to the specific case. If the asylum officer approves the application and the alien passes the identification and background checks, then the foreign national is granted asylum status. There has been a 79% decrease in affirmative asylum cases filed since the enactment of IIRIRA in 1996, falling from 116,877 in FY1996 to 24,550 in FY2009. The asylum officer does not technically deny asylum claims; rather, the asylum applications of aliens who are not granted asylum by asylum officers are referred to EOIR immigration judges. Defensive asylum claims started at a lower level in FY1996 (84,293) than affirmative USCIS claims (116,877) Since that time, defensive asylum claims have dropped by 53%, to 39,279 in FY2009. The number of asylum cases that EOIR judges have approved, however, has risen by 99% over this 14-year period. The applicant/alien is not detained due to their asylum claim, but rather because of the broader authority in the INA to detain aliens. Asylee adjustments comprised only 4% of the 10.3 million LPRs admitted or adjusted from FY2000 through FY2009. Unlike other facets of U.S. immigration policy, asylum issues are less about the number of foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the asylum seekers. The U.N. Refugee Agency is a non-profit organization based in Geneva, Switzerland. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Mexican levels of affirmative versus defensive asylum claims each yielded unique fluctuations over time. Regardless of the overall decrease in asylum cases since the enactment of IIRIRA in 1996, this data analysis suggests that conditions in the major source countries were likely the driving force behind asylum seekers. Country conditions lie at the core of the principle that the United States will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. variation was also the lowest at 4%. In contrast, the denial rates of Salvadoran asylum seekers were the highest. Some argue that given the religious, ethnic, and political violence in various countries around the world, it has become more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors. Some express concern that U.S. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the immigration system are being misused by the Obama administration, who are pushing for a change in the law to make it fairer. By the end of FY1995, there were 457,670 asylum cases in the backlog, as the INS asylum corps was unable to keep pace. Almost half of those cases, however, resulted from the 1990 settlement of the American Baptist Church (ABC) case. The Illegal Immigrant Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA, P.L. 104-208 ) of 1996 made substantial changes to the asylum process, most notably by establishing summary exclusion provisions (now known as summary exclusion clauses) asylum seekers were three times as likely to obtain asylum if they had legal representation, to emphasize the need for legal counsel. Supporters of current law maintain that the one-year rule prevents abuses of the asylum system. Some argue that lack of counsel for a bona fide asylum seeker might result in deportation to a country where the person's life and liberty are threatened. Others have observed that many asylum seekers who fail to file within one year of arrival subsequently receive withholding of removal or relief under the United Nations Convention Against Torture. asylum process, most notably by establishing summary exclusion provisions (now known as expedited removal) IIRIRA also added a provision enabling refugees or asylees to request asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. Asylum claims with the INS dropped in the years following the passage of II RIRA. The Real ID Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-13 ) further revised the asylum process. It remains difficult to assess the extent to which the IIriRA revisions to asylum policy affected this decline. ID Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-13 ) further revised asylum law. It established expressed standards of proof for asylum seekers, including that the applicant's race, religion, nationality, social group, or political opinion was or will be one of the central motives for his or her persecution. It also required that the asylum seeker provide evidence which corroborates otherwise credible testimony. Because "fear" is a subjective state of mind, assessing the merits of an asylum case rests in large part on the credibility of the claim. Asylum seekers are often detained with criminal aliens, a practice that many consider inappropriate and unwarranted. Opponents to the mandatory detention of asylum seekers in expedited removal usually cite the U.N. High Commissioner on Refugees. Supporters of current law say it sends a clear signal of deterrence to aliens who consider using asylum claims as a mechanism to enter illegally. Some have long been concerned that terrorists would seek asylum in the United States, hoping to remain hidden among the hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases. concern that U.S. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the current political uprisings in the Middle East, northern Africa, and South Asia could inadvertently facilitate the entry of terrorists. Others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations or gender-based abuses that occur around the world. Some assert that asylum has become an alternative pathway for immigration rather than humanitarian protection provided in extraordinary cases. At the crux of the issue is the extent to which an asylum policy forged during the Cold War is adapting to the competing priorities and turbulence of the 21 century. population growth, poverty, and political instability in the sending countries of asylum seekers, are factors over which the United States has little control. Some have warned of "the ongoing separation of asylum from any grounding in the national interest" Others have asserted that the U.S. should re-calibrate asylum policy to provide more protections for asylum seekers. These proponents have expressed a desire for the US to reaffirm its welcome to asylum seekers and to set an example for the world to follow. Critics point to asylum seekers from countries of "special concern" Some argue that national security risks should outweigh humanitarian concerns. Others point out that asylum seekers are subject to multiple national security screenings. If an asylum seeker is a suspected or known terrorist, the case should be reviewed, they say. The U.S. is home to hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases. The asylum process can take up to two years. The Supreme Court has the power to grant or deny asylum. It has declined to grant asylum to more than 1,000 people. foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the policies and the efficacy of the procedures. Asylum is an adjudication of a person based upon facts, evidence, beliefs, and circumstances that might be clear at some times yet nebulous at other times. The policy tensions of asylum often pit the promotion of our humanitarian values against the prevention of fraudulent abuses. The protection of the persecuted against the security of our borders. The obligations of our moral responsibilities internationally against the commitments of our social priorities domestically. balance of these competing concerns may be shaken by a crisis in a neighboring nation or by larger world events. The U.S. Congress plays the key role in considering when and whether revision or re-calibration of asylum law and policies is warranted, says John Avlon, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says Congress should consider whether a change in asylum law or policies is in the best interests of the country as a whole, rather than just the asylum seekers. overview of current policy, discussing the threshold of what constitutes asylum and the procedures for obtaining it. The second portion of the report identifies the top sending countries and includes a time series analysis of six selected source countries for asylum seekers. The report rounds out with a discussion of selected legislative policy issues. In 1968, the United States became party to the 1967 United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (hereafter referred to as the U.N. Refugee Protocol), agreeing to the principle of nonrefoulement. Nonrefoulement means that an alien will not be returned to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened. The U.N. Refugee Protocol does not require that a signatory accept refugees, but it does ensure that signatory nations afford certain rights and protections to aliens who meet the definition of refugee. Congress and the Administration thought that there was no need to amend the INA, assuming the U.S. would not accept refugees. The INA was amended in 2006. The Refugee Protection Act of 2011 would make significant revisions to asylum policy. The bill would eliminate the time limits on seeking asylum in cases of changed circumstances. It would also proscribe conditions under which an asylum seeker who was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded. The Senate Committee on the Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy and House Committee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren introduced the companion bills on June 15, 2011. The companion bills are S. 1202 / H.R. 2185. was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded as a terrorist; provide alternatives to detention of asylum seekers; modify certain elements necessary for the asylum seeker to meet the conditions for the granting of asylum; and, allow aliens interdicted at sea the opportunity to have an asylum interview. Foreign nationals seeking asylum must demonstrate a well-founded fear that if returned home, they will be persecuted based upon one of five characteristics: race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Foreign nationals who participated in the persecution of other people are excluded from receiving asylum. The law states other conditions for mandatory denials of asylum claims, including when the alien has been convicted of a serious crime and is a danger to the community. The INA, moreover, has specific grounds for exclusion of all aliens that include criminal and terrorist grounds. This report opens with an overview of current policy, discussing the threshold of what constitutes asylum. It then goes on to discuss what constitutes a credible threat to national security. In 1974, the former Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) issued its first asylum regulations. The Refugee Act of 1980 codified the U.N. Refugee Protocols definition of a refugee in the INA and included provisions for asylum in INA 208. The law defined asylees as aliens in the United States or at a port of entry who meet the definition of refugee. As Figure 1 illustrates, asylum claims spiked immediately after passage of the Refugee Act in 1980, when over 120,000 asylum claims were made. a desire for the U.S. to reaffirm its welcome to those who have fled persecution as well as its commitment to humanitarian efforts. They have argued that some of the statutory revisions in 1996 and 2005 created unnecessary barriers for genuine asylees. The body of research that has revealed disparities in asylum decisions has led many to call for greater congressional oversight of the immigration courts. According to a number of observers, while the immigration Courts have experienced a rise in the number of asylum seekers, they have also experienced a fall in the numbers of those granted asylum. Asylees from countries of "special concern" may be beneficial to U.S. national security. They may have useful information that assists in the war on terrorism. Opponents of limiting the asylees argue that security risks had existed before the asylum law was changed. They argue that those risks resulted more from the limits of intelligence data on terrorists in the past rather than the expansiveness of asylum policy. The law already bars alien terrorists from entering the United States, they say. The asylum law changed after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Some argue that the law should be amended to provide an exception for people who have been forced by terrorists to provide support. Opponents of limiting the judicial review of asylum cases say it would erode two traditional values of U.S. polity. The law states that an alien who commits an act that he "knows, or reasonably should know, affords material support" to a terrorist organization is inadmissible. It makes no exception for instances where the alien has been coerced into providing support. GAO found that the grant rate for affirmative cases exceeded 50% for asylum seekers from countries such as Albania, the PRC, Ethiopia, Iran, Russia, Somalia, and the former Yugoslavia. In contrast, GAO found the grant rates was lower than 10% for Asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico. GAO also offered the following important caveat: Because data were not available on the facts, evidence, and testimony presented in each asylum case, we could not measure the effect of case merits on asylum cases. A study of 290 asylum officers who decided at least 100 affirmative cases from the PRC from FY1999 through FY2005 found that the approval rate of PRC claimants spanned from zero to over 90% during this period. In one regional asylum office, the grant rates for affirmative applications from thePRC varied from zero up to 68%. Sixty percent of the officers in that regional office deviated from their office's average PRC asylum approval rates by more than 50%. Nationwide, immigration judges granted asylum to 47% percent of defensive cases ofPRC claimants from January 1, 2000, through August. For one of these countries, China, the high grant rate and the low grant rate deviated by more than 50% from the national average. Colombian asylum seekers also faced major disparities. Those who appeared before the Orlando Immigration Court had a 63% grant rate, while those heard by the Atlanta Immigration Court faced a grant rate of 19%. The average national grant rate for Colombia asylum seekers is 36%. The U.S.was more than50% above the nationalAverage. The average grant rate was 36%. 20 approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases: Colombia, Haiti, Guatemala, and, of course, the PRC. For year-by-year data on the top 20 source countries for approved asylum cases, see the Appendix. Research studies of the approval rates of cases filed by asylum seekers consistently reveal disparities by USCIS regional asylum offices and EOIR immigration courts. Fredric N. Tulsky of the San Jose Mercury News was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for investigative reporting in 2001. system that grants political asylum. Stanford Law Review published "Refugee Roulette: Disparities in Asylum Adjudication" in 2007. The example of asylum seekers from the PRC offers striking differences in the percentage of cases approved across regions and jurisdictions, despite national data trends that appeared consistent. A study of 290 asylum officers who decided on asylum cases found "a surprising lack of consistency" among similarly situated asylum cases considered by EOIR from FY1994 to the early months of FY2005. GAO analyzed the disparity in asylum decisions as well and found that "significant variation existed" GAO performed multivariate statistical analyses on asylum cases from 19 immigration courts that handled almost 90% of the cases from October 1994 through April 2007. GAO identified nine factors that affected these outcomes: (1) filed affirmatively (originally with DHS at his/her own initiative) or defensively (with DOJ, if in removal proceedings); (2) applicant's nationality; (3) time period of the asylum decision; and (9) length of experience as an immigration judge. Researchers at Syracuse University's TRAC have been conducting analyses of the immigration courts for several years. They were among the earliest to identify wide variations in asylum outcomes that were dependent on the immigration judge. In the New York immigration court, for example, one judge denied only 6% of the asylum cases. The denial rates of Iraq asylum seekers were the lowest, and their variation was also the lowest at 4%. In contrast, the asylum seeker's country of origin was the highest, with denial rates ranging from 4% to 74%. cases of PRC claimants from January 1, 2000, through August 31, 2004. The immigration court in Atlanta approved 7% of defensive PRC cases; however, the court in Orlando, FL, approved 76% of defense cases. The disparity continued if the applicant lost at the Board of Immigration Appeals and petitioned for review in the U.S. Court of Appeals. From FY2003 to FY2005, the Fourth Circuit did not remand a single case from the PRC (i.e., the court never remanded the case) affirmative, defensive, and "credible fear" claims for each of these source countries from FY1997 through FY2009. PRC asylum cases peaked in FY2002 for both affirmative and defensive claims. The ebbs and flows ofPRC asylum seekers over the 13-year period, however, exhibit different patterns depending on the asylum gateway, as shown in Figure 7. The figure includes time series data on "Credible fear's" claims, which are available only since FY2005. average for defensive claims (8,581) was higher than the average for the affirmative claims. The "credible fear" claims dropped from a high of 1,711 in FY2005 to 602 in FY2008, and then rose to 962 in FY2009. Overall trends of Colombian asylum seekers from FY1997 through FY2009 are up by 48.2% and 53.6% respectively. Mexican affirmative cases evidenced a moderate surge in FY2001 and FY2002, but the overall trend line has declined by 89.8%. average for affirmative claims was 2,351, and for defensive claims it was 3,072. The "credible fear" claims have dipped by 54.6%, from 185 in FY2005 to 84 in FY2009. Affirmative asylum claims from El Salvador have steadily declined by 90.4%, from a high of 4,706 in FY1997 to 453 in FY 2009. Overall, defensive asylum claims are down by 53.2% for Salvadorans, the U.S. government says. Over 120,000 Cubans and about 25,000 Haitians set sail for Florida in 1980. In the 1980s, political violence and civil wars in Central America prompted mass migration of asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. Asylum cases filed with the INS surpassed 100,000 for the first time in 1988. The Tiananmen Square massacre of Chinese protesters in 1989 symbolized events that triggered asylum seeker from China, who contributed, along with conditions in South America. The U.S. government is now home to more than 800,000 asylum seekers. The December 1991 military coup d'etat deposing Haiti's first democratically elected president, Jean Bertrand Aristide, led thousands of Haitians to flee by boat to the United States in FY1992. Asylum claims with the INS peaked at 149,566 in FY1995 ( Figure 1 ). Almost half of the asylum claims were made by Chinese. The following year, 285 Chinese came ashore in New York on the "Golden Venture" and a total of 683Chinese came ashore along the coast of California in the summer of 1993. In FY1995, more than three-fourths of asylum cases filed annually came from the Western Hemisphere. In FY1999, the People's Republic of China (PRC) moved to the top of the source countries for affirmative asylum claims, with 4,209 new cases. Somalia followed as a leading source country with 3,125 cases in FY1999. As the overall number of asylum seekers fell in the late 1990s, the shrinking numbers from Central America contributed to the decline. The PRC remained the leading sourcecountry throughout the 2000s. the top 10 source countries of asylum seekers were Western Hemisphere nations in FY2009. The PRC (18%) was still the leading source country, but El Salvador (17%) sent a comparable number of "credible fear" claimants. Iran, Iraq, Indonesia, and Pakistan were top 20 source countries for those who received asylum from FY2000 through FY2009, as were Indonesia, India, and Burma. Iraq and India were the only ones among these countries (along with Nepal) to be among the top 10 in FY 2009. Overall, defensive asylum claims are down by 53.2% for Salvadorans, despite peaking at 9,955 in FY2007. The number of "credible fear" claims during expedited removal has risen sharply from 73 in FY2005 to 945 in FY2009. Asylum seekers from Ethiopia comprise the smallest number of cases among the six source countries studied. The 13-year average was 972 for affirmative claims and 689 for defensive claims, with only modest variations from year to year. PRC asylum seekers are also benefiting from the provision enabling aliens to claim asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. The U.S. Coast Guard interdiction of Haitians has undoubtedly suppressed the number of asylum seekers from that nation. Although the continent of Africa was not home to many of the asylum seeker from the top source countries discussed above, the African nations of Nigeria and South Africa were among the top sources of asylum cases in FY2009. The portion of approved asylum cases from Haiti was consistent with its portion of asylum seeker in FY 2009.

ROUGE-1: 78.07, ROUGE-2: 70.45, ROUGE-L: 23.99
BERTScore: 62.04

==============================================
==================== [50/100] ====================
Summary:
Rebate amount is based on the PPACA MLR rebate formula, as shown in figure 2. Insurers can choose to provide rebates in the form of a lump-sum payment or as a premium credit for the following MLR year. In general, insurers in the individual market must providing rebates to their enrollees while insurers in group market plans can choose not to pay rebates. A higher MLR standard if specified by law in the state in which the a Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)-approved, adjusted MLRstandard for a particular state’s individual market. Insurers paid about $1.1 billion in total rebates to enrollees and policyholders in 2011. These amounts would each have decreased by about 75 percent had agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions been excluded from the MLR and rebate calculations. All eight insurers that we interviewed reported that they increased their premium rates since 2011 due to a variety of factors, and most (five of the eight) reported that the factors were largely unrelated to PPACA MLR requirements. Two of the insurers we interviewed told us that the PPACAMLR requirements have not affected where they do business. The 2013 PPACA MLR calculation is based on a 3-year period including 2013 and the prior 2 years. One insurer, who paid rebates in 2011, noted that it would not have owed rebates had the MLR formula been based on 3 years of insurers’ experience. In comparison, another insurer told us that it will likely owe rebates for 2013. We provided a draft of this product to HHS for comment. HHS responded that it had no general or technical comments. have fallen from $520 million to about $135 million. There was variation in the impact of the recalculated MLRs across the three markets. In both years, the differences between the actual and recalculated rebate amounts were greater, on a percentage basis, in the small group market compared to the individual market. These rebate calculations are based on the assumption that insurers did not make other changes during this time that would have affected their MLRs. If the formula had been different, insurers might have made different business decisions in those years. address the unreliability associated with calculating an MLR based on a small number of enrollees. All insurers will calculate their MLRs for their experience in 2013 and subsequent years based on data from a 3-year period. insurers will add their data for the year for which the MLR is being calculated to their. Credibility adjustments are provided to increase, the insurer’s MLR.their MLRs. These adjustments are referred to as credibility adjustments, and they are added to, and thus Two of the eight insurers we interviewed stated that they exited certain insurance markets since the PPACA MLR requirements began. None of the insurers reported that the PP ACA MLR requirement has generally influenced their spending on QI activities since 2011. All eight insurers reported other influencing factors, such as customer and employer demand for QI programs, competition among insurers, and the goal of improving enrollees’ health outcomes, which in turn could lower the use and costs of health care services. The 2013 PPACAMLR calculation, which is based on 2013 enrollees, was also cited as a factor. annually on the various components that are used to calculate their PPACA MLRs. Each of these components must be reported by state and by market. Private insurers first reported this information in 2012, based on their 2011 experience. The markets include large group, small group, and individual. Large and small group employers are defined by the number of their employees. Prior to PPACA, a small employer was defined in federal law as having a maximum of 50 employees. From the time PPACA was passed in 2010 until 2016, states have the option of continuing to define a small. The individual market includes policies sold by insurers directly to individuals. Insurers report their MLR data to CMS by entering information on a standardized form. The data that insurers report to CMS include the following components, as required by law. Medical claims. These include claims paid and incurred for clinical services and supplies. Small group employers. States can continue to define a small group employer as having 50 or fewer employees, but starting in 2016, they must define small employers as having from 1 to 100 employees. Insurers’ spending on enrollees’ medical claims and non-claims costs as a percentage of premiums varied across insurance markets in 2011 and 2012. Most insurers met or exceeded the PPACA MLR standards established for the markets and state in which they operated. Group market insurers were more likely to meet or exceed the standards than individual In 2011, about 76 percent of insurers meeting or exceeded market insurers. In 2012, 79 percent of insurer met or exceed standards. The median for the large group market was higher than that of the small group and individual markets. competition with other insurers, the PPACA requirements that insurers offer their plans on a guaranteed-issue basis as well as provide essential health benefits in their plans, and the per- capita fees associated with PPACA’s reinsurance program. Three of the eight insurers reported that the PP ACA MLR requirements were one factor among a variety of factors that influenced their decisions regarding premium rates. Two of these insurers told us that theMLR requirements have generally moderated their premium increases. For example, one insurer that has increased premiums in the individual market since 2011 stated that its increased premiums were due in part to the increased costs that the insurer told us was associated with it. Under the PPACA MLR requirements, private insurers must report annually to CMS their MLRs by each state and insurance market in which they operate. Agents and brokers sell insurers’ plans to individuals and employers. Insurers must pay rebates when their MLR do not meet or exceed the minimum applicable PPACAMLR standards. More than three quarters of insurers met or exceeded the minimum MLR standards in 2011 and in 2012, the median MLR for all insurers was about 88 percent in each year. Claims costs, will be referred to as the insurer’s “premium surplus” in this report. Premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital. Some insurers, such as those with a small number of enrollees, are permitted certain adjustments to their MLRs. These adjustments are known as credibility adjustments, or “credibility adjustments.” The PPACA MLR is generally calculated by dividing (a) the sum of an insurers’ medical claims and expenses for QI activities (the formula numerator) by (b) the insurer's premiums. for 2011 (see table 6) and for 2012 (see tables 7 and 8) This appendix presents information on insurers’ spending as a percent of their net premiums, by state for all markets combined for 2011 and 2012. This appendix gives information on the total amount of PPACA medical loss ratio rebates that insurers paid to enrollees and policyholders who paid premiums, for 2011 (See table 10) and 2012 ( see table 11). This appendix shows the amount of rebates insurers would have paid, compared to the actual amounts they paid. Services and other interested parties. The report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114 or DickenJ@gao,gov. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. This appendix presents information on insurers’ median PPACA medical loss ratios by state and insurance market for 2011 (see table 6) and for 2012. 2011, insurers in the large group market paid 37 percent of this total, or $405 million in rebates. Of the $520 million in total rebates that insurers paid in 2012, insurers paid the largest amount inrebates (about $207 million) We calculated the average rebate amount by dividing the total amount of rebates insurers paid by the total number of individuals (including dependents) enrolled in their plans. (See table 4.) However, these two years of data may not reflect future rebate patterns. market must provide rebates to their enrollees while insurers in the small and large group markets may meet this obligation. In turn, group policyholders are responsible for allocating the amount of rebate that is proportionate to the total amount of premium paid by enrollees. Agents and brokers sell plans for insurers and perform a variety of functions on behalf of individuals and employers. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2012 there were approximately approximately 1.3 million Americans who were insured through a health insurance company. Bureau of Labor Statistics: In 2012 there were approximately 337,000 jobs held by insurance sales agents. Agents and brokers provide assistance to individuals and employers in choosing and enrolling in plans. They may assess an individual’s insurance needs and describe the characteristics of different plans that best meet those needs. They can also provide assistance after an individual or employee has enrolled in a plan, for example, by helping enrollees communicate with health plans in trying to resolve problems with their plans. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Insurers’ spending on non-claims costs as a percent of their net premiums varied by insurance market. Insurers in the individual and small group markets spent more than insurers in the large group market. With regard to premium surplus, our analysis showed that there was also variation across the insurance markets in 2011 and in 2012. An insurer’s premium surplus includes profit and other reserved capital but does not account for any PPACA MLR rebates the insurer may have to pay to enrollees. Three of the six non-claims cost categories generally comprised the largest share of insurers’ spending. There was some variation across the markets in spending on each of these three categories. Insurers in the small group market spent a higher share on agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions than insurers in the individual and large group markets. In 2012 small group insurers spent about 42 percent of their total non- Claims costs on agents' and brokers' fees and commission compared to 23 percent for large group insurers. In 2011 and 2012, the percentage of net premiums that insurers spent on their enrollees’ medical claims varied across insurance markets. In 2012 insurers in the large group market spent about 89 percent of their net premiums on medical claims compared to the 85 percent that individual market insurers spent and the 84 percent that small group market insurers spend. Our analysis of the data showed that in both years, insurers in this market spent a higher percent of the net premiums than those in the small group and individual markets. Non-claims costs include expenses beyond medical claims, expenses for QI activities, and federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. Federal income taxes on investment income and capital gains are excluded. CMS defines non- claims costs for the following categories: agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions, cost containment expenses, office maintenance and supplies costs, not classified as claims adjustment expenses. The costs of these expenses are not related to an activity to improve health care quality, CMS says. supplies costs, not classified as cost containment expenses; (4) salaries and benefits that insurers pay to their employees who sell their plans; (5) other taxes that may not be excluded from premium revenue; (6) other general and administrative expenses, such as salaries and advertising; and (7) community benefit expenditures. The remaining amount of premiums that an insurer does not spend on the components of medical claims, QI activities, taxes and fees, and non- claims costs, will be referred to as the insurer’s “premium” to include expenses for health information technology required to accomplish these activities as well as a percentage of their expenses for converting disease classification codes. Premiums. These include the sum of all funds paid by an enrollee and employer, if applicable, as a condition of receiving coverage from the insurer. These also include any fees or other contributions associated with the health plan. Federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. This includes federal income taxes, assessments, state insurance, premium and other taxes, and regulatory authority licenses and fees. Federal income taxes on investment income and capital gains are include claims paid and incurred for clinical services and supplies provided to enrollees by physicians and other clinical providers. Expenses for quality improvement (QI) activities. These include expenses for activities that are designed to increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes in ways that can be objectively measured. The activities must be primarily designed to (1) improve health outcomes; (2) prevent hospital readmissions; (3) improve patient safety, reduce medical errors, and lower infection and mortality rates; or (4) implement, promote and increase wellness and health activities.

ROUGE-1: 73.57, ROUGE-2: 67.09, ROUGE-L: 27.37
BERTScore: 59.75

==============================================
==================== [51/100] ====================
Summary:
OIOS began implementing a risk management framework in 2001 for prioritizing resources. Out of 25 entities that comprise major elements of its “oversight universe,’ only three risk assessments had been completed. As a result, OIOS officials cannot currently provide reasonable assurance that the entities they choose to examine are those that pose the highest risk. The office says it plan to assign risk areas more consistently to audits proposed and carried out by OI OS officials. The company says it plans to more closely adhere to international auditing standards. OIOS’s annual reports contain references to risks facing OIOS and the UN organization. The reports do not provide an overall assessment of the status of these risks or the consequence to the organization if the risks are not addressed. For instance, in February 2005, the Independent Inquiry Committee reported that many of the Oil for Food program's deficiencies were not described in the annual reports submitted to the General Assembly. A senior OI OS official told us that the office does not have a report to assess risks and controls. the voluntarily financed UN funds and programs. OIOS audited some aspects of the Oil for Food program and identified hundreds of weaknesses and irregularities. It lacked the resources and independence needed to provide full and effective oversight of this large, costly, and complex UN effort. The program was further weakened by inadequate attention to internal controls, including establishing clear responsibility and authority and identifying and addressing program risks. In addition to oversight, an external audit of the program would have been necessary to identify and address program risks, the authors say. services with the manager of the program it intends to examine, and heads of these entities have the right to deny funding for oversight work. By denying OIOS funding, UN entities could avoid audits or investigations, and high-risk areas could potentially be excluded from timely examination. For example, the practice of allowing the heads of programs the right of deny funding to internal audit activities prevented OIos from examining high- risk areas in the UN Oil for Food program. billions of dollars were subsequently found to have been misused. OIOS formally adopted the Institute for Internal Auditors’ (IIA) international standards for the professional practice of internal auditing in 2002. UN financial regulations and rules are very restrictive, severely limiting OIOS’s ability to respond to changing circumstances and to reallocate funds to emerging or high priority areas when they arise. State fully agreed with GAO's findings that UN member states need to ensure that OIos has budgetary independence. However, State does not believe that multiple funding sources have impeded OI OS’S budgetary flexibility. OIOS is now at a critical point, particularly given the initiatives to strengthen UN oversight launched as a result of the World Summit in the fall of 2005. Effective oversight demands reasonable budgetary independence, sufficient resources, and adherence to professional auditing standards. In moving forward, the UN and OIOS will demonstrate their commitment to addressing the monumental management issues facing the United Nations. The U.S. has begun to develop and implement the key components of effective oversight. However, the office has yet to fully implement them. The Department of State stated that it welcomed our report and endorsed its recommendations. We reviewed relevant UN and OIOS reports, manuals, and program documents. We assessed the UN’s control environment for procurement, as well as the reliability of funding and staffing data. To assess internal controls in the UN procurement process, we used an internal control framework that is widely accepted in the international audit community and has been adopted by leading accountability organizations. We determined the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this testimony. The General Assembly mandate creating OIOS calls for it to be operationally independent. In practice, however, OIos’s independence is impaired by constraints that UN funding arrangements impose. GAO recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to support budgetary independence for OI OS. Both the Department of State (State) and OiOS generally agreed with our findings and recommendation.. State fully agreed with GAO’S findings that UN member. OIOS does not have a mechanism in place to determine appropriate staffing levels to help justify budget requests, except for peacekeeping oversight services. For peacekeeping audit services, OIOS has a metric—endorsed by the General Assembly—that provides one professional auditor for every $100 million in the annual peacekeeping budget. The General Assembly would have to determine the appropriate vehicle for such a new reporting requirement, according to OIos officials. OI OS assigned an additional auditor exclusively to the CMP, using funds from its regular budget. OIOS’s authority spans all UN activities under the Secretary-General. OIOS derives its funding from (1) regular budget resources and (2) extrabudgetary resources. While the UN has yet to finalize its CMP procurement strategy, to the extent that it relies on current UN processes, implementation of the planned renovation could be delayed. The U.S. State Department recommends that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to more closely adhere to international auditing standards. OIOS assigned one staff member to begin researching the CMP on a part-time basis. OIOS officials requested funding to hire contractors to help evaluate the C MP, project management plan, and security upgrades. In July 2005, OI OS reported that it had two staff members researching CMP. The General Assembly has not yet decided whether to approve implementation of the Cmp. The U.S. House of Representatives is considering a resolution to require oversight of CMP implementation. The House is expected to vote on the resolution in the coming weeks. UN personnel records show that OIOS staff took a total of more than 400 training courses offered by the Office of Human Resources Management in 2005. Since 2004, OIos has subscribed to IIA’s online training service that offers more than 100 courses applicable to auditors. Although OI OS provides these professional development opportunities, it does not formally require staff training, nor does it systematically track training to provide reasonable assurance that all staff are maintaining and acquiring professional skills. OiOS policy manuals list no minimum training requirement. OIOS is dependent on UN funds and programs and other UN entities for resources, access, and reimbursement for the services it provides. OIOS negotiates the terms of work and payment for services with the manager of the program it intends to work with. 69 percent) is funded with extrabudgetary resources, which increased due to audits and investigations of peacekeeping operations, including issues related to sexual exploitation and abuse. For example, one section in the Internal Audit Division may have exhausted its regular budget travel funds, while another section may have travel funds available that are financed by peacekeeping resources. OIOS would breach UN financial regulations and rules if it moved resources between the two budgets. Since 1996, an increasing share of OIOSís total budget is comprised of extrabudgetary resources. The majority of staff (about 69 percent) is funded with extrab budgetary resources, which increased due to the rise of the U.N. peacekeeping force. OI OS would breach U.S. financial regulations if it moves resources between U.K. and UN budgets. have been misused. Some fund and program managers have disputed fees charged by OIOS for investigative services rendered. Since 2001, less than half of the entities have paid OIos in full for investigative service it has provided. According to OI OS officials, the office has no authority to enforce payment for services rendered, and there is no appeal process, no supporting administrative structure, and no adverse impact on an agency that does not pay or pays only OI SOS. For example, 40 percent of the $2 million billed by OiOS after it completed its work is currently in dispute. The United States financed construction of the original complex by providing the UN with a no-interest loan. The rest of the complex was built between 1960 and 1982 and funded through the UN’s regular budget or private donations. In December 2002, the General Assembly endorsed the CMP to renovate the UN headquarters complex. The General Assembly approved funds for the renovation in December 2002 and the project was approved by the UN General Assembly in December 2003. The renovation is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. CMP to renovate the UN headquarters complex and approved funds to further develop the conceptual designs and cost estimate. In May 2003, we reported that the resulting renovation planning was reasonable, but that additional management controls and oversight were needed. In April 2006, the UN appropriated $23.5 million to finance the renovation’s preconstruction phase. The General Assembly has not yet decided whether to approve implementation of the renovation. However, it has committed $77 million to the construction of temporary conference space and supplementary office space rental. The UN headquarters buildings in New York City are in need of renovation. Over the last 50 years there have been no major renovations or upgrades to the buildings or their systems. In September 2005, the headquarters complex was shut down and the staff sent home because a fire broke out in one of the buildings. The UN headquarters complex lacks fire sprinklers, has a deteriorating window structure, and is vulnerable to catastrophic electrical failures. The buildings do not meet current safety, fire and building codes and does not meet UN technology or security requirements. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. Maria Edelstein, Assistant Directors; Joy Labez, Pierre Toureille, Valérie L. Nowak, Jeffrey Baldwin-Bott, Michaela Brown, Joseph Carney, Debbie J. Chung. At present, the UN Procurement Service directs its vendors to file protests to the chief and then to his or her immediate supervisor. If handled through an independent process, vendor complaints could alert senior UN officials and UN auditors to the failure of UN procurement staff to comply with stated procedures. While UN procurement has increased sharply in recent years, the size of the UN‘s Headquarters Committee on Contracts and its support staff has remained relatively stable. The committee’s chairman and members told us that the committee does not have the resources to keep up with its expanding workload. relies on current UN processes, implementation of the planned renovation is vulnerable to the procurement weaknesses that we have identified. We have identified problems affecting the UN’s bid protest process, headquarters contract review committee, vender rosters, procurement workforce, ethics guidance for procurement personnel, and procurement manual. In our April 2006 report on UN procurement, we recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to encourage the UN to establish an independent bid protest mechanism. The UN has not established an independent process to consider vendor protests. Such a process would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. It would also help alert senior UN management to situations involving questions about UN compliance. The General Assembly endorsed the principle of independent bid protests in 1994 when it recommended for adoption by member states a model procurement law drafted by the UN Commission on International Trade Law. The UN’s lack of an independent bid protest process limits the transparency of its procurement process by not providing a means for a vendor to protest. The number of contracts reviewed by the committee has increased by almost 60 percent since 2003. The committee is charged with evaluating proposed contracts worth more than $200,000 and advising the Department of Management as to whether the contracts are in accordance with UN Financial Regulations and Rules and other UN policies. However, concerns regarding the committee’s structure have been raised by some members of the UN Security Council, who say the committee does not have the resources to keep up with its expanding workload. It is unclear whether the committee will be able to meet its goals by the end of the year. UN auditors conclude that the committee cannot properly review contract proposals. It may thus recommend contracts for approval that are inappropriate. Earlier this year, OIOS reiterated its 2001 recommendation that the UN reduce the committee’s caseload and restructure the committee “to allow competent review of the cases” The UN does not consistently implement its process for helping to ensure that it is conducting business with qualified vendors. As a result, the UN may be vulnerable to favoring certain vendors. An effective procurement process is one of the keys to success for any large scale construction project. The UN procurement process has been under increasing stress in recent years as procurement spending has more than tripled to keep pace with a rapidly growing peacekeeping program. Long-standing weaknesses in the UN’s procurement office have left UN procurement funds highly vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. If implemented, the CMP will be a large and unique endeavor for the UN. Effective internal oversight practices will demonstrate their commitment to addressing the monumental management and oversight tasks that lie ahead. developing UN procurement policies. Because the UN is a multilateral institution, our oversight authority does not directly extend to the UN. In recognition of this factor, we conduct UN-related work only in response to specific requests from committees with jurisdiction over UN matters. Many of our ongoing or recently completed requests are both bicameral and bipartisan in nature. The UN is vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement due to a range of weaknesses in existing oversight, the report says. large and unique endeavor for the UN. Effective internal oversight and management of the procurement process will be necessary for the successful completion of the project. Recent UN scandals, particularly in the Oil for Food program, demonstrate the need for significant reforms in these areas. OIOS has a mandate establishing it as an independent oversight entity and to conduct oversight of the CMP. But the office does not have the budgetary independence it requires to carry out its responsibilities effectively. In addition, OI OS’s shortcomings in meeting key objectives could impact implementation of the program. to fraud, waste, and abuse. Many of these weaknesses have been identified and documented by outside experts and the UN’s own auditors for more than a decade. Sustained leadership at the UN will be needed to correct these weaknesses and establish a procurement system capable of fully supporting the UN's expanding needs. This concludes my testimony. I would be pleased to take your questions. Should you have any questions about this testimony, please contact me at (202) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov. The UN may be vulnerable to favoring certain vendors or dealing with unqualified vendors. The UN has not demonstrated a commitment to improving its professional procurement staff. Due to significant control weaknesses in the UN’s procurement process, the UN has relied disproportionately on the actions of a small number of vendors. It is not clear if the UN will ever be able to recruit and retain a qualified professional workforce. It has not shown acommitment to improving the training of its procurement staff through training, establishment of a career development path, and other key human capital practices. procurement process, the UN has relied disproportionately on the actions of its staff to safeguard its resources. Recent studies indicate that Procurement Service staff lack knowledge of UN procurement policies. Most procurement staff lack professional certifications attesting to their procurement education, training, and experience. The UN has not established requirements for procurement staff to obtain continuous training, resulting in inconsistent levels of training across the procurement workforce. UN officials acknowledged that theUN has not committed sufficient resources to a comprehensive training and certification program for its procurement staff. The UN has been considering the development of specific ethics guidance for procurement officers for almost a decade. Such guidance would include a declaration of ethics responsibilities for procurement staff and a code of conduct for vendors. In addition, the UN has not established a career path for professional advancement forprocurement staff. Doing so could encourage staff to undertake progressive training and work experiences. The UN has yet to include such guidance in its Procurement Service guidelines for procurement. Staff are currently being trained to be procurement officers. The UN has not updated its procurement manual since January 2004 to reflect current UN procurement policy. As a result, procurement staff may not be aware of changes to procurement procedures that the UN has adopted over the past 2 years. In June 2005, a UN consultant recommended that theUN develop separate guidelines in the manual for the planning and execution of construction projects. These guidelines could be useful in planning and executing CMP procurement. The UN has yet to include guidance for construction procurement into its procurement Manual.

ROUGE-1: 74.09, ROUGE-2: 66.27, ROUGE-L: 30.29
BERTScore: 58.57

==============================================
==================== [52/100] ====================
Summary:
Each is planned to be within an area 3,500 nautical miles from the United States and from the war zones. This distance is based on the maximum efficient range of the C-17 cargo aircraft without refueling. Operation of the ERS airfields is shared between the host nation, which owns the airfield, and a number of DOD organizations. Host nation responsibilities vary and are documented in the Status of Forces Agreement for each country. U.S. organizations with responsibility for the airfields include the Air Force, who provides day-to-day operations. The U.S. Transportation, Air Mobility, European, Central, and Pacific Commands have various functional or geographical responsibilities. The airfields are normally staffed for the peacetime flow of aircraft. Additional personnel and equipment would be brought in to handle the increased flow of Aircraft in the event of contingency operations. Many air fields are primarily for U.N. cargo and refueling operations. U.K. fighter aircraft are generally located at separate bases because of the specialized equipment needed to fly them. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates the airfield in Rota, Spain; and the Marines operate the air field in Iwakuni, Japan. The airfields are located on bases owned by the host country, under agreements for support negotiated by the State Department. Each military service must operate theAirfield in accordance with its primary service mission. However, each service must also manage the Airfield in according with the policies set forth by the geographical command. These commands are responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests in their particular ERS-related areas. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates for ERS needs. The ERS purpose is to act as a conduit for aircraft headed to war zones in the Middle East. While the unified commands have some management responsibilities for the airfields, they have no funding programs for base operations and construction. The military services and the Defense Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. In Europe, both the European and Central commands may act as advocates for the E RS airfields. The ability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous major theater wars is the cornerstone of U.S. defense strategy. For planning purposes, the military assumes that the two most likely places where these wars would take place are Korea and Southwest Asia. Mobilization of U.,S. forces for such conflicts requires a global system of integrated land, sea, and air resources, and supplies already stored overseas. The fleet of civilian and military passenger and cargo aircraft and the En Route System (ERS) airfields provide the critical air component. The ERS provides the primary “throughput” services for aircraft as they move from U.S. bases through ERS airfields and on to their eventual destinations. The ERS also provides the capabilities needed to handle ongoing peacetime operations and requirements associated with smaller-scale contingency operations. For example, the base must have the ramp space to park the aircraft and perform required maintenance, the equipment to load and unload cargo if needed, and the equipment needed to quickly refuel the aircraft. operations and requirements associated with smaller-scale contingency operations. ERS bases were used extensively during recent operations in Kosovo. As shown in figure 1, the 13 ERS airfields are located mostly in Europe and throughout the Pacific. Each is planned to be within an area of 3,500 square miles, with a total of 13 bases in the U.S., Europe, and the Asia-Pacific region. The bases are selected according to their proximity to the anticipated war zones, the host nation's willingness to allow the use of its bases, and other factors such as climate. The growth in importance of the En Route System has not been matched by a commensurate improvement in its information and management structures. Establishing the European and Pacific steering committees was an important first step in organizing regional operations, but does not go far enough. While these committees perform an important function, officials said that no organization is responsible for formally coordinating and overseeing overall ERS operations. Without such structure, one overarching organization with responsibility for strategic operations and coordination of overall E RS operations during peacetime is needed. The ERS is fragmented among at least four unified commands and six subcommands, three services, host nations, and other organizations. No single organization has overall responsibility for the ERS. Because of the absence of centralized responsibility, the European and Pacific Commands established separate steering committees (see app. I for more details on the various responsibilities of these organizations) The U.S. Central Command is responsible for the U.K.’s military operations in Europe and the Middle East. has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System. It is not in charge of the ERS airfields and can provide only limited funding for repair and improvement projects. The needs of the geographical commands (such as the European, Central, and Pacific commands) take precedence over those of the functional commands. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization may also use the bases to assist in carrying out its strategic operations. Conflicts can and do occur. For example, in the late 1980s, the European Command had planned to return. responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests in their particular region. They include component commands drawn from each of the military services to manage the support associated with each. These commands may act as an advocate for ERS needs consistent with their contribution to the commands’ For example, US Navy Europe and US Air Forces Europe provide support for their naval and air bases in the region. The US Navy’s Pacific Fleet, Marine Forces Pacific, and Pacific Air Forces provide similar support in the Pacific. Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. For example, the Air Force provides funds for the operation of its ERS airfield in Fairford, England. If the base command needs funds for a construction project, it requests them from its parent command in the region. The Defense Logistics Agency has responsibility for funding fuels projects across all services. In deciding whether to include a project in funding requests, the services and the Defense Logistic Agency assign their own priorities to the project. are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the Honorable Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defense. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (757) 552-8100 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. According to Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials, all of the organizations with responsibility for the En Route System play some combination of three basic roles: owner/manager, funder, and/or advocate. The Transportation Command plans and coordinates movements through the overall transportation system. The Air Mobility Command uses the ERS airfields to help provide aerial refueling and airlift through its fleet of air tankers and cargo airplanes. Both commands may act as advocates for the resource needs of the E RS. The Transportation Command has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System, with the airlift portion handled by its air component, the Air Force Air mobility Command. The ERS is a joint operation of the Air force and the U.S. Air Force. funding. Only recently has the ERS begun to receive high priority for funding. In 1997 the Air Mobility Command proclaimed 1997 the “Year of the En Route System” and funding began to increase. However, the Air Transportation Command still struggles to fund the system. The ERS was established in the early 1950s to provide air transport for the U.S. military. It has since been expanded to include a number of other air transport systems, including the Air National Guard and the Army Corps of Engineers. whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. U.S.-funded ERS projects in Europe must compete for funding against Pacific projects and others within DOD. DOD infrastructure is grossly under funded, with facilities currently funded for replacement every 250 years. (See p. 18 for a discussion of DOD problems in infrastructure management.) For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, contact the Samaritans on 08457 909090. The proposed projects are intended largely to replace capability lost due to deterioration or base closures, not to increase overall capacity. Only 25 of the 516 projects provide additional capacity. The remaining projects either upgrade existing capacity to current environmental, safety, or operational standards or replace/repair equipment due to obsolescence or failure. DOD plans call for about 55 percent of the $2 billion in ERS construction funding to come from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ($132.6 million) and host nations such as Canada. is voluntary, and there are no written agreements associated with the ERS projects. The remaining 45 percent ($878 million) is expected to come from a variety of U.S. programs. The largest contributors are the Defense Logistics Agency and the Air Force Operation and Maintenance and Military Construction programs. It is unclear whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. The level of funding has been declining somewhat since the early 1990s, and is constrained by prohibitions such as using the funds for projects viewed by the government of Japan as increasing war-fighting capacity. Most of the costs (86 percent) are associated with projects that had not yet started construction as of October 2000. Host nations and U.S. allies are expected to fund about 55 percent of the total. It is unclear whether all the projects will be completed as planned, as the projects must compete with each other and with other DOD projects for funding and face other uncertainties. Since the end of the Cold War, many U.N. military locations overseas have been closed. The United States is expected to funding the rest. of a 2- to 3-year delay in host government approval of funding requirements. According to officials, the host government was concerned about sovereignty issues involved in its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Formal approval has now been received for these projects, and funding has been shifted by about 1 year. Most of the projects have not yet started construction. As of October 2000, about 4 percent ($75.0 million) of total funding had been spent on completed projects with another 10 percent ($194.6 million) spent on projects in progress. The remaining 86 percent ($1.7 billion) of funding was associated with projects in various stages of planning, programming of funds, and engineering design. Funding for such projects is subject to future budgetary constraints and uncertainties. Projects funded by U.S. programs have progressed somewhat faster than those funded by host nations and allies. According to Transportation Command officials only recently has the project been funded by the United States. The funding for the project is expected to run out in 2006, Transportation Command says. North Atlantic Treaty Organization ($132.6 million) and host nations such as Germany ($430.8 million) Japan ($523.9 million) According to officials from the U.S. Transportation, European, and Pacific Commands, funding commitments from the NATO and Germany are contained in formal agreements. Japanese funding is provided under the Japanese Facilities Improvement Program. Japan has provided some $21 billion for projects under this program, which started in 1979 to ease the financial burden of stationing U.N. forces in Japan. A formal, written strategic plan that lays out missions and goals, guiding principles and priorities, performance measures, and monitoring mechanisms is also needed. Without such structure ERS operations are prone to a higher risk of inefficiency in the form of confusing and overlapping lines of authority and accountability for key decisions. Without the vision and order provided by a formal strategic plan, decisionmakers do not have the information they need to ensure that ERS resources and operations are focused on the right goals and outcomes. Without a system for ongoing monitoring of key aspects of E RS operations, decisionmaker do not. have the real time, readily available information needed to quickly identify and correct problems. performance, and assigned responsibilities is crucial to achieving program success. According to officials from the Office of the Secretary of Defense, some strategic guidance for the ERS is expressed through the DOD budget process. DOD indicated in its written comments that it generally even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated overall management structure. Our recommendation is intended to assign responsibility for overarching issues to one organization to help provide a clear, coordinated, and comprehensive management structure for all ERS operations. It should be noted that during our review this recommendation received strong support from officials at organizations currently involved in E RS operations. We agree that some elements of ERS operations are individually managed by various organizations and processes. Some elements, such as base level operations, fuels projects and readiness reporting, may be managed quite intensively. However, “robust” management in one or even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated ERS. We remain convinced that the ERS needs a better management structure. But we agreed to consider whether one organization should be designated as responsible for some matters. We in fact describe examples of many of these Organizations and processes and their responsibilities for parts of E RS operations in our report. The Congress may wish to consider directing the Secretary of Defense to implement the recommendations. DOD generally disagreed with our conclusions and recommendations. We believe that the lack of a strategy or system for monitoring progress and overall costs is symptomatic of the weaknesses in DOD’s management of the ERS. DOD stated that our report asserted that the approach it used is “flawed” and overestimates the shortfalls. DOD further stated that any modeling provides only an approximation of real-world systems and that no analysis can provide solutions. its proposed projects represent the best solutions. Despite concerns about aging and deteriorating facilities and equipment, the ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide data on deterioration and failure rates. It has no formal strategic plan to identify long-term plans and strategies, guiding policies, and operating priorities. No single organization is responsible for managing and funding the E RS. These weaknesses raise questions about system plans and operations, and unnecessarily increase the risk of operational problems and inefficiencies. DOD does not include information on ERS shortfalls in its reports on the performance of the overall ERS. growth in costs of eliminating the shortfall in system capacity, or our description of the modeling approach used to analyze ERS capacity. DOD believes that the existing organization, in particular its ERS steering committees, readiness reporting processes, planning and budgeting system, and reviews of strategic mobility already provide a “robust” management structure for the ERS. DOD partially agreed with our recommendation to make one organization responsible for overarching strategic issues. It believes that base-level management of ERS airfields is best performed by the responsible services. justified in the military construction budgeting process. Transportation Command officials also told us that they could not provide data on deterioration and failure rates. The ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide readily available, up-to-date data on the condition and readiness of the airfields. Sound strategic planning that clearly lays out missions and goals, needed resources, priorities, strategies, measures of performance, and assigned responsibilities is crucial to achieving program success, the report says. The report says the ERS could not identify any worthwhile measures that it could accurately produce without an extended research effort. to correct them, we reviewed the processes DOD used to identify deficiencies and corrective actions. We obtained lists of construction projects at each ERS airfield and analyzed them from a number of different perspectives. The total costs by base, by region, and systemwide; the cost of each project; and the total cost of the entire ERS system. We reviewed deficiencies, corrective actions identified in DOD Joint Monthly Readiness Review Reports, Air Mobility Command reports, and other documents produced by the European and Pacific Steering committees and the Inspector General. strategic plan and monitoring system. It stated that the recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005 already includes a strategic plan for the ERS. DOD said it would nevertheless try to improve the integration, presentation, and documentation of the plan to help outside organizations understand its provisions. We disagree. The document cited by DOD in the January 2001 Mobility Requirements. Study 2005 is identified as the E RS “Infrastructure Analysis,” not as a. strategic plan. It is simply an analysis of current shortfalls in capacity and. whether planned construction projects will remedy those shortfalls by 2005. DOD reports annually on its performance in managing strategic mobility capabilities. It does not include data on ERS shortfalls in the report, despite the major effect such shortfalls have on airlift capacity. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up the funding needed to ensure that critical assets such as the ERS airfields are adequately funded. The ERS is an integral aspect of strategic mobility. Omitting ERS information from the key annual report would be a mistake, we say. review of ERS construction plans and projects in light of the ongoing review of the National Military Strategy. DOD needs to ensure that ERS problems and issues receive a visibility consistent with their critical strategic importance. Omitting data on ERS limitations from DOD’s plan and reports on strategic mobility presents an incomplete picture of DOD capability. Efforts to reduce shortages of DOD cargo aircraft will have limited impact if those aircraft do not have adequate airfields to land on. to improve the visibility of the ERS. often results only in inferences as to why decisions were made. DOD’s annual requests for funds contain no evidence that projects are prioritized by importance or that progress toward an established goal, such as modernizing the ERS, is being made in an efficient and timely fashion. DOD disagreed with our recommendation to include information on ERS limitations in its annual performance plan and report along with the other elements of strategic mobility: airlift, sealift, and airlift/sealift. on schedule. The analysis does not include many of the elements needed for sound strategic plans, which need to lay out missions and goals, necessary resources, assigned responsibilities for accomplishing goals, priorities and strategies to be followed, and performance measures for gauging progress toward identified goals. In addition, the analysisdoes not identify the expected cost to remedy the capacity shortfalls, or the organizational or procedural responsibilities for achieving ERS goals. Similarly, it does not identify priorities between regions, bases, or projects to help identify strategies in case of funding or other problems. in case of funding or other problems. The analysis also does not identify any system of performance measures and monitoring mechanisms to help decisionmakers gauge progress and problems. For example, it simply assumes that projects will be completed on schedule without any measures of actual progress. In fact, during our review Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials could not tell us how many projects were behind their original schedule because there is no centralized monitoring system. The Department also disagreed with our recommendation for an overall cost-benefit study to document the rationales for plans. DOD needs to develop an overall cost-benefit study of its construction plans for the ERS. DOD believes the guidance it provides through the planning and budgeting process is sufficient to optimize the list of construction projects to be funded. We disagree. We understand that developing a formal cost- benefit analysis of the overall ERS infrastructure is difficult. But relying exclusively on the budget process to document funding rationales often results only in inferences as to why decisions were made.not be delayed. This study would also serve as a useful review of ERS construction plans and projects. the En Route System” and funding began to increase. Officials told us that it still takes many years to move projects through the budget process, obtain funding, and begin construction. Despite the strategic importance of the ERS, critical information on ERS plans and operations is not available, and the system is not managed as a coherent whole. Despite increased cost estimates and other uncertainties surrounding ERS construction projects, DOD has not developed overall cost-benefit studies or other prudent assurances to demonstrate either the rationale for its decisions or the planned $2 billion in projects. to difficulties in assessing performance in a variety of areas. As a result, we have classified DOD strategic planning as a major management challenge. DOD has reduced force structure since the end of the Cold War, but it has not achieved similar reductions in infrastructure costs. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up money for other priorities. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. It is published by arrangement with the Institute for Defense Studies and the RAND Corporation. conducted our review from July 2000 through April 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to those named above, Katherine Chenault, Lawrence E. Dixon, Richard G. Payne, Stefano Petrucci, and Gregory J. Symons, made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The model DOD uses to simulate ERS operations could overestimate the size of the shortfall. Air Mobility Command officials acknowledge that the Airlift Flow Model does not necessarily identify the best or optimal solution to mobilization requirements. The model repeatedly simulates cargo movements until it reaches a solution to the identified mission, but the solution may or may not be the optimal one. There are other types of models, called optimization models, that officials part, Air mobility Command officials say. The net effect on estimates of ERS capacity in 2005 is unclear. ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005. Air Mobility Command officials responsible for operating the Airlift say models are inflexible and slow. Officials further state that loading data into optimization models can be very labor intensive, making the models relatively inflexable and slow, and that it is difficult to introduce variables into analyses because optimization models attempt to analyze all possible permutations. They believe that models can come to unrealistic conclusions because they cannot simulate random events and may use information that may not be available to commanders early in the mobilization. Airlift Flow Model would schedule an aircraft to pick up the 10-ton cargo immediately since it is focused on current conditions. An optimization model would likely wait a few hours until an aircraft was loaded with all 50 tons before sending it off. In 1997 DOD sponsored an ERS capacity analysis that compared the results of an optimization model with those of the Airlift Flow model. The optimization analysis agreed with the basic AirliftFlow Model conclusion that there would be a capacity shortfall. However, the analysis also concluded that a better distribution of ERS resources could significantly increase the flow of cargo.  optimization models are designed to seek the best or optimal solutions to mission requirements. For example, in analyzing the movement of cargo aircraft through the ERS the Airlift Flow Model would only be aware of what cargo is available for pickup at the moment. An optimization model would be aware. of all cargo available forpick throughout the mission being modeled. As a result, in a situation where 10 tons of cargo are being transported, an optimization model can identify the best allocation of cargo to aircraft, aircraft to routes, and ground resources to airfields. The $2 billion will fund repairs and improvements to fuel systems, runways, ramp space, and other base elements. Transportation Command officials told us that most ERS airfields were built during or immediately after World War II. According to Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials, the standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were built in the 1940s and 1950s. The largest construction cost category is associated with fuel system repair and improvement. The cost of the project is estimated to be between $1 billion and $3 billion. An overall cost-benefit analysis was not done, officials said. Officials stated that they attempted to make cost-effective decisions. Because of the age of the facilities, many of the planned projects had already been identified and justified in the military construction budgeting process, they said. The ERS evolved over many years in response to changing military and political conditions and to hundreds of mobility and engineering analyses of capacity trade-offs under different combinations of bases, they added. The U.S. military says it is trying to minimize costs where possible. by an estimated 12 to 13 percent. A second DOD- sponsored study used an optimization model to analyze the impact of proposed construction projects designed to increase the fuel handling capacity at ERS bases. The study concluded that the increase in throughput capacity provided by the projects would be small and that using existing resources more effectively may be the best way to increase fuel deliveries. Although DOD officials believe that optimization models have promise, they also believe that they have drawbacks and did not use them to analyzed the ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005. The standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were designed and built during the early 1950s and had an estimated life span of 30 to 40 years. At some bases refueling must be carried out by trucks, rather than by more modern pipeline and hydrant systems. At other bases, hydrants are antiquated or have deteriorating lines that slow and sometimes interrupt fueling operations altogether. Bases in the Pacific are the worst off. As shown in figure 6, repairs and improvements at bases in thePacific region total about $1.14 billion. in deployment operations. Omitting ERS information from the key annual performance report gives an incomplete and misleading view of strategic mobility capabilities. DOD also disagreed with our description of the growth in estimated costs for improving the ERS. DOD stated that the different cost estimates we were provided are not directly comparable because they were produced several years apart and were premised on different sets of bases and analytical methodologies. Our report clearly lays out these differences. DOD further claimed that we were using the comparison to point to “unexplained” cost growth. “unexplained” cost growth. Whether DOD was aware of the reasons behind the increased estimate was not the primary point we were trying to make. Our primary point is that DOD did not know how much it would cost to bring ERS capacity up to requirements because it does not monitor overall costs. Air Mobility Command officials had to make a special query to all the commands to find out what the current costs were and whether they had changed over previous estimates. Similarly, when we requested an updated estimate late in our review, officials responded that obtaining such an update was not possible. in 2005 is unclear. Most (58 percent) of the costs are associated with bases in the Pacific region. Host nations told us that the cost to eliminate the shortfall in ERS capacity was about $1.2 billion for fiscal years 1997 through 2006. However, shortly after that the estimate was changed to $2.0 billion. According to Transportation Command officials, no one is responsible for monitoring the overall cost of eliminating the shortfall. The U.S. overseas presence has shrunk since the end of the Cold War. covered what at the time were about 35 ERS bases, with sometimes only half a day spent at each base. Air Mobility Command agreed to query all of the various commands involved in the ERS to determine the current cost to eliminate the shortfall. The estimated cost had grown to about $2 billion. According to officials, the increase reflects changes in the bases making up the E RS since the mid-1990s, increases in the costs of repairing/improving system components due to aging, and a more in-depth and accurate analysis. Cold War, many U.S. military locations overseas have been closed and their personnel relocated to bases in the continental United States. Transportation Command officials state that with this drawdown in the 1990s, the ERS lost many of its facilities and much of its flexibility. Today, ERS has access to only 13 locations, compared with 45 in the early 1990s. As a result, the remaining bases have become much more important as the only airfield options available for en- route mobilization support. systems and that no analysis can provide solutions that are 100-percent accurate. DOD believes that it has applied the best tools available and that it will continue to refine its capabilities, as new modeling tools become available. Our report does not attempt to measure the precise effect of these factors on DOD’s estimate. We state that the assumptions and modeling approaches DOD used could underestimate or overestimate the size of the shortfall, but that we could not measure the exact effect on DOD's estimate. these factors on DOD’s estimate. Our report does not attempt to endorse one modeling approach over the other. It is important to fully consider all options in such analyses to ensure that, should an optimal solution be available, it is identified. DOD also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional members for their consideration. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/science-and-defense/features/features-features-solar-panoramic-panorama. In the event of overlapping major theater wars in Korea and Southwest Asia, the 13 ERS airfields would not currently have enough capacity to move the required amounts of personnel and equipment to the war zones. DOD expects the shortfall to be largely eliminated by 2005. But the assumptions and modeling approach DOD uses in its calculations raise some uncertainty about the precise size of the shortfall. The study concluded that current capacity is significantly short of requirements but that improvements to the ERS would largely eliminate the shortfall by 2005, DOD says. Some assumptions tend to underestimate the size of the shortfall. DOD assumes that ERS airfields would operate without breaking down. Because the construction projects are expected to run through 2006, the capacity of several airfields will still be short of requirements at the end of 2005. The study at least partially offsets these assumptions. It says that the U.S. needs to increase the number of ERS bases to meet demand in the event of a conflict in Iraq or Afghanistan. It also says that this needs to be done at a faster rate than previously thought. The capacity requirements of the ERS are defined in the recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005. Some study assumptions tend to underestimate the shortfall, while the modeling approach used could overestimate it. Capacity requirements could be raised even higher if other ongoing missions (such as peacekeeping) were added, further increasing the shortfall. The net effect of these factors on estimates of ERS capacity in 2005 is unclear. The study at least partially offsets these assumptions by calculating the capacity of E RS bases in Europe on the assumption that DOD would lose access to one of six bases during mobilization.  requirements could raise airlift capacity requirements by about 7 percent. The ability of the ERS to handle this extra requirement is unclear, the study says. Officials were unsure when this issue would be tackled, the authors say. The authors did not independently verify DOD’s estimate of system capacity. They reviewed the processes DOD used to determine whether extra capacity was available. They say the assumptions tend to underestimate the officials at the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the RAND Corporation and others.

ROUGE-1: 82.58, ROUGE-2: 74.49, ROUGE-L: 31.00
BERTScore: 72.41

==============================================
==================== [53/100] ====================
Summary:
 HUD’s Assisted Living Conversion Program provides private nonprofit owners of eligible properties with grants to convert some or all of their units into assisted living facilities for the frail elderly. The facilities must provide supportive services such as personal care, transportation, meals, housekeeping, and laundry. The reconfigured facilities must include enough community space to accommodate a central kitchen or dining area, lounges, and recreation and other multiple-use areas.in the community where new construction is proposed. HUD's Section 232 Mortgage Insurance Program provides mortgage insurance for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of nursing homes. All insured facilities must provide supportive services, but these services vary according to the type of facility. USDA’s Section 515 Program, USDA Section 515 Program - Rehabilitation of Nursing Homes, Intermediate care facilities, Board and care homes. All insured facilities must provide supportive services, including room, board, and continuous protective observation of the elderly. USDA Section 515 program - Assisted living facilities, nursing homes, intermediate care facilities. according to the type of facility. USDA’s Section 515 Program, which provides loans to construct or to purchase and substantially rehabilitate multifamily rental or cooperative housing and recreational facilities in rural communities. Tenants eligible to live in program properties may also receive rental assistance through HUD or USDA programs. The Congregate Housing subprogram funds the development of assisted, group living environments that must provide meals, transportation, housekeeping, personal services and recreational and social activities. Generally, HUD and USDA do not provide funding for the services required under these housing programs. The Congregate Housing Services Program provides grants for the delivery of meals and nonmedical supportive services to elderly and disabled residents of public and multifamily housing. While HUD provides up to 40 percent of the cost of supportive services, grantees must pay at least 50 percent. Like the Elderly/Disabled Services Coordinator Program under ROSS, the Congregate housing services program has provided no new grants since 1995. Congress has not passed a bill since 1995 that would provide funding specifically for services for the elderly. The Section 515 program’s Congregate Housing subprogram requires properties to provide supportive services. Before fiscal year 1992, the Section 202 program also supported the development of housing for the disabled. The Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market Interest Rate (inactive) Section 236 Mortgage Insurance and Interest Reduction Payments (in active) The Section 207/223(f) Mortgage Insurance for Existing Multifamily Properties is inactive. The section 213 mortgage insurance for Cooperatives is also inactive, as is the Section 236 mortgage insurance and interest reduction payments. Property owners may establish relationships that give the elderly access to meals, transportation, and housekeeping and personal care services. GAO did not obtain data on the extent to which such services are made available at all public and federally subsidized multifamily housing. In Greensboro, North Carolina, Dolan Manor has established a relationship with a volunteer group from a local church. The volunteer group provides a variety of services such as transportation for transportation for the elderly, the GAO says. The GAO does not have the data to determine the extent of such partnerships. questions at this time. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Emily Chalmers, Natasha Ewing, Alison Martin, John McGrail, Marc Molino, Lisa Moore, John Mingus, Paul Schmidt, and Julianne Stephens. For further information on this testimony, please contact David G. Wood at (202) 512-8678. Section 502 Rural Housing Loans (Direct) Section 502 Direct Housing Natural Disaster Loans Section 502 Guaranteed Rural Housing loans Section 504 Rural Housing Repair and Rehabilitation Loans Section 515 Rural Rental Housing Loans. In Plain City, Ohio, residents of a Section 515 property receive meals five times a week in the community's senior center. A local hospital donates the food and a nursing home facility prepares it. The senior center uses the funds collected from the lunch for its activities. The United Way provides most of the funding for the senior center in Plain City. In In Plain City,. Ohio, the. group provides a variety of services such as transportation for the residents. The.group provides a. variety ofServices such as transport for theResidents. provides most of the funding for the senior center. Some elderly residents of public and federally subsidized housing may also obtain health-related services through programs run by HHS. For example, HHS’s Public Housing Primary Care Program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health care through clinics that are located either within public housing or within the public housing system. In Guthrie, Oklahoma, Guthrie Properties—also a Section 515 property— has established a relationship with the local Area Agency on Aging. The agency assists residents in obtaining a variety of services. The Elderly/Disabled Service Coordinator Program has not provided new grants since 1995. The Program provides funding for managers of multifamily properties designated for the elderly and disabled to hire coordinators. Service coordinators can be funded through competitive grant funds, residual receipts (excess income from a property), or rent increases. According to HUD’s fiscal year 2003 Performance and Accountability Report, service coordinators were serving more than 111,000 units in elderly properties.. Elderly residents of public and federally subsidized multifamily housing can also receive supportive services through partnerships. state and local governments, educational institutions, private foundations, and corporations. The ROSS grant program links public housing residents with appropriate services. This program differs from the Service Coordinator Program in that it is designed specifically for public housing Residents. The program has five funding categories, including the Resident Service Delivery Models for the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities (Resident Services) The Elderly/Disabled Service Coordinator program is designed for public Housing Residents. It can be used to hire a project coordinator and assess residents’ needs for supportive services. The program awards grants to public and nonprofit private entities to establish the clinics. The organizations must work with public housing authorities to obtain the physical space for the clinics and to establish relationships with residents. Currently, there are 35 grantees, 3 of which are in rural areas. According to a program administrator, although clinics are not specifically geared toward public housing designated for the elderly, they can be established at such properties. Elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the program's assistance. The Neighborhood Networks program encourages property owners, managers, and residents of HUD-insured and -assisted housing to develop computer centers. Although computer accessibility is not a traditional supportive service for the elderly, a senior HUD official noted that having computers available enhances elderly residents’ quality of life. HUD does not fund each center’s planned costs but encourages owners to seek cash grants, in-kind support, and donations from sources such as state and local governments, educational institutions, private foundations, and corporations. government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of two or more agencies. This shared responsibility is an outgrowth of several factors, including the piecemeal evolution of federal programs and service delivery efforts. Achieving results on public problems, such as the potentially large service needs of a growing elderly population, increasingly calls for effective interagency coordination. However, a number of barriers inhibit coordination among agencies. For example, the federal government’s system for providing assistance to low- income people is highly inefficient. system for providing assistance to low- income people is highly fragmented. Each federal assistance program usually has its own eligibility criteria, application, documentation requirements, and time frames. A review of federally assisted transportation services for “transportation- disadvantaged” seniors found that 5 federal agencies administer 15 programs. Service providers told GAO that certain characteristics of federal programs, such as what the providers view as burdensome reporting requirements and limited program guidance, are to blame. The GAO report was released on Tuesday. USDA does not have specific goals related to the elderly in its fiscal year 2004 Annual Performance Plan. As GAO has previously reported, virtually all the results that the federal government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of government agencies and private sector partners. USDA's goals include increasing the availability of affordable housing for the elderly, increasing the number of assisted-living units, and increasing elderly families’ satisfaction with their Section 202 units, according to the plan. The plan does not provide specific goals for assisted living or multifamily housing. residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) Waiver Program. Through this waiver program, individuals eligible for Medicaid can receive needed health care without having to live in an institutional setting. HUD has identified these waivers as an innovative model for assisting the frail elderly in public housing. The Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) integrates Medicare and Medicaid financing to provide comprehensive, coordinated care to older adults eligible for nursing homes. Figure 1 provides information on the housing assistance programs that can use federally funded supportive services programs. In general, both HUD and USDA programs target families at lower income levels. Of these programs, 2 are intended for the elderly only, 3 target the elderly and disabled, and another 18 have special features for the Elderly. HUD has specific goals for increasing housing opportunities for the Elders, including one goal specifically related to supportive services. These programs do not reach all needy households, and waiting lists for many types of subsidized housing, including housing for the elders, are often long. The HUD Annual Performance Plan outlines these goals. Housing developments can be assisted by multiple programs. HUD’s Section 202 program subsidizes the development and operating costs of multifamily properties for elderly households with very low incomes. HUD administers four service-related programs that can be used in conjunction with subsidized housing programs. Of these programs, 2 or include the elderly among potential beneficiaries, only 4 require the owners of properties developed under the programs to ensure that supportive services are available. The property owners typically obtain other funds from federal programs, local charities, and civic groups. providers view as burdensome reporting requirements and limited program guidance, can impede the implementation of practices that enhance senior mobility. Generally, HUD and USDA’s housing assistance programs are not required to provide supportive services to the elderly. Of the 23 housing assistance Programs that target or include the elderly among potential beneficiaries, only 4 require such services. We have noted the range of barriers to coordination that agencies often face, including missions that are not mutually reinforcing or that may even conflict; concerns about protecting jurisdiction over missions and control over resources.

ROUGE-1: 82.82, ROUGE-2: 73.64, ROUGE-L: 33.87
BERTScore: 60.57

==============================================
==================== [54/100] ====================
Summary:
of the programs reviewed accepted legacy software without fully identifying the sources of development. Software is also developed as part of the hardware components it is tasked with managing. This embedded software is used to control other electronic hardware products, either onboard or offboard the weapon system, and is often purchased from lower tier subcontractors. While we did not specifically ask for information on foreign suppliers responsible for embedded software, officials for two of the programs stated that this software tends to include more reused and COTS software. These officials indicated that this could limit the visibility of the software. officials indicated that this could limit the visibility of the software suppliers. acceptance testing was usually only performed to prove functionality and the software was not further evaluated to determine the actual source that developed the software code. Further, DOD and prime contractor officials told us that it is sometimes difficult to determine whether the actual hardware subcontractor developed embedded software, or if it was done by a software developer hired by that subcontractor. Most of the program offices we reviewed did not specifically track foreign software suppliers for security purposes. Foreign nationals employed by contractors or subcontractors to develop, modify, or remediate software code specifically for DOD shall each have a security clearance commensurate with the level of the program in which the software is being used. Primary vendors on DOD contracts may have subcontractors who employ cleared foreign nationals that work only in a certified or accredited environment. Software quality assurance personnel shall check software sent to locations not directly controlled by DOD or its contractors for malicious code when returned to the DOD contractors’ facilities. Vendors of COTS software that demonstrate efforts to minimize the security risks associated with foreign nationals. Programs have very little knowledge of the developers for their offboard software. Officials for 13 of the programs reviewed had almost no insight into the use of foreign developers. Even when procured directly from a known supplier, program systems could not guarantee whether additional subcontractors were used for software development. According to DOD and program officials, visibility into COTS software is limited by the willingness of the producers of that software to share information on how the code was developed. The cost of identifying and managing foreign software suppliers, especially for COTSSoftware could be substantial. Software from other applications and embedded software is often accepted without full knowledge of the source of development. Legacy, or reused code, is most prevalent when software programs are updated into newer versions or when software just requires editing and enhancing the older code rather than developing new code. When asked to produce software similar to what they have developed previously, manufacturers can use all or part of the legacy code as a basis for developing or modifying the new software. Ten of the programs reviewed accepted legacy software without fully identifying the source. program offices obtained information on software suppliers through requirements in their prime contracts. In at least two cases, program software managers became aware of foreign software suppliers while collecting information requested for this review. Program officials also said that some knowledge of foreignSoftware development was available as a result of procedures in place because their programs contained classified or technical program information. While limited information on the supplier and location of foreign entities performing software work was available from export licenses, contractors request approval directly from the State Department, which may not refer the application to DOD. Officials from one program office said they were effective in determining software suppliers at the prime and subcontractor levels. Only five of the prime contractors reported that they were required to notify the program office concerning their decisions on software subcontracting. Once a winning bidder is selected, more information is often available to the program manager. For example, contracts for 12 programs contained a requirement that the software was intended to use in the development and manufacturing phases, including potential foreign suppliers and components they were expected to provide. Aerial Vehicle, Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System, Joint Strike Fighter, Patriot Missile System, Tactical Tomahawk Missile, and Wideband Gapfiller Satellites. To learn more about program practices for managing and mitigating the use of foreign-developed software, we solicited information and documentation from the prime contractor for each system using contacts provided by program office officials. We received information from 15 of the prime contractors through written responses, on-site interviews, and other means such as telephone conversations. obtained several security and software related documents such as the Program Protection Plan, the Software Development Plan, and other program specific documents. John Neumann, Brian Mullins, Delores Cohen, Shelby S. Oakley, Christopher Miller, Gary Middleton, and Marie Ahearn made key contributions to this report. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's official website at: http://www.dhs.gov/cybersecurity. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. a greater reliance on software to provide more weapon capability when hardware limitations are reached. As such, DOD weapon systems are subject to many risks that arise from exploitable software vulnerabilities. Software code that is poorly developed or purposely injected with malicious code could be used to disrupt these and other DOD information systems. DSS specifically noted a concern with exploitation or insertion of malicious code with the use of foreign research facilities and software development companies located outside the United States working on commercial projects related to classified or sensitive programs. There was a significant increase in suspicious attempts by foreign entities to access U.S. technology and information. Information systems technology was the most sought after militarily critical technology by these entities. Forty-four countries were associated with attempts at accessing U.s. information technology, with 33 percent of the activity coming from foreign government-sponsored or affiliated entities. Access to these technologies by potential adversaries could be detrimental to the United States' defense industry and national security, according to the report by the National Security Agency. classified and export-controlled information and technology by establishing procedures to manage such access. For example, the National Industrial Security Program Operation Manual establishes mandatory procedures for the safeguarding of classified information. It generally limits access to U.S. citizens with appropriate security clearances and establishes eligibility policies for contractors determined to have foreign ownership, control, or influence. Further, an additional DOD directive requires programs containing classified military information to have controls to prevent the unauthorized release of this information to foreign recipients. In addition, the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) controls foreign U.S. entities, including defense contractors, may apply to the Department of State for authorization to export controlled information and technology to qualified foreign recipients. DOD estimates that it spends about 40 percent of its Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation budget on software. DOD and industry experience indicates that about $8 billion of that amount may be spent on software in fiscal year 2003. The International Traffic in Arms Regulations controls foreign access to defense articles and services through the establishment of the export license and authorization process. Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan address the risks associated with the potential release of information to foreign governments. Documents do not provide information on specific suppliers who will be performing work, such as software developers. It evaluates the risk of releasing critical military capability or sensitive information and technology against the benefit of the sale to the United States. The plan also outlines the planning requirements for the possible release of sensitive information to the foreign entities involved in cooperative programs or purchasing military equipment. The documents also outline the risk assessment procedures for releasing sensitive information. Onboard software is that which actually runs the weapon system. Program offices were most knowledgeable about the foreign-developed software for the onboard portions of their programs. Because onboard software is the most critical for meeting mission requirements and other program goals, program managers placed greater importance on onboard software. None of these programs could fully identify all foreign- developed software for their systems. Six program offices had significant knowledge of foreign software developers. The knowledge program managers had was based on the function of the software being developed, the manner in which it was acquired, and the specific handling requirements. and contractors reported very little knowledge about the level of foreign involvement for offboard software. This software, sometimes referred to as ground based, interacts with the onboard system to provide updated information in support of operational activity. Offboard software is often used to check for errors or malicious code and to produce, maintain, or verify onboard software. Program officials from 10 of the programs we reviewed indicated they had verylittle knowledge of the offboard component of their programs. For example, one program uses standard mission planning software that interacts with onboard flight software. To protect the United States, DOD relies on a complex array of computer-dependent and mutually supportive organizational components. These systems are, in turn, connected with other systems operated by contractors, other government agencies, and international organizations. In addition, performance requirements for weapon systems have become increasingly demanding, and breakthroughs in software capability have led to a greater reliance on software to provide more weapon capability, the agency says. The U.S. Department of Defense is responsible for protecting the nation's national security. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. weapon systems based on recommendations from DOD officials and on our internal knowledge of the systems. While our selection of programs cannot be generalized to the population of all DOD systems, the systems selected varied by product type, represented each of the military services, and represented a range of DOD contractors. The systems reviewed were the Abrams System Enhancement Package, AH-64D Apache, Bradley Upgrade, C-130 Avionics Modernization Program, C/17 Globe Master, Comanche Reconnaissance Attack Helicopter (RAH-66) and F/A-18 Super Hornet. development and include practices such as pilot programs for providing information on software metrics. The Tri-Service Assessment Initiative began in 1999 to strengthen software acquisition and development as well as address repeated performance shortfalls attributed to software. Task forces conducted detailed assessments of software-intensive programs to identity potential improvements. DOD has also begun policy-level initiatives focused on better software management and on identifying and specifying software security processes and technologies to protect systems and network capabilities from various internal and external threats. Specific initiatives include the following: conducted detailed assessments of software-intensive programs to identity potential improvements in overall software acquisition processes. A source selection criteria working group is tasked with clarifying the policy onSource selection criteria for software intensive systems and the application of software product maturity measures. Another working group has been tasked with developing a proposal for a centralized clearinghouse of software best practices, but DOD has not approved any proposals. In October 2003, the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information Integration) established the position of Deputy Director for Software Assurance. Contractors expected to ensure quality and security on their systems because their software development processes are more mature than those required by DOD. Such practices could indirectly address foreign software risks. Through dedicated software testing, teams assess the quality of the software to uncover gaps and make it as defect-free as possible. However, on eight of the programs we reviewed, decisions on the amount of software code to test were made based upon the risks and benefits to the functionality of the system to be tested, not on the benefits to security. DOD and SEI officials said that the. amount of effort needed to comprehensively test every line of code to.  contractors for the weapon systems we reviewed had not received specific direction from program managers to address risks from foreign suppliers in software development. Officials from one contractor we interviewed that employs practices consistent with SEI’s highest level indicated that unless software security is a specific contract requirement, they would not modify their practices to address associated risks. SEI experts confirmed that the models they have developed do not include a security element and are not intended to certify that improved processes will be effective. The SEI representatives told us that rigorous software development could help improve the quality and functionality of software. Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has developed models and methods that define and determine organizations’ software process maturity. About $8 billion of that amount may be spent on reworking software because of quality-related issues. Better software development practices are seen as a way to reduce the number of software defects and therefore improve overall software quality. But alone the practices cannot be expected to address malicious software development activities intended to breach security. To underscore the importance of securing software-related products, the Office of the Assistant software development are measured and mitigated, we reviewed relevant DOD guidance, policies, regulations, and procedures. We met with software experts at the Software Engineering Institute of Carnegie Mellon University to obtain information on software development practices. In addition, we spoke with DOD officials from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition Technology & Logistics), the National Security Agency, the Defense Information Systems Agency, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. We also spoke with the Department of the Army, the Departmentof the Air Force and the Navy. may be tailored and, in some cases, integrated with other acquisition activities and documentation. If the program manager has not identified risks from foreign suppliers, the process cannot be expected to mitigate them. DOD also requires weapon programs to protect certain types of information during transfer of technology to foreign entities. For example, certification and accreditation processes such as DITSCAP should include verification that software development practices contain adequate security measures to address identified risks, according to the DOD Software Assurance Program officials. For. example, the Technology Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan address the risks suppliers and adjustments to program security requirements. The Defense Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP) is a standardized evaluation process. This process includes a review by a designated approving official who certifies that the security features and information technology system safeguards will maintain information assurance through the life cycle of a system. The process results in an agreement between the program manager, the intended program, and the intended software supplier. The standards do not include criteria to specifically identify and manage the use of foreign software suppliers. However, DOD has developed the DITSCAP. vary across programs. DITSCAP requirements do not govern contractors in cases where the requirements were not included as part of the original contract. Program officials responsible for software development on one other program indicated that they had no knowledge of this process. In cases where DitSCAP is being implemented, the certification and accreditation process requirements are determined based on the program manager’s. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/technology/ditscap-guidance-for-contractors. Laws, requirements, and policies that are intended to provide information assurance for operational security do not fully address risks during software development. Under the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, all executive agencies, including DOD, are required to ensure that information security policies, procedures, and practices are adequate. DOD is required to carry out an information assurance program that includes the development of essential information assurances technologies and programs. Generally, this includes a review of security features and information technology system safeguards. It sets out a process for all DOD information systems to achieve an appropriate level of confidentiality, integrity, knowledge of threats and vulnerabilities. threats, such as external hacking and unauthorized access to information systems. But they do not apply to internal threats that could affect the integrity of the software. In implementing its information assurance policy, DOD also relies on other governmentwide policies and standards. For example, DOD requires the evaluation and validation of information assurance software products such as firewalls and intrusion detection systems. This policy requires the use of one of three nationally recognized evaluation andvalidation standards. It is based on National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Policy No. 11. information would require resources and assets beyond those of individual program managers. DOD indicated its intent to develop a database to identify, track, and maintain information on security risks from specific software suppliers. DOD agreed that it should ensure that program risk assessments include specific attention to software development risks, including those from foreign suppliers. However, DOD suggested that this might be best accomplished through collaboration between the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration and the Office for Acquisition Technology and Logistics. This seemed reasonable, and we agreed.  Require program managers, working with software assurance experts, acquisition personnel, and other organizations as necessary, to specifically define software security requirements. These requirements should then be communicated as part of the prime development contract. Require DOD to collect and maintain information on software suppliers, including software from foreign suppliers. This information should be evaluated periodically to assess changes in the status of suppliers and adjustments to program security requirements, according to the report. DOD indicated that centralized information onSoftware suppliers is necessary because the cost of collecting and maintaining this information would require resources and assets beyond those of individual DOD resources. have to be addressed later in the acquisition process. DOD agreed that software security risks should be defined for DOD weapon programs. DOD concurred with our three recommendations based on the concern that they place too much responsibility for risk mitigation on program managers. DOD stated that program managers should be able to rely on external resources to gain threat information on suppliers and that formulation and oversight of security practices should be a collaborative function among several offices within DOD. We do see the value of software assurance experts playing a critical role in defining software security requirements. Since its inception, the office has initiated working groups intended to focus on mitigating software risks and improving software security. To date, while these initiatives have presented top level findings and recommendations within DOD and in public forums, they have not externally published reports or obtained funding for implementing the recommendations. While these plans and initiatives may help to increase DOD’s focus on software security and may lead to the development and identification of software security risks, they are not ready to be externally published or funded yet. Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence. This seemed reasonable, and we adjusted our recommendation to reflect the inclusion of other organizations. DOD agreed certification activities such as DITSCAP can assist in addressing insider threats in software development. Additional guidance is necessary to ensure that software security risks are addressed during system design and development or when selecting software sources. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees; the Secretary of Defense; the Secretaries of the Air Force, Army, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps. for security reasons. For example, prime contractors for two programs did not use foreign subcontractors for economic reasons; namely the company wanted to maintain the software expertise within the company. While restricting foreign access solely foreconomic reasons could result in a decrease in software development security risks, it might also preclude foreign suppliers that could offer new capability or lower costs to the government. In yet another case, the contractor did not want to create dedicated partitions, such as firewalls, required to prevent employees from a foreign subcontractor from accessing unauthorized information. not function as needed to allow related system components to meet mission requirements, rather than potential vulnerabilities from foreign suppliers. For these programs, security risks have generally been implemented to prevent unauthorized access to classified or technical program information. In addition, these programs employed various measures to address software security consistent with information assurance requirements. These measures included the use of password protection, firewalls, or encrypted software, but they did not always focus on risks from foreign involvement in software development. However, interpretation and implementation of this requirement can vary across programs. Software generally only becomes a concern for program managers as it begins to affect the cost or schedule of the program. It is possible that using software development practices to increase efficiency could lead to an increase in security vulnerability by encouraging the use of legacy and COTS software. For several programs we reviewed, contractors made risk identification and mitigation decisions for business reasons and to avoid additional resource burdens (i.e., cost and access) associated with incorporating foreign suppliers necessary for software development. For example, prime contractors for two programs listed “software executibility” as a program level risk. mission requirements and other program goals, program managers placed greater emphasis on the quality, functionality, and usually, the security of this software. In 9 of the systems we reviewed, either prime contractors or major subcontractors conducted software development for the onboard systems. In meeting with prime contractors, we found that while this increased their knowledge about foreign software suppliers, the information was not always shared with government program managers. If the program manager has not identified foreign software development as a program risk or threat, it will not be addressed by the process. results in an agreement between the program manager, the intended user of the system being certified, and approval authorities. The process includes a requirement for a threat assessment, but does not articulate how this information should be developed or reported. As such, it does not direct program managers to consider foreign involvement in software development as a risk or threat that needs to be addressed for information system security. In addition, while the process is mandatory, the implementation details may be tailored and, in some cases, integrated with other systems. DOD acquisition policy requires major weapon programs sale to the U.S. The plan also outlines the security requirements to prevent compromise. Each of the military services is developing plans for improving software acquisition. The improvement plans are each at varying stages of development and include practices such as pilot programs for providing software for pilot programs. The purpose of the Program Protection Plan is to identify measures to protect Critical Program Information from hostile collection efforts and unauthorized disclosure during the acquisition process. While DOD has taken steps to strengthen software acquisition practices, it has yet to implement practices to better manage software development security risks. Despite the risks associated with foreign access to defense systems, DOD acquisition policy does not require program managers to identify and manage the amount of foreign involvement for software development in weapon systems. DOD information system security requirements focus on operational software threats, rather than potential threats posed by software developers. While program managers should be allowed discretion in managing their acquisitions, they are responsible for knowing more about who is developing software and where. Unless this is done early in the software acquisition process, it cannot be included as part of software source selection and risk mitigation decisions. As the amount of software on weapon systems increases, it becomes more difficult and costly to test every line of code. DOD cannot afford to monitor all worldwide software development facilities or provide clearances for all potential software developers, especially for COTS software. Given the global nature of the software industry, which offers benefits to software cost and functionality needed by weapon systems, DOD can't exclude all foreign suppliers from its programs. In similar cases, contracting decisions might sometimes be made in favor of U.S. suppliers to avoid costs and delays. DOD initiatives have begun to recognize potential risks from foreign software suppliers. Program officials for most of the systems we reviewed did not make foreign involvement in software development a specific element of their risk identification and mitigation efforts. Risk mitigation efforts emphasized program level risks, such as meeting program cost and schedule goals, instead of software security risks. For 11 of the 16 systems, program managers have not identified foreign supplier involvement inSoftware development as a significant risk to the security of their weapon systems. The relative importance ofSoftware security in risk mitigation efforts also varied greatly across the system we reviewed. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. We will also make copies available to others upon request. To determine how the Department of Defense (DOD) measures the extent of foreign involvement in software development in weapon systems, we reviewed relevant DOD documents. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512- 4841. Staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix III. Carnegie Mellon University to obtain information on software development practices and risk identification and mitigation techniques used by the software industry. The Association of Old Crows (The Electronic Warfare and Information Operations Association) whose membership includes individuals and companies involved in the design and development of software used in DOD weapon programs. To document and analyze how programs specifically measure and manage their use of foreign-developed software, we identified 16 DOD weapon systems and solicited information from each program office and prime contractor. We selected these weapon systems based on recommendations from DOD officials and on

ROUGE-1: 75.85, ROUGE-2: 70.33, ROUGE-L: 25.57
BERTScore: 57.32

==============================================
==================== [55/100] ====================
Summary:
CRS analysis of SIPP data for April 2013 indicates that among an estimated 73.0 million children under age 18, an estimated 8.5 million (11.6%) lived in families in which one or more family members received Social Security. Most, but not all, of these 3.2 million children from the SIPP are probably child beneficiaries. An additional 1.9 million (22%) live in families where a parent or guardian reported receiving Social Security benefits, though not directly on behalf of a child. About 8.5 million children under age 18 were identified on the SIPP in April 2013 as living in families in which Social Security benefits were reported. In some cases it is uncertain whether all or only some children under 21 in the family are direct beneficiaries. Some adults may include the child's portion of their Social Security benefit as their own, without explicitly indicating that they received Social Security on behalf of a child. To some extent, this method will overstate the number of children under 18 who received social Security. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. The SIPP collects information on Social Security receipt and the reasons for receipt for persons age 15 and over. In some cases the benefits received by these parents or guardians may contain an allowance for beneficiary children that is not separately identified. In such cases, the two groups mentioned above are combined for purposes of analysis as "child beneficiaries" and "children of parents or guardian" of Social Security benefits on the program. Social Security was received by someone other than a child or the children's parent(s) or guardian(s). In such cases Social Security benefits may have been received by an extended family member (e.g., grandparent, aunt or uncle, cousin, niece or nephew) For this latter group, children may incidently be affected by Social Security, but not directly as a matter of policy aimed at them. For the former group, Social Security's effect on child poverty is more directly related to Social Security policy.  differences become more apparent between children living in families in which Social Security is received on behalf of children and/or parents/guardians. Also, the after-the-fact comparison of poverty status by family Social Security receipt doesn't take into account the effect that Social Security itself has in reducing poverty. In families that do not receive Social Security, the former group has a much higher pre-transfer poverty rate (54.2%) than does the latter group ( Figure 5 ) (38.4%). don't receive Social Security (23.2%). Figure 6 shows the relative share of estimated aggregate dollars going to children's families. Of these benefits, an estimated 44.1% (about $2.671 billion, or about $32.050 billion on an annualized basis) went to families who were poor based on their total cash income, excluding any Social Security benefits they received. Over two-fifths of Social Security dollars paid to families with children goes to children who would otherwise be counted as poor. poverty status," based on a measure of family income that excludes the amount families received from Social Security. When Social Security is added back into these families' incomes, child poverty is cut by nearly half. Among children in families that receive Social Security, 34.4% have family income below 125% of the poverty line, compared to 29.8% of children that don't receive benefits. In families where Social Security benefits are received on behalf of children or by parents or guardians, Social Security reduces poverty rate from 54.2% to 27.2%. Social Security lifted nearly 2.0 million children (1.952 million) above the poverty line in April 2013. Social Security benefits received by families with children have the effect of reducing the incidence of poverty. The effect of Social Security on the poverty status of all 73.0million children in the U.S., overall, is much more modest than the effect on 8.5 million children that are in families that received Social Security. In all, 19.082 million children were estimated as being poor in April 2014, or 26.2% of all children. Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. Children may qualify for Social Security benefits by being a child of a retired or disabled worker receiving Social Security or a survivor of a deceased worker who met the program's insured status requirements. In December 2012, 3.3 million Social Security beneficiaries (5.7% of all beneficiaries) were children under the age of 18. The average monthly benefit among child beneficiaries in December 2012 was $525. Average monthly benefits of children of disabled workers were lowest, about $323. of the parent's primary insurance amount (PIA) before adjustments. A maximum family benefit applies, varying from 150% to 188% of the PIA of the retired, disabled, or deceased parent. The family maximum cannot be exceeded regardless of the number of recipients entitled to benefits under the deceased or retired worker's earnings record. Child benefits generally apply to all biological children of a worker (assuming that paternity/maternity has been established) and to the deceased worker's widow or husband. Stepchildren may be eligible in some cases, as may some legally adopted grandchildren, with their benefits being determined on the basis of their grandparents' earnings record. Children may receive benefits until they reach age 18, and if in high school, through age 19. Disabled children can receive benefits indefinitely as long as the disability was incurred before age 22. In addition to receiving Social Security benefits in their own right, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive Social Security. December 2012 amounted to about $1.712 billion, or about $20.5 billion on an annualized basis, based on SSA administrative data. In FY2013, combined federal and state TANF expenditures, in the form of cash aid to families, amounted to an estimated $8.7 billion, of which approximately $4.3 billion (49%) was from federal funds. The estimates presented in this report are based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies, becomes disabled, or retires. This report examines the effects of Social Security on child poverty. The estimates presented in this report are based on a CRS analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation numbers of individuals receiving Social Security benefit. The most recent data sources used are the U.N.'s World Bank and the European Union’s Eurostat. The U.K. government”s Office for National Statistics estimates the number of children living in poverty at the end of the year. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies, becomes disabled, or retires. For children of disabled or retired workers, the child's benefit is generally equal to 50% of the parent's primary insurance amount (PIA) before adjustments. Unlike welfare programs, Social Security is a work-related entitlement, in which benefits are determined on the basis of workers' employment and earnings history, without respect to current income. of U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data in April 2013. based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. The SIPP data do not provide the comprehensive detail to precisely identify child beneficiaries. The pre-transfer poverty estimates should not be confused with the full effects on poverty of eliminating the Social Security program, as some individuals would alter their behavior in absence of the program. It should also be noted that estimates of the pre- transfer poverty status of children (i.e., poverty status excluding Social Security from total income) provide one measure of the relative importance of Social Security in combating poverty. SIPP is designed to interview a representative sample of families every four months over a 64-month period. The SIPP collects detailed information on family composition, labor force participation, income, and program participation among families and their members. The analysis presented in this report relies on SIPP data for April 2013, the latest month in common from data released for the full SIPP sample. The most recent SIPPData are from the 2008 panel, and the most recent data are from September 2008 through December 2013.

ROUGE-1: 61.32, ROUGE-2: 57.22, ROUGE-L: 25.27
BERTScore: 61.36

==============================================
==================== [56/100] ====================
Summary:
 HUD found that its assumption that housing agencies would begin to feel a significant impact from welfare reform starting in 1997 was not borne out by what was happening across the country. HUD did not supplement the average unit cost with additional amounts even if they made sense from a policy standpoint unless the supplementary amounts could be supported with historical or other data. For 1998, HUD valued the welfare supplement at $138 per unit ($46 in 1997 and $92 in 1998). However, after submitting its budget estimate to the Congress in February 1997, HUD determined that this amount was unnecessary. In its fiscal year 1998 budget submission of February 1997, HUD used a value of $6,386 as the average unit cost for renewing tenant-based housing assistance contracts. This value is based on the program’s actual expenditure data for fiscal year 1996. It also includes several supplementary amounts for administrative fees paid to housing agencies, contingent or unexpected costs, and increased program expenditures caused by residents losing their welfare assistance in 1997 and 1998. In September 1997 HUD proposed—and the Congress accepted—changes in its contract renewal estimate. the office of the comptroller, and the departmental budget office could have prevented this error. For example, the program office’s comptroller reviewed the actual disbursement data obtained from the accounting system but did not review the final average unit cost calculation until after HUD submitted its budget to the Congress. The second supplementary amount was for covering unknown costs or contingencies. For this supplement, HUD added approximately $204 to the unit cost, or 2 weeks of disbursements. Also, HUD did not conduct an independent review of the added costs and underlying basis for the estimate. In 1995, Congress encouraged HUD to use available unexpended funds in the Section 8 program to offset assistance over the life of the contract. HUD subsequently shortened the contract terms to 5 years and, later, to 3 years. Finally, beginning in fiscal year 1995, Section 8 tenant-based contracts were written for 1-year terms, thus minimizing the amount of budget authority HUD needs to fund contract renewals. Renewing expiring contracts will require a sharp increase in budget authority over the next several years.  HUD provides housing subsidies through nearly 4,300 contracts with local housing agencies and state housing finance agencies. Housing agencies receive a fee from HUD for administering the tenant-based program and working with households to determine eligibility, verify income, and ensure that units meet quality standards. Because a significant number of the Section 8 tenant- based contracts will expire over the next 5 years, the estimated cost to renew contracts will rise from $3.6 billion in fiscal year 1997 to $18.1 billion in Fiscal Year 2002. In fiscal year 1998, the Congress appropriated $25 billion in discretionary budget authority for the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s ( HUD) programs. HUD provides rental housing assistance-about $21 billion in fiscal year 1996—that enables about 4.7 million low-income households to obtain safe, decent, and affordable housing. HUD assists about two-thirds of these households through its Section 8 housing assistance program. In fiscal year 1997, HUD spent about $7 billion to provide tenant-based rental assistance. certificate and voucher programs—provide direct rental assistance to about 1.4 million households. These programs are designed to allow low-income households to live in decent and affordable private rental housing of their choice. HUD enters into contracts with local and state housing agencies, including public housing agencies. These housing agencies certify applicants for eligibility, inspect units found by the tenant for compliance with housing standards, and verify that the lease is valid and up to HUD’s rent and quality standards. In turn, the voucher program assists they elect to live. housing agency must wait 3 months before reissuing that certificate or voucher to another eligible household. HUD does not factor the effect of this requirement into its budget estimates for Section 8 tenant-based assistance. Therefore, during this 3-month period, reserves accumulate in the housing agencies’ reserve accounts. The build-up of reserves is indicative of long-standing problems with HUD’s budget estimating process, says the OIG. The OIG says HUD has been unable to $204 to the unit cost, or 2 weeks of disbursements.  HUD intentionally established program reserves during the early years of a multiyear housing assistance contract to help fund the program in the later years. This practice was, in part, required by law. To build up reserves, HUD based its estimate of the amount of budget authority needed on two conservative assumptions. HUD assumed that all certificates were in constant use, even though the leasing of housing units would necessarily take some time to accomplish while prospective tenants shopped for housing and the housing agencies determined the tenants’ eligibility and ensured the selected units met quality standards. units were not leased because housing agencies did not make housing subsidy payments for unleased units. As a result, the larger housing agencies, especially those receiving new certificates every year, developed significant reserves. While HUD began to consider tenants’ income in its contract renewal budget requests for fiscal year 1991, it continued to assume that all units were fully leased. For instance, a statutory requirement exists that once a household discontinues its need for and use of a certificate or voucher and returns it to the housing agency, the agency must wait 3 months before reissuing that certificate. The Budget Office was unaware of the program office’s budgeting assumption that all tenant-based certificates are in constant use. This assumption, however, does not reflect the current practice of housing agencies. As stipulated by current appropriations law, after a certificate is turned in by the current holder, the housing agency must wait 90 days before reissuing it to a new household. But because the budget estimate assumes constant use, the effect is to estimate more funding than will actually be needed. available unexpended funds in the Section 8 program to offset the budget authority requirements for contract renewals. Budget authority appropriated for Section 8 tenant-based contract renews is “no-year” money and does not expire if it is not expended. In fiscal year 1995, HUD began to draw on unused budget authority from previous years to extend the terms of expiring contracts. To identify unexpending balances to help offset the cost, go to http://www.hud.gov/soulmatestories. carryover occurred too late in the budget process to have an impact on HUD’s fiscal year 1997 budget request. Therefore, HUD reflected it in the Department's fiscal year 1998 budget request by reducing the estimate of Section 8 tenant-based contract renewals by $1.6 billion. At the request of the Chairman of the Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, House Committee on Appropriations, we reviewed HUD's fiscal Year 1998 budget proposal for Section 8 contract renewal funding. We informed the Congress that at the end of the year with the housing agency. HUD plans to no longer extend expiring tenant-based contracts with excess budget authority within the program reserves. HUD has recognized the need for improving coordination and oversight among program, budget, and housing agencies. HUD will compare monthly the number of contracted units in the system to the previous month’s total to reconcile any differences. The agency plans to improve the security over access to the unit tables within the information system and to compare monthly. updated its Section 8 tenant-based information system. HUD recaptured $7.7 billion of this excess balance and retained the difference of $2.2 billion to cover contingencies and to account for future transactions. The remaining $1 billion was not recaptured because it represented amounts that had not yet been credited to housing. About $1.2billion was left in the participating housing agencies’ accounts as a reserve for contingencies equal to about 2 months of assisted housing payments to landlords. In 1996 and 1997, HUD conducted a financial data reconciliation of all of its tenant-based housing assistance contracts. Congress rescinded $4.2 billion, and after other adjustments, the current balance is about $3.5 billion. With improved systems and better data, HUD has the opportunity to report in more detail its unexpended Section 8 funding and the potential availability of this funding to offset needs for new budget authority or for other uses, the report says. The report also says HUD has updated its Section 8 tenant- based information system. represented amounts that had not yet been credited to housing agencies’ reserve accounts at the time of the recapture. After two congressional rescissions totaling $4.2 billion, GAO has calculated on the basis of data obtained at the end of fiscal year 1997 that about $3.5 billion remains in the Reserve Preservation Account. While a reserve for contingencies is prudent, it is not clear that a reserve of $1.2billion is reasonable and necessary. HUD’s more recent financial information maintained by HUD shows that this balance may be closer to $3,7 billion. Agencies, House Committee on Appropriations, has expressed concern about HUD’s financial management of the Section 8 tenant-based program. Report: HUD has lack of timeliness and precision in identifying magnitude of unspent budget authority. Report recommends that the Secretary of HUD direct the Office of the Chief Financial Officer to modify the agency”s consolidated financial statements so that they identify the portions of the unexpended appropriations for the Section8 program that are excess to current needs and therefore available for other uses.  HUD’s consolidated financial statements comply with the federal accounting requirement to disclose unexpended budget authority by major budget account. The federal accounting standards established by available for other purposes. The standards do not, however, require agencies to disclose such information below the majorudget account level. Each agency should disclose information that is most useful to the users of their financial statements, the report says. In a note to its fiscal year 1996 consolidated financial statement, HUD disclosed unexpending appropriations by major program type. In May 1997, HUD estimated that the amount of unexpended budget authority that exceeded the amount needed to meet contract requirements in the tenant-based program was $9.9 billion. In fiscal year 1996, housing agencies used $353 million in excess budget authority to cover contingencies, far less than the amount that HUD has reserved for this purpose. HUD plans to adjust its reserve level after it examines in more detail housing agencies’ actual use of available budget authority in fiscal years 1996 and 1997.  HUD is not required to and does not currently report in its annual budget justifications the aggregate amount of excess unexpended budget authority credited to housing agencies’ reserve accounts. By doing so, however, the Department could ensure that the Congress is informed about the funding on hand before appropriating new budget authority. OMB’s guidance on budget formulation, agencies should consider available funding onhand before requesting new funding. HUD would need to annually review each tenant-based housing assistance contract it has with housing agencies. hearing on March 18, 1997. We informed the Congress that HUD had a significant amount of unexpended funds in the Section 8 tenant-based program. We contacted national associations representing housing agencies and discussed the need for retaining unexpending funds in housing agencies’ program reserve accounts. To evaluate the accuracy of HUD’s estimate of its unexpends funds and the reasonableness of this amount, we reviewed documentation and discussed HUD's examination of balances in reserve accounts with HUD officials. To assess HUD's budget formulation process, we discussed the results of Price Waterhouse LLP's independent evaluation of available funds.  HUD’s revised estimate of $9.9 billion has been verified by an independent accounting firm. In the June 1997 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, the Congress directed HUD to recapture unexpended budget authority that was not needed to meet the current obligations of the Section 8 tenant-based program. Price Waterhouse LLP performed tests on a statistical sample of 158 housing agencies to confirm the accuracy of HUD's estimate of excess unexpending budget authority. For this sample, the accounting firm compared information in HUD's tenant- based information system with information in the housing agencies’ most recent year-end settlement statements.  HUD implemented a new Section 8 tenant-based information system in fiscal year 1995. The Chairman of the Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, House Committee on Appropriations, has expressed concern about HUD’s efforts to more accurately estimate their Section 8 budget needs. HUD officials believe that this process will eliminate overfunding and improve the accuracy of the budget estimating for contract renewals. HUD plans to modify its information system to calculate the actual average cost per unit before completing the annual settlement process at each housing agency. time of our review, a chief financial officer for the tenant-based program had not been hired. Second, the Office of the CFO is developing a model to analyze all budget submissions, including the contract renewal estimate. Previously, the departmental budget office accepted the cost estimates with only limited review of the supporting documentation that detailed how the estimates were developed. Although the Office  plans to develop budget estimating policies and procedures, it also plans to build in enough time for adequate coordination, oversight, and communication.  HUD’s OIG analyzed a statistical sample of HUD's contracts. For those contracts that were Section 8 tenant-based contracts, the OIG traced the information in the original contract files. The OIG concluded that, for the sample reviewed, the amounts reserved and obligated were correct. We provided a draft of this report to HUD for use in the report. We did not systematically verify the accuracy of HUD”s data or conduct a reliability assessment of HUD  databases as part of this assignment. We relied upon the work of HUD  OIG and our audit of the consolidated financial statement, which shows the information is generally reliable.  HUD had to re-estimate its contract renewal needs for fiscal years 1990 and 1991 because of inadequate financial management systems and inaccurate forecasting. HUD’s cost estimates for contract renewal were based on assumptions about average costs that proved to be inaccurate. The OIG believed that the accuracy of the Department's tenant-based contract renewal estimate for fiscal year 1993 appeared improved over the fiscal year 1992 estimate. The team reported that estimating the number of expiring Section 8 contracts—and the budget authority required to renew them—had been a recurring problem for HUD since 1989. Inspector General (OIG), HUD, for years, has been unable to estimate accurately the budget authority it needs for Section 8 contract renewals and amendments. Historically, HUD’s accounting and information systems did not contain reliable, complete, or accurate data on Section 8 contracts. This situation occurred because of poor systems design and serious deficiencies in the controls, policies, and procedures associated with the input and maintenance of contract and accounting data. As a result of these problems, HUD had to continually revise its Section 8 estimates and often request additional funding. need for improving coordination and oversight among program, budget, and financial management officials. HUD’s budget operations have been fragmented and disjointed, preventing clear accountability and the necessary coordination. HUD has recently placed all departmental budget operations under the Office of the CFO to ensure that budgeting is integrated with financial management oversight. HUD also has implemented a risk management program to protect resources from fraud, waste, and abuse and to maintain the agency's financial integrity. The actions appear to be responsive to the problems identified but HUD has no specific time frames for their completion. Since 1989, HUD estimates of Section 8 contract renewals have been either too low or too high. This inability to accurately forecast budget needs persisted into fiscal year 1998. While HUD has taken action to correct these problems, budget estimating problems still remain. We believe that HUD’s Office of the CFO will need to exercise strong leadership to complete these changes and to develop specific budget procedures to guide the new organizational changes. Otherwise, HUD”s fiscal year 2000 budget estimate—which HUD will begin to prepare in May 1998—and future estimates may also misestimate program funding needs. frames for their completion. HUD’s fiscal year 1998 budget process had inadequate oversight of procedures and insupportable estimates or assumptions underlying key values. Although HUD recognizes these problems and has plans to correct them, it is too soon to measure the effectiveness of the remedies because many have not been implemented. HUD has a lengthy history of budget estimating problems and faces some uncertainty now about personnel to oversee and make policy for the budgeting function. Therefore, we are concerned with the agency's ability to sustain such recent corrective actions and implement those it has planned. excessive estimates of key cost factors that, once discovered, led to HUD’s reducing its request for tenant-based contract renewal funding by about $1 billion. In its budget projection for fiscal years 1999 through 2002, HUD overestimated its need for funding to amend existing housing assistance contracts because accurate data were not available from its accounting system at the time. HUD has acknowledged many of its problems with its budgeting process and has begun implementing corrective actions. However, many of the changes HUD is making or has planned were not implemented in time to affect its initial formulation of its fiscal year 1999 estimate. Housing Authority Directors Association reviewed HUD’s budget formulation process for the Section 8 tenant-based program. We also reviewed federal laws and regulations, OMB policies, and HUD's guidance. We discussed programmatic, budgeting, and financial management issues with HUD officials from the Offices of Public and Indian Housing, Budget, the Chief Financial Officer, Policy Development and Research, and Inspector. In response to the fiscal year 1995 Financial Statement Audit, HUD recently enhanced its tenant- based information system and plans changes to related procedures. process, the Department’s budget office did not use more reliable estimates developed by the program offices. Accurate budget estimates are essential to federal agencies meeting their fiscal responsibilities. HUD agreed with the report's major findings, conclusions, and recommendations, and said that the report presents a balanced assessment. In support of agencies being fiscally responsible, OMB requires them to submit reasonably accurate budget estimates. The CFO and officials of the housing office provided several comments to improve the report’S clarity, and we incorporated them as appropriate. improve the report’s factual representation and to ensure clarity. HUD believed that we should recognize that its initial estimate of the impact of welfare reform on fiscal year 1998 budget needs was based on the best information available. We agreed and made changes to reflect this concern. The report was released on October 1, 1998. It was the first time HUD had released a report on welfare reform since the 1990s. For more, go to: http://www.hud.gov/welfarereform.

ROUGE-1: 55.26, ROUGE-2: 52.20, ROUGE-L: 25.89
BERTScore: 66.13

==============================================
==================== [57/100] ====================
Summary:
The potential universe of projects contained 10 completed projects including: Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion Light Rail. We also included 3 ongoing transit projects as part of the universe: Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector (design-build-operate-maintain) and Houston Metro North and Southeast Corridor pilot projects. We determined that we would focus solely on projects that have or are expected to go through the Federal Transit Administration’s (FTA) New Starts process given that this is the case. Administration’s (FTA) New Starts process given that this is the largest capital grant program for transit projects. This eliminated the John F. Kennedy Airtrain, Portland MAX Airport Extension, and Las Vegas Monorail projects. Third, we applied three of four criteria from FTA's Report to Congress to the remaining projects, including (1) project costs were reduced, (2) project duration was shortened, and (3) project quality was maintained or enhanced. This eliminate the South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades, Hudson-Bergen Light. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion were eliminated. Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Largo Metrorail Extension was also eliminated. These projects were selected because they are recent examples of ongoing and completed transit projects in the U.S. that incorporated greater private sector involvement. This eliminated the D.C. Metro Transit Authority’s Largo Metro Rail Extension, which was scheduled to go into service in 2015. It also eliminated two of the remaining three completed projects, including the Minneapolis-St. Paul Metro. its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program in 2007: Bay Area Rapid Transit. The Oakland Airport Connector project is to be a 3.2-mile system that will connect the Oakland International Airport to the rest of the transit system. Lower-than-expected ridership predictions due to the economic climate, among other factors, led BART to move forward with a different alternative approach for its project. This eliminated the South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades, Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Transit Minimum Operating Segment 1 and Minimum operating Segment 2. to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one bidder are less competitive and can result in less attractive bids. Bay Area Rapid Transit negotiated with the sole remaining bidder on costs for nearly a year but then let the Request for Proposals expire with no proposals submitted. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Regional Transportation District’‘s Transportation. to encourage the participation of multiple b biders. For example, two contractors withdrew during the negotiation period due to concerns about the project affordability. Houston Metro's North and Southeast Corridor projects are to provide improved access to Houston’s Central Business District. No bidders on the project proposed an equity investment, so it is instead using a design- build-operate-maintain approach. Denver's East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects connect the city's main railway station with its airport and other parts of the city. The private sector partner will be selected through a competitive proposal process to deliver and operate the project under a long-term agreement. sector potentially has a greater incentive to make efficient design decisions. This is because the private sector can be held responsible for the condition of a transit project for longer durations. Houston Metro officials told us that for an earlier project that used the conventional design-bid-build approach, the project’s warranty terms did not hold the construction firm responsible long enough to cover defects such as faulty track and concrete. As a result, Houston Metro had to file claims to remedy these defects, they said. Houston Metro’s private sector partner told us it would like to begin some construction activities on the North and Southeast Corridors, but will not be able to begin until a full funding grant agreement is awarded. As a result, the privatesector partner has to delay its work until the funding process is completed. FTA officials responded that they allowed Houston Metro to carry out someConstruction activities in advance of their receiving a funding agreement.that the resubmission of the documentation is necessary because the private sector can bid to provide something different than what was agreed upon under preliminary engineering. out some construction activities in advance of their receiving a full funding grant agreement. Houston Metro officials told us that FTA required them to submit and resubmit entire project documents to FTA multiple times, which led to delays. FTA officials said the length of time for reviews depends on a number of factors, most importantly the completeness and accuracy of the project sponsor’s submissions, and that project sponsors could help to avoid such delays by improving their submissions. For example, FTA officials stated that Houston Metro’S projects have changed repeatedly, thus requiring multiple submittals. In the U.S., the private sector has played a more limited role in the delivery and financing of transit projects than in some other countries. Since 2000, seven New Starts projects were completed using alternative approaches. These projects have focused on delivery, rather than financing, and have used either the design-build or thedesign-build- operate-maintain delivery approach. When the long-term responsibilities of transit operations and maintenance are transferred, theprivate sector potentially has a greater incentive to make efficient design. able to add value to transit projects through improved management and innovation in a project’s construction, maintenance, and operation. Alternative approaches promote the use of performance measures (such as train capacity and frequency) rather than specific design details. This allows the private sector to potentially generate and apply innovative solutions in the design of the transit system, adding value to the project. For example, because Denver Regional Transportation District’S Transportation Expansion Light Rail project (another of the seven New Starts projects) used a design-build approach, a cost and schedule benefits. The South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades saved 4 to 6 years by completing all upgrades as a single project, but incurred slightly higher costs than estimated for the conventional design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors may be able to benefit from certain efficiencies and service improvements by transferring long-term responsibility of transit operations and maintenance in addition to design and construction to the private sector. DOT’s 2007 Report to Congress on transit public-private partnerships stated that the privatesector may be can add value to transit projects through improved management. using an alterative project delivery approach again after having what it believed to be a prior successful experience that included enhanced efficiencies and design improvements. Minnesota Metro Transit determined that it would have to complete 60 percent of the Central Corridor project’s design to meet FTA's New Starts requirements for final design. These requirements are not consistent with alternative approaches where project sponsors look to involve the private sector after only one-third, for example, of the design work is completed. In commenting on a draft of our report, FTA officials recognize that while additional steps could be taken to facilitate alternative approaches to transit projects, they also believe that other barriers beyond the design-bid-build approach could be overcome. it can potentially reduce the total cost and duration since a single contractor can concurrently perform project activities. Project sponsors, stakeholders, and transit experts told us that potential cost and time savings can be key incentives for using alternative approaches. For example, Minnesota Metro Transit’s Hiawatha Corridor (one of the seven completed New Starts projects that used an alternative approach) was completed 12 months ahead of schedule compared to using the conventional design-bid-build approach by allowing design and construction schedules. Denver Regional Transportation District and the private sector completed the Transportation Expansion project 22 months ahead of schedule and within budget. In the United Kingdom, the three Docklands Light Railway extensions were built using design-build-finance-maintain approaches. However, the use of alternative approaches does not guarantee cost and schedule benefits. For example, the design- build approach used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers saved an estimated $25 million to $38 million since early completion led to avoided administration costs. planned or in their early stages, we are retaining our recommendations. FTA officials provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and DOT. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at flemings@gaO.gov or (202) 512-2834. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. audit from October 2008 through October 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the individual named above, Steve Cohen, Assistant Director; Jay Cherlow; Patrick Dudley; Carol Henn; Bert Japikse; Joanie Lofgren; Maureen Luna-Long; Amanda K. Miller; Tina Paek; Amy Rosewarne; Tina Won Sherman; and Jim. Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and Establishing a Clear Federal Role. Highway Public-Private Partnerships: More Rigorous Up-Front Analysis Could Better Secure Potential Benefits and Protect the Public Interest. Public Transportation: Improvements Are Needed to More Fully Assess Predicted Impacts of New Starts Projects. Road Bridges and Tunnels: Federal Role in Providing Safety Oversight and Freight Infrastructure Investment Could Be Better Targeted. Highway Highways: Increased Reliance on Contractors Can Pose Oversight Challenges for Federal and State Officials. D.C. Public Transportation: Preliminary Analysis of Changes to and Trends in FTA’s New Starts and Small Starts Programs. GAO-07-812T. Washington, D.C.: May 10, 2007. Public transportation: New Starts Program Is in a Period of Transition. GAE-06-819. Washington,. D.c.: August 30, 2006. public transportation: Prel Preliminary Information on FTA's Implementation of SAFETEA-LU Changes. Report: Pilot Projects Could Help Test Solutions to Long-standing Concerns with the EEO Complaint Process. Public Transportation: Better Data Needed to Assess Length of New Starts Process, and Options Exist to Expedite Project Development. High Speed Passenger Rail: Future Development Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges and Establishing an Estimate of the Costs and Benefits of High Speed Rail in Washington, D.C. The report was written by Tina Paek, Amy Rosewarne, Tina Won Sherman, and Jim Wozny. Investment in Major Projects Has Been Limited. GAO-04-419. Washington, D.C.: March 25, 2004. Back to Mail Online home. Back into the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the pageYou came from: Back to thepage you came From. Backto the page You came from,. Back tothe page you were from, Back to The page you arrived from.Back to the pages you camefrom, Back To The Page You Came From. FTA may want to use existing, long-standing tools to incorporate more flexibility in the New Starts process to help facilitate transit projects that use alternative approaches. Without an evaluation plan to assess the results of its pilot program, FTA may also lose some valuable information Congress intended the agency to obtain through the pilot program’s establishment. We provided a draft of this report to DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use of these existing tools in the future. yet granting project sponsors any major streamlining modifications to the New Starts process. FTA does not have an evaluation plan to accurately and reliably assess the pilot program’s results. We have previously reported that to evaluate the effectiveness of a pilot program, a sound evaluation plan is needed and should incorporate key features including: well-defined, clear, and measurable objectives; measures that are directly linked to the program objectives; criteria for determining pilot program performance; a way to isolate the effects of the pilot programs. a way to isolate the effects of the pilot program; a data analysis plan for the evaluation design; and a detailed plan to ensure that data collection, entry, and storage are reliable and error-free. FTA officials told us that they have not yet developed an evaluation plan for its pilot program given that the projects are all ongoing, far from completion, and still working through the New Starts. Without such an evaluationPlan, FTA is limited in its decision making regarding its pilotProgram. Congress will be limited in Its decision making about the pilotProgram’s potential broader application. including design-build and design- build-finance-operate-maintain because of the lack of early commitment of federal funding for the projects. Use of these tools is not without risk. Letters of Intent could be misinterpreted as an obligation of federal funds when they only signal FTA’s intention to obligate future funds. Early Systems Work Agreements require a project to have a record of decision for the environmental review process that must be completed under the National Environmental Policy Act. environmental review process that must be completed under the National Environmental Policy Act. Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreement count against FTA’s available funding for New Starts projects under the current surface transportation authorization. We found that the governments of the United Kingdom and Canada use conditional approvals to help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. The United States does not use these tools. The U.S. does not have the ability to use the conditional approval process for transit projects, we found. FTA has employed a contractor to determine whether risk is effectively transferred from the public to private sector for its pilot program projects. FTA can also use Letters of Intent to signal an intention to obligate federal funds at a later date when funds become available. Early Systems Work Agreements obligate a portion of a project’s federal funding so that project sponsors can begin preliminary project activities before a full funding grant agreement is awarded. From a public FTA still has the ability to further experiment with the use of existing tools that could encourage a greater private sector role. DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed to consider our recommendations and provided comments through e-mail from FTA officials. In their comments, FTA officials stated that the agency has ongoing and planned efforts as part of its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program that they believe address the intent of our recommendations. For example, they said they have made use of tools such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements in the past in order to streamline the New Starts process, and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use. The office is intended to offer outreach, professional capacity building, technical assistance, and decision-making tools for highway-related public-private partnerships. In addition, FTA officials told us that they have plans to develop an online toolset for employees to help them provide technical assistance to project sponsors. This assistance is to include checklists to help determine whether a project should use an alternative approach, risk matrices that provide an overview and explanation of risks transferred using such an approach, and a financial feasibility model that can be used to quantitatively compare the use of an alternative. FTA can offer concurrent project approvals into preliminary engineering and final design. The modification of any of FTA’s New Starts requirements and oversight tools will be on a case-by-case basis if FTA determines enough risk is transferred to and equity capital is invested by the private sector. These include Letters of No Prejudice that allow a project sponsor to incur costs with the understanding that these costs may be reimbursable as eligible expenses (or eligible for credit toward the local match) should FTA approve the project for funding at a later date. New Starts program by Deloitte, commissioned by FTA to review the New Starts process and identify opportunities for streamlining or simplifying the process. Study found that FTA’s risk-assessment process delayed project development. Consultants to the Dulles Silver Line project sponsor told us that through the New. Starts program through the FTA, they were able to get the project off the ground. The study found that the New starts process is perceived by project sponsors as intensive, lengthy, and burdensome. It also found that New Starts’ prescribed review times of 30 and 120 days are apparently arbitrary. considered transferring more risk to the private sector to meet FTA’s threshold to waive certain New Starts evaluation requirements, but decided against doing so. While it may be too early for FTA to grant major streamlining modifications with the other two pilot projects, FTA still has the ability as part of its pilot risk to consider granting major modifications to streamline its New Starts requirements. Despite this apparent impasse, FTA sill has the unique opportunity to take advantage of the fundamental characteristic of a pilot program to gain valuable insight. project sponsors with some level of relief, including expediting its risk assessment and providing Letters of No Prejudice earlier than traditionally allowed in the New Starts process. FTA has also granted a waiver from federal performance bonding requirements to the Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector pilot project, which it has also done for non-pilot program projects. It has also stated its amenability to waiving its risk Assessment and financial reviews, concurrently approving the project into the final design phase while awarding an Early Systems award. approvals into the New Starts phases. FTA determined that it would not relax, modify, or waive its risk assessment and financial capacity reviews prior to advancement into final design. Houston Metro retains risks in a number of critical risk areas including finance since there is no equity capital investment by the private sector partner. FTA has only assessed the Houston Metro pilot project to determine the extent to which FTA could streamline the New starts process. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Silver Line project sponsor told us that through the New Starts process, FTA has complete control over a project’s schedule. Denver took 5 years to receive a full funding grant agreement when the project sponsor originally estimated that it would take 2 to 3 years. FTA officials stated that several factors, including the decision to reexamine a tunnel option, contributed to challenges surrounding the Dulles Silver Line. The New Starts project approval process may also limit other potential benefits, such as enhanced efficiencies and design improvements. officials told us that these additional costs stem from a lack of funding available in a surface transportation authorization period rather than FTA’s New Starts requirements. For the Dulles Silver Line, tax-increment financing funding was a major funding source for the project, contributing up to $400 million to the $2.6 billion project. The project risked losing the tax increment financing funding as it took 5 years to receive a full funding grant agreement, project consultants told us. The Duller Silver Line project consultants said that the project risked lose the tax Increment Financing Funding. deliver and operate the project under a long-term agreement. In September 2009, Denver Regional Transportation District released a request for proposals to prequalified teams. One ongoing New Starts project did not apply to be part of the pilot program, but is using an alternative approach. The Dulles Silver Line is using the design-build approach with partial funding of the local share coming from area businesses generated through a tax-increment financing district. In contrast, international project sponsors have delivered transit projects using a wider range of funding. The Federal Highway Administration has carried out three pilot programs that have allowed projects to move more efficiently through its grant process. These pilot projects waived certain aspects of the federal-aid highway procurement provisions. One of these pilot programs is cited as having helped pave the way for design-build to become the standard project delivery approach in highway projects. Another pilot program allowed the Federal Highway administration to waive regulations and policies so project sponsors in two states could contract with the private sector at a much earlier point in the project development cycle than was previously allowed. The Federal Aviation Administration uses Letters of Intent in its Airport Improvement Program to establish multiyear funding schedules. The Federal Highway Administration grants early conditional approvals to highway project sponsors seeking Transportation Infrastructure Finance. The FAA has granted 90 of these multiyear awards since 1988. The agency says the letters of intent allow project sponsors to proceed with greater certainty regarding future federal funding compared to the broader program and also help prevent project stops and starts. Also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations use similar conditional approvals. project, respectively. One project, the Las Vegas Monorail, a 4-mile fixed-guideway system serving the resort corridor along Las Vegas Boulevard in Nevada, was financed with tax-exempt revenue bonds issued through the state of Nevada and with contributions from the area resorts and hotels. No completed New Starts projects have been privately financed and therefore, none of these projects have used private equity financing. There have been very few examples of completed non-New Starts-funded new fixed-Guideway projects that have been private financed. and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds, and defined conventional project delivery to refer to the design-bid-build approach. We defined innovative financing to include loan or credit assistance such as the Transportation Infrastructure Financing and Innovation Act, Private Activity Bonds, Tax Increment Financing, State Infrastructure Banks, Grant Anticipation Notes, and Revenue Bonds. Finally, we defined alternative financing to referring to public-private partnerships that involve private equity capital such as concession agreements and defined alternative approaches as ones that transfer greater risk to the private sector. The New Starts grant process is closely aligned with the conventional design-bid-build approach. Project sponsors and other stakeholders for Denver Regional Transportation District’s East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects told us that the private sector must maintain its financial commitment to a project for up to several months. FTA has yet to grant three pilot project sponsors any major streamlining modifications of the New Starts project approval process, such as the awarding of concurrent approvals into the New starts phases, the authors say. The costs of delays may also contribute to additional project costs borne by the public sector. For the East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects, Denver Regional Transportation District officials also told us that since enough design work will be completed during the New Starts preliminary engineering phase, no additional design work is needed. However, as required by New Starts, they will again prepare the design documentation for the final design and full funding grant agreement approval phases, potentially contributing to schedule delays. FTA officials said that the resubmission of the documentation is necessary because the project will need to be fully funded before construction can begin. Denver Regional Transportation District officials anticipate adhering to the sequential and phased New Starts approach to its project. However, following this approach will likely increase the cost of the project. FTA officials told us that these additional costs stem from a reauthorization of the existing transportation bill, the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users. Management and Budget, and congressional review of the full funding grant agreement for the project will be key to the project's success. Congress authorized FTA to establish the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. Pilot program allows FTA to study projects that incorporate greater private sector involvement through alternative project delivery and financing approaches. Project sponsors, advisors, and private sector partners believe that other barriers beyond the federal approval process affect the use of these approaches, including those beyond the immediate reach of the program such as reduced available private equity capital resulting from the recent economic recession. FTA has agreed to provide all three of the pilot program project sponsors with some level of relief, including expediting its New Starts program. authorized FTA to establish its Public- Private Partnership Pilot Program to demonstrate the advantages and disadvantages of these approaches in transit. Pilot project studies projects that use alternative approaches that integrate a sharing of project risk and incorporate private equity capital. To date, only one of the pilot projects is expected to incorporate private Equity capital. FTA designated three project sponsors for its public-private partnership Pilot Program in 2007: Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) and the San Francisco Bay Area Rail Authority (SMA) The pilot program will be open to the public for the next five years. FTA identifies and recommends new fixed-guideway transit projects for federal funding. Over the last decade, the New Starts program has resulted in funding over $10 billion. The New Starts project approval process is not entirely compatible with transit projects that use alternative approaches in that the process is sequential and phased with approvals granted separately and at certain decision points. However, we and other stakeholders debt for large transit projects due to tight lending conditions. We have previously identified FTA’s New Starts grant program as a model for other federal transportation programs because of its use of a rigorous evaluation process. FTA evaluates potential transit projects and assigns ratings to them annually. FTA uses the evaluation and rating process to decide which projects to recommend to Congress for funding. The sequential and phased New Starts project approval process can create schedule delays as project sponsors await federal approval. The amount of time it takes for FTA to determine whether a project can advance can be significant. The challenges they raised include (1) delays, (2) additional costs, and (3) the loss of other potential benefits, such as enhanced efficiencies and improved quality. the availability of appropriations, provided that a project meets all the terms of a full funding grant agreement. (2) Early Systems Work Agreements that obligate only a portion of a New Starts project’s federal share for preliminary project activities, such as land acquisition. Over the past 30 years, FTA has made very limited use of these tools by only granting three Letters of Intent and four Early Systems work Agreements to transit projects. The Deloitte study noted that project sponsors miss the opportunity to use alternative methods including design-build. Consideration of the public interest in transit may refer to the many stakeholders in public-private partnerships. No definition of public interest exists at the federal level, nor does federal guidance identify public interest considerations in transportation. Stakeholders include public transit authorities, transit agency employees, mass transit users and members of thepublic who may be affected by a public/private partnership. The public interest refers to the due diligence that FTA typically conducts as a public entity with a financial interest in a transit project. project sponsors have delivered transit projects using a wider range of alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships. According to World Bank officials, the United Kingdom and Canada are leading countries for private equity investment in transit, and the United States. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors, private sector participants, international stakeholders, and experts regarding the competitive procurement process and robust concession agreements. We also examined international mechanisms that were implemented for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands Light Railway, London Underground. FTA’s pilot program is expected to demonstrate potential benefits to using alternative approaches in transit. Project sponsors cited a range of potential benefits, such as achieving cost and time savings. DOT outlined some of these same benefits and advantages in its 2007 Report to Congress on transit public-private partnerships. As more transit projects use alternative approaches, FTA may not be able to readily accommodate these approaches, ultimately disadvantaging transit project sponsors that seek to deliver their projects more quickly and efficiently and at a lesser cost. be used to quantitatively compare the use of an alternative approach with the conventional approach to transit projects. Project sponsors and their advisors noted that as there is little public sector institutional knowledge about public- private partnerships in and trade-offs. Quasi- governmental entities established by foreign governments have better equipped project sponsors to implement alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships. Expanded FTA efforts could facilitate the implementation of transit projects that use alternative approaches and protect the public interest through theUse of standardized contracts, technical assistance, and financial assessments. FTA can introduce additional flexibility into its three pilot projects through, among other things, the use of existing, long-standing tools, such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements. Other agencies within DOT have used such tools successfully in the past to provide flexibility to their funding and approval processes and to advance and promulgate alternative project finance and delivery approaches. Some other countries have used conditional approvals to incorporate more flexibility into their funding processes and help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. Our scope was limited to identifying the primary issues associated with using public- private partnerships for transit infrastructure. We defined traditional financing to include federal grants, state and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors and private sector participants about their experiences with alternative financing and procurement in transit projects. We collected and reviewed descriptions of the projects, copies of the concession or development agreements, planning documents, and documentation related to the financial structure. FTA distributes billions of dollars of federal funding to transit agencies for the construction of new, large-scale projects. Project sponsors are looking to transit projects that use alternative approaches to deliver and finance new transit projects, along with federal funds. FTA’s New Starts evaluation requirements for transit projects seeking federal funding do not include an evaluation of whether the public is receiving the best value for its money as compared to other delivery approaches. Thus project sponsors, advisors, and government officials noted that such an entity in the United States could be valuable in protecting the public interest in public-private partnerships. FTA defines alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships, as those that increase the extent of private sector involvement. Conventional transit projects generally follow a “design-bid-build’ approach. Project sponsors say they may better meet cost and schedule targets by transferring risks to the private sector. However, benefits are not assured and should be evaluated by weighing them against potential costs and trade-offs, the FTA says. The agency says it will continue to monitor the situation and provide information to the public. GAO: DOT has done much to promote the benefits, but comparatively little to assist states and localities weigh potential costs and trade-offs of these partnerships. Since that report, the Federal Highway Administration’s Office of Innovative Program Delivery has been established to provide support for highway-related public-private partnerships. The office is intended to offer outreach, professional advice and support for project sponsors and other stakeholders.provide similar support for transit projects, the GAO says. The GAO recommends that the U.S. Department of Transportation provide more information about the benefits and costs of public- private partnerships. Government officials and consultants that perform financial assessments, such as Value for Money analysis, cautioned that the assessments are not without limitations. Officials and consultants told us that these analyses are inherently subjective and rely on assumptions that can introduce bias. In the United Kingdom, an “optimism bias” of cost overruns is added to the public sector comparator in part to account for this. Some countries have further protected the public-private partnership in the past to protect the taxpayer from being overcharged. stated that including both quantitative and qualitative factors in financial assessments such as Value for Money analysis provides a more comprehensive project assessment. Project sponsors can assess if one public-private partnership option is more advantageous than another if it is decided that private participation in a project is beneficial. For example, Bay Area Rapid Transit used a Value For Money analysis in its original iteration of the Oakland Airport Connector to assess which alternative project delivery approach (design-build-operate-maintain) would be more advantageous. use Value for Money to give a range of possible project costs when coupled with a sensitivity analysis. A sensitivity analysis developed for the Canada Line suggested that project costs could have varied from $47 million more to $270 million less than expected. Project sponsors noted that since Value for money analyses are often publicly available, such as in the United Kingdom, they can lead to more-informed discussions and provide transparency in the project. A further example of how project sponsors can use Value formoney is to enhance communication about a project. tests examine not only the economic value of a project but also other factors that are hard to quantify, such as design quality and functionality. In the United Kingdom, Value for Money analysis includes qualitative factors such as the viability, desirability, and achievability of the project. Provinces such as Canada’s British Columbia and Australia's Victoria also include qualitative factors in their financial assessments. Government officials stated that including both quantitative and quantitative factors in financial assessments is a good idea. The use of quantitative and qualitative public interest tests and tools before entering into transit public-private partnerships can help lay out the expected benefits, costs, and risks of the project. Not using such tools can potentially allow aspects of the public interest to be overlooked. For example, a Value for Money analysis is a tool used to evaluate if entering into a project as a public- private partnership is the best project delivery option. Internationally, the United Kingdom, and British Columbia in Canada, among others, require a Value For Money analysis for all transportation projects. require a Value for Money analysis for all transportation projects over a certain cost threshold. All transportation projects in the United Kingdom that exceed about $24 million must undergo an analysis to receive project funding. Project costs in British Columbia must total more than about $46 million. Domestically, Florida requires avalue for money analysis for public- private partnerships. One of which was recently conducted on the I-595 Corridor Roadway Improvements Project in Broward County. A Value for money assessment was also completed for the Bay. Value for Money assessment was also completed for the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport Connector at the request of FTA. Value for Money tests are often done by comparing the costs of doing a proposed project as a public-private partnership against an estimate of the cost of procuring that project using a public delivery model. The tests examine not only the economic value of a project, but also the social and political value of the project as well as the potential benefits of a public/private partnership. Some countries have further protected the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by establishing quasi- governmental entities to assist project sponsors. Entities such as Partnerships UK, Partnerships Victoria, and Partnerships BC are often fee-for-service and associated with Treasury Departments on the provincial and national levels. These quasi-governmental entities all develop guidance such as standardized contracts and provide technical assistance to support transporters using alternative approaches. They also provide other varied services to facilitate public-private partnerships across different sectors. partnerships and approaches generally follow a standard model such as a framework for assigned risk between the project sponsor and private sector. The United Kingdom’s standard contract outlines requirements as well as factors to consider from a project's service commencement through termination, which is periodically updated to reflect lessons learned. For example, after the government of the United Kingdom required the private sector to share any refinancing gains, the standard contract was subsequently updated. Furthermore, the quasi-governmental entities provide technical assistance to support transit. delivery or alternative financing) or both of our established definitions. We determined that we would collect the most valuable and relevant information from countries that share a similar political and cultural structure to the United States. Given our limited resources, we decided to select only two of the three remaining countries. We ultimately identified Canada and the United Kingdom for our international site visits. Issues discussed in the report related to the interpretation of foreign law, including the character of public-private partnership agreements, were evaluated as questions of fact based upon interviews. project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that allow for flexibility under certain circumstances. For example, Houston Metro’s North and Southeast Corridor projects’ concession agreement incorporated this flexibility by including an operations and maintenance agreement for the first 5 years after service begins with the option for renewal. According to a consultant that works on the project, this flexibility is important to protect the public interest given that unforeseen circumstances may occur that make the concessionaire unable to meet performance standards. It is also important to have the ability to periodically revisit agreement terms in long-term concessions. Both of the London Underground’s maintenance 30-year concession agreements are reviewed for scope of work and costs by a public-private partnerships arbiter every 7.5 years. The concessionaire has the ability to request an extraordinary review by the arbiter if costs rise above a specified threshold. Periodically revisiting terms, or shorter concession periods, can also allow for changes such as system extension. One of the projects being revisited is the London 2012 Olympics, which will be held in London. have been avoided if the initial concessions had been shorter. Shorter concession periods are being used as a means to revisit terms and rebid if desired. Denver Regional Transportation District’s draft concession agreement includes clauses specifying both triggers that could lead to default and terms of compensation in case of default. For example, termination provisions detail the condition of the transit asset at the end of the concession when it is abandoned. For more information on how to get involved in this type of project, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/transit/how-to-get-involved-in-a-transit-project-you-can-help. such as delayed trains and littered or unclean railcars, persists. If low performance continues over a period, the project sponsor can terminate the concession agreement and rebid the project to another private partner. Project sponsors we interviewed also protect the public interest in transit public-private partnership and other alternative approaches through the incorporation of private equity capital. Other advisors to project sponsors told us that a clause specifying the sharing of “refinancing gains” between the project sponsors and concessionaire could also help to protect thepublic interest. private sector partner borrows to finance its costs. It will be unable to meet its financial obligations from these milestone payments if those standards are not met. Bank lenders protect their investments by ensuring that the private sector properly develops a concession agreement and then delivers on it. The public interest is thus further protected by this integration of the private and public sectors, the report says. The report was published by the International Institute for Fiscal Studies and Research (IFS) in association with the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR) The public interest is further protected by this integration of responsibilities. The bank lender and concessionaire provide additional project oversight through the monitoring of cost overruns and schedule delays, among other issues. To better protect the public interest, project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that protect public interest. For the Croydon Tramlink, the private sector partner contributed 30 percent of project costs. In the case of the Canada Line, theprivate sector partner did not miss any of its 400 payment milestones. the private sector can potentially benefit through gains achieved in refinancing their investments and these gains can be substantial. The governments of the United Kingdom as well as Victoria and New South Wales, Australia, require that any refinancing gains achieved by private concessionaires generally be shared with the government. Some foreign governments have recognized the importance of protecting the public interest in public-private partnerships through the use of quantitative and qualitative public interest assessments. We have previously reported that more rigorous, up-front analysis could better secure potential benefits and protect thepublic interest. to accommodate changes over time such as extensions, service changes, and technology upgrades. In the United Kingdom, the project sponsor for Manchester Metrolink had to break two existing public-private partnership concession agreements to accommodate extensions to its system. Consultants to the Manchester project told us that breaking a concession agreement can be very expensive and can damage the relationship between project sponsor and private sector partner. Similarly, to accommodate increased ridership, theproject sponsor for Docklands Light Railway decided to build platform expansions. The Manchester Metrolink Phase II light rail project was a 17-year concession agreement wherein the private partner had responsibility to design, construct, finance, operate, and maintain this project. The private partner provided over one-half of the project’s funding for construction. The public sector terminated the concession to further expand the system. The concession was ultimately bought by Transport for London. The London Underground maintenance projects included agreements entered into between London Underground and two private sector partners. The project was designed to connect two of the city's existing stations. The Lewisham Extension was the United Kingdom’s first transportation public-private partnership for both project delivery and financing. The Croydon Tramlink light rail project was a 99-year design- build-finance-operate-maintain agreement to develop the new system. In this project, payments to the private sector partner during operations were based entirely on ridership revenue, but the project sponsor retained the authority to set fares. Additionally, if a transit project is built as an extension of an existing system, the privatesector partner may not want to operate a single segment of the system. countries for private equity investment in transit, and the United Kingdom has the most experience using different public-private partnership models. International projects also generally require a government subsidy to supplement farebox revenues for construction as well as operations and maintenance. The Docklands Light Railway serves a redevelopment area east and southeast of London. Transport for London, the public sector project sponsor, used three separate design-build-finance-maintain concession agreements to construct system extensions and operate trains over the entire system. a greater private sector role in transit projects. The United Kingdom’s Department for Transport grants a conditional approval. If the agreed-upon cost, schedule, and risk transference are not met, the government withdraws its funding. We also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations have experience withdrawing funding when such conditions have not been met. Similarly, Transport Canada officials told us that it makes process. to state its intent to provide federal funds to a transit project. Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Regional Transportation District offered proposal stipends to private sector entities that submitted formal bids. Stipends add costs that must be weighed against the benefits they provide. Project sponsors that we interviewed have also encouraged early and sustained interaction with the private sector to test the project's marketability and whether and in what form private sector participation is advantageous. Such feedback can be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants, the authors say. They say the project sponsors are looking for a partner that is willing to invest in the project. the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to include the private sector. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential items to solicit bidders. Minnesota Metro Transit told us that private sector input produced several good ideas that were incorporated into the project, such as a shared risk fund to provide an incentive for the privatesector to reduce construction delays. The Hiawatha Corridor project used a request for qualifications to select bidder and solicit private sector review of project details. far from completion, and still working through the New Starts project approval process. The alternative approaches we reviewed have protected the public interest in various ways to ensure the public receives the best price for a project. Project sponsors we interviewed have attempted in part to protect the publicinterest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by ensuring the use of competitive procurement practices. These practices are not unique to alternative approaches and are sometimes used in conventional procurements, the report says. The report concludes that alternative approaches to transit projects are better than conventional approaches. for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands Light Railway, London Underground, Manchester Metrolink, and Nottingham Express Transit in the United Kingdom. We also held in-depth interviews with FTA on its steps to protect the public interest in federally funded transit projects with greater private sector participation. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 through October 2009 in accordance with FTA’s Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program and the New Starts Program. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. permitting risk to the private sector. The private sector partner spent more than $30 million dollars over a 10-year period and never obtained final approval to proceed with construction. Transit projects that use alternative approaches may also introduce transaction costs to the project sponsor through legal, financial, and administrative fees in addition to higher-priced financing in cases where the transit project is privately financed. According to officials we interviewed, transit public-private partnerships often require the advisory services of attorneys, financial experts, and private consultants. partner may not want to operate a single segment of a publicly owned system. According to officials, private investors are reluctant to assume ridership risk of any portion of a system operated by an entity they do not control. In many cases, the private sector partner would need the authority to increase or decrease transit fares based on ridership trends and the number of transit users. However, because raising fares involves political considerations, including equity for low-income transit users, officials told us that most project sponsors retain the right to set fares. agreement was structured to incorporate a limited transfer of ridership risk to the private sector partner. Although the project sponsor wanted to transfer full ridershiprisk to the concessionaire, it learned that private investors would not finance a deal. The project sponsor decided to transfer limited ridership Risk to theprivate sector by basing 10 percent of its payments to thePrivate sector partner during operations and maintenance on ridership figures. According to project sponsors, this transfer of Ridership risk is a win-win situation. Ridership risk may be difficult to transfer to the private sector if transit project sponsors are reluctant to forfeit full fare-setting authority. Denver Regional Transportation District chose not to transfer ridership risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects given that it wanted to retain the risk.site leads to increased project costs or schedule delays, and can encompass conditions that are identified as well as those that are not identified during surveys of a project site. Past experience in projects demonstrates the difficulty of transferring these risks to theprivate sector. Most project sponsors retain the right to set fares and are unwilling to forfeit fare-setting control. The Oakland Airport Connector project initially tried but ultimately was unable to transfer ridership risk in part because the private sector concessionaire would not have fare- Setting authority. This was also the case with the Canada Line, where the agreement was structured to incorporate a limited transfer of ridership. It is unclear if the project will be completed by the end of the year as planned. The project is expected to cost more than $1 billion. The Canada Line light rail project in the Vancouver area is a 35-year design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession agreement. The project is in the ninth year of its contract. A separate entity was created to oversee the project’s development and the private partner provided one-third of the revenue. The private partner assumed some risk that actual ridership would not reach forecasted levels. Along with this transfer of risk, the private sector was also given the ability to set fares. In the 1800s, the private sector played a central role in financing early transportation infrastructure development in the U.S. In following years, transportation infrastructure Development became almost wholly publicly funded. More recently, there has been a move back towards policies that encourage more private and public blending of funding, responsibility, and control in transportation projects. The federal government has progressively relaxed restrictions on private participation in highway and highway and rail projects in the past few years, according to a report by the Center for American Progress. A greater private sector role in transit projects can also potentially offer certain advantages to the public sector. Denver may have more financing flexibility by potentially extending the payments 20 years longer than if a bond were used. With a longer payment period, project stakeholders told us that the transit agency could conserve funds in the short term to help it construct other new transit projects on time. Also, alternative approaches may help ensure more predictable funding for maintenance, the report says. The report was written by the Denver Regional Transportation District and the Center for Transportation Studies. fees for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ request for proposals submittals. In addition to transaction costs, public-private partnerships incur added costs when the private sector provides the financing for the project. The municipal bond market in the United States generally provides public transit agencies a cheaper source of funding because they can borrow more cheaply. Officials also stated that the effects of the recent economic recession and failed credit markets have stymied the privatesector’s ability to raise revenues and provide affordable long-term debt for large transit projects. The Nottingham Express Transit light rail project used a 27-year contract to design, build, finance, operate, and maintain a new transit line. One of the two private sector partners subsequently went bankrupt, and the concession agreement was then taken over by Transport for London. Payments to the private sector were based on performance and ridership revenue. The private sector assumed some risk, meaning that the privatesector assumed some responsibility for the project's development. The project was completed in 2010. It is part of the Nottingham Express Light Rail project, which runs through Nottingham. and service points—by creating performance targets and to tie monthly payments to these based on the private sector partner’s actual performance. Some projects have also incorporated standards that link to increased ridership to provide incentives for the privatesector partner to provide good customer service. For example, Nottingham Express Transit has 20 percent of its payments to theprivate sector based on ridership. Additionally, the draft concession agreement for Denver's Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects incorporate levels of payment deductions that accelerate when low performance persists. services of attorneys, financial experts, and private consultants to successfully execute the steps necessary to finalize the project’s agreement. These additional services and transaction fees represent additional public sector costs that the conventional project delivery approach may not necessarily require. For example, the project sponsor for the London Underground spent the equivalent of $112 million to cover legal expenses, financial services, and administrative fees. Denver Regional Transportation District anticipates spending $15 million in advisory fees for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ Denver's East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects initially had a 700-page design specification document for their commuter rail vehicles. After industry review and feedback that the specifications would lead to customized vehicles that would be expensive and difficult to operate and maintain, the project sponsor responded by creating a 15-page performance specifications document for the vehicles. When specifications are focused on performance, bidders can offer a range of design and technology options as well as follow best practices that meet overall project objectives, the district says. performance specifications document for the vehicles. An advisor to the project sponsor noted that the use of design specifications is more challenging with transit projects than in highways and other sectors. The advisor also said that projects with a range of technology options must undergo the environmental review process at the highest possible level of design given the effect of different technologies on the environment. In contrast, one project sponsor said that performance specifications should not be used when conditions of the facility or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances. design details be included and that this requirement can prohibit a project sponsor from instead leaving such design specifications to the private sector. This may limit the ability to find innovative and cost-effective solutions for the project. Due to the New Starts requirements, another project sponsor told us that it had been discouraged from using an alterative project delivery approach again after having had what it called a 'positive experience' with New Starts. When a project sponsors specifies the exact number of vehicles, the privatesector partners must incorporate that design detail into their scope, whether or not that exact number is really needed. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential elements agreed upon by the public agencies funding the project as a basis for negotiating with potential bidders. Project sponsors that we interviewed seek to protect the public interest in alternative approaches through an emphasis on performance. Performance specifications focus on desired project performance ( such as frequency of train arrivals at a station) and not design details (such as the type of train). Project sponsors and consultants told us that detailed specifications that have been in conventional project delivery approaches can restrict what bidder can offer. or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances could occur that would require more specific design specifications. Project sponsors have also sought to use performance standards to protect the public interest. These standards are what the private sector partner must meet to be compensated during the project’s construction, operations, and maintenance phases. If theprivate sector partner does not meet the standards, then it is penalized with no, reduced, or delayed payments, and penalties can escalate if poor performance continues. Standards for construction include delivering a completed project or project element. be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants. Project sponsors then conduct a request for qualified bidders to gain more detailed input from the private sector on a project. The request can establish a higher threshold of responsibility for private partners compared to traditional procurements in which a private partner is selected based primarily on bid price. Thus, sustained and iterative interaction between the project sponsor and theprivate sector can refine the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to use the funds. competitive procurement practices are generally required to be used for federal funding. European Union countries are required to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one are sometimes used in conventional procurements and are sometimes called "alternative approaches" to traditional procurement. The public sector receives the best bid when using these partnerships and approaches, project sponsors say. They say maximizing the use of these competitive procurement practices helps to ensure that the public sector gets the best price for its work. The U.S. Department of Defense says it has no plans to change its procurement practices. for construction include delivering a completed project or project element within a set schedule. For example, the Canada Line private sector partner had 400 milestones that it needed to complete and have certified in order to continue to receive timely payments during the project’s construction period. Performance standards for operations and maintenance, also called key performance indicators, cover all aspects of service including the availability, frequency, and reliability of service and conditions of facilities. London Underground chose to emphasize keyperformance indicators in four areas: availability, capability, ambience, and service points. extent of private sector involvement beyond the conventional design-bid-build project delivery approach. These alternative approaches contemplate a single private sector entity being responsible and financially liable for performing all or a significant number of functions in connection with a project. With these alternative approaches, many of the project risks that would these alternative approach are transferred to or shared with the private sector. In transferring responsibility and risk for multiple project elements to the privatesector partner, the project sponsor often has less control over the procurement and may earn a financial return commensurate with the risks it has assumed. Denver Regional Transportation District originally planned to transfer all environmental remediation risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ long-term design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession. When the project sponsor decided to retain one aspect of the environmental risk related to several unknown remediation elements, the private sector dropped the cost estimate of transferring the remaining environmental risk from $25 million to $9 million. According to project sponsors, this transfer of ridership risk was done to induce the concessionaire to increase ridership by providing quality customer service. private partnerships (see table 4). One limitation is that some project risks should not be transferred to the private sector. For example, it may be too costly for project sponsors to transfer certain risks, such as ridership and environmental remediation. Ridership risk refers to whether the actual number of passengers achieves forecasted levels. According to officials we interviewed, environmental remediated risk refers to whether the cleanup of hazardous materials and other conditions at a project site leads to increased project costs or schedule delays. requirements and other environmental risks may become too time-consuming and costly for the private sector to address. The public sector may best be retained by the public sector given its stewardship role within the government. According to officials we interviewed, although the Canada Line’s concession agreement transferred all key construction risks (i.e., cost overruns) to theprivate sector, the public authority retained risks associated with permitting. Further, for one early highway public- private partnership in California, the project sponsor attempted to transfer environmental permitting risk to the privatesector.

ROUGE-1: 77.39, ROUGE-2: 69.96, ROUGE-L: 21.48
BERTScore: 55.21

==============================================
==================== [58/100] ====================
Summary:
In 1998, HEA was amended to include a provision stating that eligible lenders that act as trustees are responsible for meeting statutory and regulatory requirements for the loans they hold as trustees. Loss of the federal guarantee due to servicer problems has occurred under the auspices of trustee arrangements in the past. For example, in the late 1980s, Bank of America served as trustee for the California Student Loan Finance Corporation. Education determined that the loan servicer, United Education and Software Company, failed to transfer certain information to its new computer system.  servicer problems that may result in loan guarantee loss can also occur on loans held by eligible lenders and are not unique to trustee arrangements. Department of Education reports that approximately 125 trustee arrangements exist between eligible and ineligible lenders. These arrangements account for $25.3 billion in outstanding loans— approximately 19 percent of all student loans. As a result of these problems, student loans totaling approximately $400 million lost their federal guarantee. The federal government will not be able to guarantee any more student loans than it already has. Education reimburses guaranty agencies for most of their claims paid to lenders for defaulted loans. Most lenders contract with a third-party entity to service the loan and collect payments from borrowers. Education may assess penalties, refuse to make future payments, or recover payments already made to lenders and agencies for such things as interest subsidies and insurance claims. Some loans lose their federal guarantee because lenders, servicers, or guaranty agency fail to follow the Department’s requirements for making, servicing, and collecting loans or because of fraudulent activity. while allowing ineligible lenders to participate in the program. The HEA provision that holds trustees responsible for an ineligible lender’s loans allows the federal government to recoup the losses from the eligible lender trustee rather than the ineligible lender. Education officials believe they do not have direct oversight authority of ineligible lenders. The federal government will not reimburse the guarantor or the lender for the associated dollar loss. However, because some problems may not be found until after the government has already provided reimbursement, the government may have to recover these monies from the parties involved. agencies. When states failed to establish such agencies, the Congress enacted legislation with several incentives to increase lender and guaranty agency participation. Congress has since shifted some risk back to the guaranty agencies and lenders by reducing the maximum reimbursement and insurance rates on defaulted loans. These actions were intended to encourage both lenders and Guaranty agencies to work with borrowers to make sure they got the loans they were owed. The Congress kept the financial risk almost entirely with the federal government. It also provided federal funds for guaranty. agencies to use as seed money to pay claims. Education officials told us that although Education has inconsistently applied the regulations in the past, it currently interprets the provision as excluding trustee-held loans. Education has no direct oversight authority to ensure that ineligible lenders are operating their programs in accordance with HEA. Obtaining a trustee arrangement does not appear to be a widespread problem among ineligible lenders to date. If eligible lenders remain unclear and therefore continue to interpret the 50-percent rule as applying to loans they hold as a trustee, the number of trustees could decline. act to mean that the lender’s FFELP loans cannot total more than one-half of the lender's combined consumer credit loan portfolio. This provision is commonly known as the 50-percent rule. Strict application of this rule would require eligible lenders to include loans they hold as a trustee for an ineligible lender in this calculation, although the regulations do not specifically address these loans. Education officials told us that although Education officials tell us that this is not the case, the rule would still apply. Representatives of one bank incorrectly interpreted an exception to the 50-percent rule. A representative of another bank said he had turned down eligible lender trustee business because the additional trustee-held loans would put the bank above its legal limit. One trustee representative was not concerned because either calculation—including or excluding the loans—would place the bank in compliance with the act. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information, visit the S.M.A.S.C. website. which policy to establish nor how to formalize the decision once it is made. Education did not say when it expected to implement our recommendation. Education also provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Honorable Richard Riley, Secretary of Education; eligible lender trustees; ineligible lenders; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others on request. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-7215. Ineligible lenders fall into two categories: secondary marketsthat have not been designated as an eligible lender for a state and private companies that wish to make and hold student loans. Eligible and ineligible lenders agree that participation by ineligible lenders increases competition among lenders and can, in turn, contribute to improved service and lower costs for student borrowers. Some ineligible lenders believe that two factors --HEA requirements and the general evolution of financial markets -- could affect their participation in the student loan market in the future.  HEA designates which entities are eligible to make FFELP loans to students. An eligible lender is defined as under certain circumstances, a national or state chartered bank, a mutual savings bank, or a savings and loan association. A pension fund as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security is an eligible lender. A single agency of the state or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state are also eligible lenders, HEA says. For more information, go to www.hea.org. the state or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state; under certain circumstances, an eligible institution; and a consumer finance company subsidiary of a national bank. The majority of organizations making loans to students fall into one of these categories. The Student Loan Marketing Association or the Holding Company of the Student Loan marketing Association is the most common. The state or an agency of any state functioning as a secondary market is also a guaranty agency; a Rural Rehabilitation Corporation is a guarantee agency; and any nonprofit privateagency functioning in any state as asecondary market. Education administers and oversees federal student aid programs authorized by HEA. Among these financial aid programs is FFELP. The five principal entities involved are students, schools, lenders, guaranty agencies,and Education. At schools participating, students apply to a participating lender for a loan. The school verifies the student’s eligibility and determines the loan amount the student is eligible to receive. The student then receives the loan from the lender. The guaranty agency guarantees the loan against default. to originate student loans or to purchase them from another originating lender. Ineligibles use trustees to securitize portfolios of student loans. Some secondary markets raise capital by selling tax-exempt bonds to investors. This report is concerned primarily with trustee arrangements used to enable ineligible lenders to make and hold student Loans. The government expected to share the program’s financial risks with state-designated guaranty agencies. However, when states failed to establish such agencies, the FFELP was created. Eligible lenders are generally not subject to financial safety and soundness reviews by government agencies. Most eligible lender trustees also hold student loans in their own name and receive regular FFELP- related payments from the government for those loans. The presence of an eligible lender from whom the government can recoup its financial losses is critical since Education has no direct oversight authority to assess a bank’s operations as well as its financial condition. The federal government has additional sources from which to recover any repayments due the government on ineligible lenders’ loans. due the government on ineligible lenders’ loans that lose their guarantee. For example, lenders usually receive special allowance payments (SAP) and interest subsidiesfor the FFELP loans they hold. If the government were owed monies on an ineligible lender’s loans, it could recover those funds by withholding the SAP on the eligible lender trustee's self-originated loans. Both eligible and ineligible lenders reported that trustee arrangements have had a positive effect on the student loan market. for example, both participant Eligible lender trustees and ineligible lenders reported limited day-to-day interaction. Trustee arrangements come with some protections to ensure the federal government’s investment in FFELP is secure while allowing ineligible lenders to participate in the program. Some trustees reported that they interact with the ineligible lender only when it is necessary to sign forms, such as quarterly reports that must be submitted to the Department of Education. One trustee reported no daily interaction. The program is funded by the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Treasury Department. not have direct oversight authority of ineligible lenders. Most financial institutions that serve as eligible lender trustees are subject to federal (and in many instances, state) oversight. Among the most important of these regulations are those dealing with minimum capital standards. These capital standards provide benchmarks against which regulators can assess the safety and soundness of a bank’s operations as a result of a default. The federal government is likely to recover its losses from trustees for two reasons. First, most financial institutions serve aseligible lender trustees. on the effects of past rulings regarding trustee arrangements. MajorManagementChallengesandProgramRisks: Departmentof Education. Risk-BasedCapital:RegulatoryandIndustryApproachestoCapitaland Risk. High-RiskSeries:StudentFinancialAid(GAO/HR-97-11, Feb. 1997). StudentLoanLenders:InformationontheActivitiesoftheFirst IndependentTrustCompany. The first copy of each GAO report is free. Additional copies of reports are $2 each. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. We focused our review on trustee arrangements created to allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans. To determine the number of existing trustee arrangements, we obtained data from Education’s lender database. For each lender identification number on the trustee arrangement list, we asked the lenders to verify whether the account was used for originations and/or purchases of student loans, securitizations, or some combination of these transactions. We also asked lenders to provide us with information on any additional identification numbers used for trustee arrangements. According to ineligible lenders we interviewed, current initiation and annual trustee fees do not prohibit them from conducting business in the student loan market. Trustees and ineligible lenders reported similar criteria used by trustees to evaluate ineligibles before they entered into arrangements. We conducted follow-up interviews as necessary to ensure that we received accurate information. We included information only for arrangements that allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans and securitizations of these loans. Further, we included balance informationonly for the Student Loan Marketing Corporation’s privatized business and the ineligible lenders it owns. trustee arrangements, the costs associated with them, and the key characteristics they shared. To determine the protections offered the federal government by trustee arrangements, we identified and synthesized applicable legislation and regulations. We also interviewed eligible and ineligible lenders, guaranty agencies, servicers, Education officials, and other student loan market participants on the responsibilities of an eligible lender trustee. We obtained the perspectives of participants on whether trustee arrangements have a positive or negative effect on lenders’ participation in theStudent Loan Market. agency’s report on the transaction. Trustees and ineligible lenders also reported that their contracts included similar clauses covering trustee and ineligible lender resignations. For example, trustee resignation clauses allow the trustee to resign from the arrangement by giving a specific number of days’ notice to the ineligible lender, such as 60 or 90 days. If the ineligible lenders is unable to locate another trustee within that time period, the resignation clause sometimes provides for additional time to obtain a new trustee. In any event, most trustees and ineligible borrowers reported that they had similar clauses in their contracts. trustee. In any event, most trustees and ineligible lenders reported that the trustee would probably remain in place until a new one can be engaged. The trustee arrangements we reviewed were also similar in the requirements placed on the ineligible lender and the amount of monitoring the trustee performed. For example, trustees generally require ineligible lenders to abide by HEA requirements and to oversee the loan servicer, but the trustees perform limited monitoring activities. One trustee reported thatThe monitoring is not specific or regular and mostly involves a review of annual reports. Four ineligible lenders reported they had a difficult time obtaining their current trustee arrangement. Several others said that finding a trustee in the future would become more problematic. Ineligible lender representatives expressed concern that because trustees also originate student loans for themselves, trustees may decide to end their eligible lender trustee services rather than continue to provide the mechanism for a competitor to do business. A few ineligible lenders stated they were uncomfortable with trustees having the final say as they originate student loan loans for their competitors. The Federal Reserve is expected to announce a plan to consolidate student loan institutions in the coming months. The 125 arrangements represent liaisons between 16 eligible lender trustees and 31 ineligible lenders. Ineligible lenders can be further grouped as 17 secondary markets and 14 other ineligibles. Costs of trustee arrangements fall into two categories—payments to initiate the agreement and annual fees to maintain it. The ineligible lenders we interviewed reported that initiation costs were generally a flat fee ranging from $1,000 to $2,000.for $25.3 billion in outstanding loans— approximately 19 percent of the outstanding balance of all FFELP loans as of December 1999. the additional trustee-held loans would put the bank above its 50-percent allocation of student loans. A second factor that is perceived by ineligible lenders as having the potential to limit their participation in FFELP is evolution in the financial markets. Most ineligible lenders we interviewed stated that the number of available trustees has decreased as eligible lender banks have merged with each other in recent years. Recent mergers include First National Bank of Chicago and Bank One, Norwest and Wells Fargo, and Firstar Bank with Star Bank and Mercantile Bank. outstanding loan balances or on the outstanding balance of bond issues. Some eligible and ineligible lenders reported that a variety of other factors could influence the size of both initiation and annual fees. Some of these factors included the structure of the trustee arrangement and the complexity of the the geographic region in which the trustee and ineligible lender operate. The trustee’s decision to charge administrative fees on a per-loan basis rather than as a flat fee, and the additional services the trustee will perform for the ineligible lender. in trustee arrangement contracts, (3) amounts of review performed of ineligible lenders, and (4) amount of day-to-day interaction between the trustee and the ineligible lender. For example, trustees reported that most important in deciding whether to enter an arrangement is the business reputation of the ineligible lenders. In addition, some trustees review the structure of the financing method used to raise the capital necessary to originate or purchase loans. This review might include examining a rating agency’s report on the transaction. reported that initiation costs were generally a flat fee ranging between $2,500 and $20,000. Annual trustee fees reported by ineligible lenders ranged between $4,500 to $75,000, depending on a number of factors. Some secondary markets reported that their trustee charged this initiation fee each time they issued bonds to raise capital. These lenders reported that the fees could be aflat fee or calculated as a percentage of outstanding loan balances or on the outstanding balance of bond balances.

ROUGE-1: 78.57, ROUGE-2: 70.95, ROUGE-L: 26.51
BERTScore: 63.54

==============================================
==================== [59/100] ====================
Summary:
The Army and Marines had planned to put the majority of the earlier versions of the MRAPs into prepositioned stocks at various overseas locations. With the increase of U.S. forces deploying to Afghanistan and Secretary of Defense requirements, these plans have been adjusted. About 5,750 will be assigned to infantry brigade combat teams, 1,700 to heavy brigade combat units, and about 165 to Stryker brigades. The Marines are reportedly still developing their ground vehicle strategy and have previously suggested that MR APs have deployability limitations under a sea-based, expeditionary Marine force. sea-based, expeditionary Marine force. MRAPs have proven to be 10 times safer than HMMWVs in protecting soldiers during IED attacks. Pentagon's Joint Program Office for MR APs also reportedly estimated that as many as 40,000 lives had been saved. Some defense experts suggest that the Joint Program office's estimates seem too high. Secretary Gates also noted the morale value of the MRAP to service members. The MRAP has been used in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Congress appropriated $38.346 billion for all versions of the MRAP. The full FY2011 DOD budget request of $3.4 billion was authorized by the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 ( P.L. 111-383 ). In the President's FY2012 DOD budget proposal, there was no request for procurement funds for the MR AP program. Many older MRAPs shipped to Afghanistan are reportedly not being used because their size and weight severely limit their effectiveness. Pentagon agreed to loan 300 MRAPs in Afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently fighting in Afghanistan. All countries that are loaned MR APs can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles. Loaning unused MRaps to coalition partners could not only help to reduce allied casualties but can also help to recoup some of the associated costs. Approximately 85 MRAP's are already out on loan to Poland, Romania, Georgia, and the Czech Republic. Mine-Resistant, Ambush-Protected (MRAP) vehicles are a family of vehicles produced by a variety of domestic and international companies. They generally incorporate a "V"-shaped hull and armor plating designed to provide protection against mines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) DOD originally intended to procure three types of MRAPs. These included Category I vehicles, capable of carrying up to 7 personnel and intended for urban operations; Category II vehicles, able to carry up to 11 personnel; and Category III vehicles. The Army and Marines first employed MRAPs in limited numbers in Iraq and Afghanistan in 2003. They were used primarily for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) operations. Some have suggested that MR APs might be a better alternative for transporting troops in combat than up-armored HMMWVs. DOD officials have stated that the casualty rate for MRAPS is lower than that of HMMwVs. The Army and Marine Corps are still using MRAP's in Afghanistan. As of July 21, 2011, 14,749 MRAPs had been delivered to Afghanistan, including 6,980 M-ATVs. DOD officials have indicated that this requirement may increase depending upon the operational needs in Afghanistan. If these vehicles are not being used, is there a better use for them elsewhere or are they to be left in country after the eventual departure of U.S. forces? Are these vehicles shipped to Afghanistan for symbolic as opposed to operational reasons and, if so, what is the total cost for these unused vehicles? DOD has approved an acquisition objective of 25,700 MRAP vehicles for all services. Of this total, 8,100 will be the new MRAP-All Terrain Vehicle (M-ATV) This new vehicle weighs 12 tons and has better off-road mobility, while providing adequate armor protection. Congress might wish to explore the performance characteristics of these modified M-ATVs in greater detail with DOD to ensure a proper balance between protection and operational to ensure that a proper mix of protection and utility is reached. M-ATVs initially enjoyed success in Afghanistan, but reports suggest insurgents have increased the size of IEDs. In response to the enhanced IED threat, two additional layers of Israeli-made armor plates are being installed to the M-ATV's underside. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Ashton Carter supposedly intends to outfit all of the almost 7,000 M- ATVs in Afghanistan with these armor kits. There are concerns that additional armor might have an adverse impact on vehicle mobility, which was the prime consideration. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) noted that "the introduction of MRAP, M-ATV and eventually the JLTV creates a potential risk of unplanned overlap in capabilities" Some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs. The use of larger and more lethal IEDs by the U.S. military can also help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of these vehicles. But the services could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the HMMWV fleet.

ROUGE-1: 65.11, ROUGE-2: 57.86, ROUGE-L: 30.53
BERTScore: 64.40

==============================================
==================== [60/100] ====================
Summary:
may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment. Allocating allowances according to output and not differentiatingaccording to the carbon intensity of the project would provide an incentive to developlow carbon alternatives. New entrant reserves should be basedon output or capacity, and avoid differentiating according to the CO 2 -intensity of thenew investment. In particular, giving more to coal than gas plants rewardsinvestment in new coal facilities, which would conflict with objectives. It would be a mistake to allocate more allowances to coal plants than to gas plants. rewardsinvestment in new coal facilities, which would conflict with objectives to tackleclimate change. The damaging effects would be amplified ifcarbon-intensive new entrants not only receive free allowances for the period2008-2012 but also receive promises for subsequent periods. The proposed treatment of coal-fired powerplants by the German Government shows how difficult it will be to direct future investment toward low-carbon projects. However, it could be argued that the long-term success of the ETS and theEU's commitment to Kyoto rests on such agreements. regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. Climaticevents influencing prices include cold weather, which increased energy usage, anddry conditions, which decreased the availability of hydroelectric power. The primary economic influence on the ETS revolved around fuel prices. Point Carbon analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance. (22) Figure 2. CO2 Market: Large Price Changes in Very Short Amount of Time Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006),p 14. analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance prices was explained by changes in fuel prices (particularly for electricpower) Kaasik argues that the evidence from the past year indicates that fuelprices influence carbon prices, but not the reverse. He seesallowance Prices as a derivative of natural gas and coal pricing, at least in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the main sources of power, this is not surprising, as the power sector significantly influencedprice development in 2005. in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the marginalcost suppliers of power, allowance prices will respond positively to increasingnatural gas prices or decreasing coal prices. Likewise, allowance Prices willrespond negatively to decreasing natural gas Prices or increasing coal Prices. Thiscreates a correlation over time between allowance prices and electricity price byinfluencing the marginal price of electricity. How this has evolved during the firsttrading period is illustrated by Figure 3 . Figure 3. There is a Very Long-Term Correlation Between CO2 and Electricity Price: Link Via Marginal Producer. The EU-ETS traded 362million metric tons of CO 2 in 2005, valued at 7.218 billion euro. Brokers wereresponsible for 57% of the volume, exchange markets did 15%, and bilateraltransactions accounted for 28%. Of the exchange market volume, the EuropeanClimate Exchange (ECX) had the largest share at 63%. The average price for an allowance traded in 2005 was 19.9 euro, withbrokered and exchanged allowances averaging 20.6 euro and bilateral transactionsaveraging 18.2 euro. The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow carbon market. However, allowance prices have been quite volatile sincetrading begin in 2005, as indicated in Figure 1 below. Inparticular, allowance Prices dropped from almost 30 euro to about 9-11 euro inApril and May, sparked by a series of reported over-allocation of allowances inseveral Member States. By July 2006,. allowance prices had recovered to about 17euro in July. Figure 1. CO2 Market: Even If No "Big" News Highly Volatile. The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow market. Monthly volumes areincreasing, but have never exceeded a 1.6% share of phase 1 allocations. Even after several years of operation, SO 2 allowances prices can changeunpredictably and inexplicably. Some reasons for ETS allowance price derivatives are explicable. The ETS market responded to a variety of regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. The market is maturing, but it is still a very small market. the emissions market and creating uncertainty for companies. The EU is not attempting to meet the Kyoto Protocolbut to get experience with emissions trading with some modest emissions targets. For the first trading period, the 21 countries have allocated an annual average of 1.8295 billion allowances and set aside 73.4million allowances for allocation. The 44.2 million allowances allocated in excess of actual 2005 emissions have been characterized as an "over-allocation" of allowances. The 2005 emissions totalreflects emissions from 8,980 sources representing more than 99% of the allowances allocated. 21 countries had not surrendered sufficient allowances. Noncomplying sources are subject to a 40-euro penalty for each tonof emissions in excess of surrendered allowances under the ETS. The EC will determine whether the insufficiency is the result of technical difficulties in national registries,tardiness, or noncompliance. No data are available for those Member States without an active registry. a. The figures in this column indicate the number of installations with active registry accounts on 30 April 2006. They differ from figurescommunicated in earlier reports. Figures are updated for installations that opted-out for the first trading period, opted-in, andinstallations without open accounts. The figures in this column are allowances allocated to existing installations at the start of the scheme. Due to technical problems in the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Ireland, the figures for Denmark, Hungary, Ireland, and Lithuania are not included in the figures in the first section of the second section of this article. Norway's "Quota Commission" (created in 1998) stressed that the 2008 program be ascomprehensive as possible. The system could include close to 90% of the country's greenhouse gas emissions. To achieve this coverage, the Commissionenvisioned a hybrid system of quotas, depending on cost-effectiveness andpracticality considerations. The Commission argued in favor of regulating CO 2 emissions at theproducer (upstream) level from mobile sources and some stationary sources. For these emissions, regulation at the producer level will not create weaker incentives for reducing emissions thanregulation at the consumer level. emissions thanregulation at the consumer level, because the volume of emissions from a particularcommodity is not dependent on technology. For process emissions stemming from a series of small sources, e.g. N 2 O from commercial fertilizers, regulation by quotas should beimposed on retailers, or importers in order to avoid unacceptably high systemcosts. (51) The Commission's recommendation that "regulation by quotas be imposed inpart on the producer, in part on the consumer" familiarity in operating such a system. The EC alsowanted the most comprehensive program possible. The wider the scope of the system, the greater will bethe variation in the costs of compliance of individual companies. This argues in favour of a comprehensive trading scheme across differentMember States covering all 6 greenhouse gases and sinks, and encompassing all emissionssources. (7) Economic analysis conducted by the European Commission confirms the potentialcost-saving available from a comprehensive Trading Scheme. As shown in Table 1 , a comprehensivetrading program is estimated by in Table 1 , a comprehensivetrading program is estimated by the EC to reduce Kyoto compliance costs to EU countries by 3billion euro. For a variety of reasons, the EC chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive trading system. Table 1: Cost of Reaching Kyoto Target to EU Member Statesin 2010 (in billions of 1999 euro) Source: EC Green Paper (Mar. 8, 2000), p. 27. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive trading scheme at this time. There areconsiderable uncertainties surrounding the emissions of the fluorinated gases [HFC, PFC, SF 6 ] and the absorption of carbon dioxide by sinks. Allocating allowances, monitoring emissions and enforcing compliance of small mobile emitters, such as private cars, raise complex technical andadministrative issues. For determining the size of the trading program, the EC looked at five criteria: (1)environmental effectiveness, (2) chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive system covering all sources and gases. Some European analysts have noted that EUpolitics played an important role in preventing serious consideration of a comprehensive program. A significantly wider coverage could have beenprovided only by an upstream system, which had been excluded by the [European] Commission at the beginning of the process. The reason was again political: an upstream scheme would have toomuch looked like a tax. Not surprisingly, this reason was not employed by the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive system. The 1997 Kyoto Protocol now in force. Countries that ratified the protocol are developing appropriate implementation strategies to begin reducing theiremissions of greenhouse gases. The European Union (EU) has decided to use anemissions trading scheme (called a "cap-and-trade" program) to help it achieve compliance at least cost. The decision to use emissiontrading to implement the Kyoto Protocol is at least partly based on the successful emissions tradingprogram used by the U.S. The EU has also used other market-orientedmechanisms permitted under the Protocol. nordeveloping the trading market. In addition, this "over-allocation" does not includethe 73.4 million metric tons of allowances held in reserve by the various countries. The Kyoto targets requireambitious caps with absolute reductions for the phase 2008-2012. (16) In general, the EC has seen the over-allocated issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process. The Climate Action Network (CAN), a network of 365non-governmental organizations, stated the following: Emissions limits set by MemberStates were a major disappointment. With the over-allocation issue in the first trading period, it is likely that theEC will take a harder stance in reviewing NAPs for the second trading period. As indicated, EU-15 states, on average, have toreduce their emissions caps 6.8% (119 million metric tons) from their current level to meet requirements under the Kyoto Protocol. In contrast, as a group, the newer countries and the EU as a whole are in substantiallybetter shape. (28) EC has seen the over-allocation issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process that should help the EU in implementing the secondtrading period beginning in 2008. The new 2005 emissions data givesindependently assessed installation-level figures for the first time and so providesMember States with an excellent factual basis for deciding upon the caps in theirforthcoming national allocations plans for the second trading period. The plans are subject to approval by theCommission, which will also be making extensive use of the 2005 emissionsdata. the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Spain, the CITL did not receivewholly reliable information on the installation level surrenders from these Member States. Some commentators have suggested that annual average 2005-2007 allocations that are actually 44.1 million metric tons higher than the reported 2005emissions are neither putting the EU on the path to the Kyoto requirements nordeveloping the trading market. In addition, this "over-allocation" does not. Figures do not account for changes to the number of installations. The deficit between the second trading period for the original 15 MemberStates can be covered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate asurplus. The EU would have little difficulty meeting its Kyoto Protocol requirements during the second Trading Period. The Kyoto Protocol is a treaty that aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from cars and other vehicles. It is intended to reduce the emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (C02) from vehicles and vehicles. likely to be included before the third trading period. Transport controls are based on voluntaryagreements with automobile manufacturers to improve fuel economy, fuel-economylabelling of cars, and promoting fuel efficiency by fiscal measures. Thecornerstone is the agreements with automobile Manufacturers to achieve improvenew car fleet average CO 2 emissions rates. The objective of the EU Council of Environmental Ministers and European Parliament was to achieve a new car fleetAverage CO2 emissions rate of 120 grams per kilometer (g CO 2 /km) by 2005 or by 2010 at the latest. at the latest. This objective was not met in 2005 and is unlikely to be met by 2010. Voluntary commitments by the European, Japanese, and Korean AutomobileManufacturers Associations in 1998 and subsequently endorsed by the EC set targetsof 140 g CO 2 /km by 2008/2009. At the end of 2005, the average new car emissionsrate is about 160 g CO2 /km. The rate of reduction in CO 2/km for new cars wouldhave to double for the automobile manufacturers to achieve their commitments,which appears unlikely. program, the EC looked at five criteria: (1)environmental effectiveness, (2) economic efficiency, (3) the potential effects on competition, (4)feasibility, and (5) existence of alternative policies and measures. It felt that starting with a relativelysmall number of economic sectors and sources that contribute significantly to total emissions would "substantially" satisfy these criteria. The six sectors chosen emit about 45% of the EU15's CO 2 emissions. The coverage for individual countries varies widely; only 20% ofFrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered. The EU's Emissions Trading System (ETS) is a cornerstone of the EU's efforts to meet itsobligation under the Kyoto Protocol. It covers more than 11,500 energy intensive facilities acrossthe 25 EU Member countries, including oil refineries, powerplants over 20 megawatts (MW) incapacity, coke ovens, and iron and steel plants, along with cement, glass, lime, brick, ceramics, andpulp and paper installations. Covered entities emit about 45% of the European Union's emissions. called a "bubble" By 2001,collective greenhouse gas emissions in the EU were 2.3% below 1990 levels. Several countries, including Ireland, Spain, and Portugal, experiencedemissions growth of over 30% during this period. In light of the Kyoto Protocol targets, the EU adopted a directiveestablishing the EU-ETS that entered into force October 13, 2003. The importance of emissionstrading was elevated by the accession of 10 additional central and eastern Europe countries to EU membership in May 2004. The trading program does not cover emissions of non-CO 2 greenhouse gases. Covered entities emit about 45% of the EU's carbon dioxide emissions. The first trading period began January 1,2005. A second trading period is scheduled to begin in 2008, covering the period of the Kyoto Protocol, with a third one planned for 2013. By 2001,collective greenhouse gas emissions in the EU had fallen by 8% from 1990 levels under a collective arrangement called a "bubble" (4) economic terms, but are notinterchangeable. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under the CDM mustbe issued by the Clean Development Mechanism Executive Board. Emissions Reduction Units (ERUs) under JI are transferred from one country toanother -- an exchange that cannot begin until the second trading period. Neither CERs nor ERUs are converted into EU-ETS allowances; rather, they are entered directly into the surrendered allowance table. Several EU countries have established carbon funds topursue JI and CDM opportunities. are in the range of 8-12 euro. In contrast, for CERsalready issued, or where the sellers take the risk, prices are in therange of 13-15euro. The real impact of CDM and JI on theEU-ETS system will not be fully known until the second trading period. The EC has surveyed stakeholders' views on ETS implementation and long-term issues. Thereport surveys the viewpoints of participating companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) a longer time frame for implementation, it is unclear when the ETSwill become as comprehensive as the European Commission would like. The anticipateddeficit between the second trading period for the original 15 Member States can becovered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate a surplus. Inaddition, potential CERs and ERUs from the CDM and JI respectively may helpmaintain limits on allowance costs. Table 6 provides one series of estimates ofavailable allowances for the Kyoto Protocol's that anticipate asurplus. Countries with potentialsurpluses may want to retain at least some of that surplus to help fuel their countries' economic growth. Second, the extent to which surplus credits would be created via JI, the EC linking directive, requires that such credits (including from CDM) be "supplemental" to acountry's domestic efforts. A third consideration is the overall commitment of the Kyoto Protocol. Asnoted earlier, the ETS only covers Overview," p. 20. The EU-ETS has provisions for linking its trading scheme to the JointImplementation (JI) and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) components of the Kyoto Protocol. TheEC's linking directive allows operators to fulfil their allowance obligations using credits derived from JI and CDM projects. Their credits areequivalent to allowances in environmental and economic terms, but are notinterchangeable. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under "Carbon Market" (May 9, 2006) commitment to Kyoto and any subsequent agreements rests on such aredirection with respect to new entrants and long-term investment. Concernsrevolve around ambiguity in the current definition of a combustion installation and the number of small installations covered under the ETS. The ETS applies to energyactivities for all sectors with combustion installations above 20 MW of thermal rated input, oil refineries, coke ovens, and, subject to size criteria, iron and steel, cement,lime, glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. Finland and Swedenopted to include small district heating installations with a rated thermal input below20 MW. Germany is attempting to have some planned coal-fired powerplants, which will be large producers of CO 2 , able to opt-out of the ETS for 14 years. In addition to the consistency issue, small installations (between 20MW and50MW) account for 30% (about 3,000) of the total facilities covered under ETS. of the Kyoto Protocol. The ETS only covers a percentage of the overall greenhouse gasemissions in the various Member States of the EU. The analysis provided in Table3 assumes that the ETS will have to provide a proportional amount of that reductionbased on 2003 emissions. However, some sectors not covered by the Ets may growfaster than sectors covered byThe ETS, creating difficulties for compliance. Inparticular, the transportation area has become a major source of concern. The transportation sector is not a part of the E TS and is not likely to be included beforethe third trading period. gasemissions in the various Member States of the EU. It is too early to tell whether the ETS market signal and individualcountries' NAPs will move investment in the appropriate direction. The early signsare not particularly encouraging, with the 2005-2008 Naps producing anover-allocation of allowances. One major major concern is the transportation area is already a major source ofconcern. A final consideration for the Ets is its suitability for directing long-terminvestment toward a low-carbon future -- the ultimate goal of any climate changeprogram. control greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors, suchas transportation. The EC may encounter in not choosing acomprehensive approach to begin with. The future direction of the ETS in terms of increasingcoverage is toward incrementally adding more economic sectors, rather than addressing the more complex issue of a comprehensive system. Based on the survey,the focus is currently on the chemical, aviation, and aluminum industries. Given that the number-one recommendation for future implementation is to provideparticipants with a longer time frame for implementation, it is unclear when it will be implemented. companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) asked which of 12 topics they felt were most important to them. Table 3 indicates thetop five topics according to governments surveyed, along with their correspondingranking by other stakeholders. The five issues are discussed below. Source: European Commission, Review of EU Emissions Trading Scheme (November 2005), p. p. 1. The European Commission's review of the ETS was published in November 2005. evident than indiscussions of new entrants. Germany is proposing to permitnew coal-fired powerplants built between 2008-2012 to opt-out of the ETS for thefirst 14 years of operation. In its survey of ETSstakeholders, the EC found that 85% of all respondents favor a harmonized approach to new entrants and closures. Nearly 75% believed that those allowances should beprovided free (40) Likewise, an EU questionnaire conducted by theEuropean Environmental Agency's Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change indicated that most Member States would welcome harmonization of the treatment of new arrivals and closures across the EU. have to be covered by the non-ETS sectors --commercial, residential, and transportation. An assessment done for GreenpeaceInternational states that the German NAP II places "a disproportionate burden foremissions reductions on the non theETS sectors" in terms of meeting its commitmentsunder the EU Burden Sharing agreement. Policies to fill in the gap reportedly include oneplan to reduce emissions by 3 million tons by training German drivers to drive moreeconomically. The EU-ETS system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide. system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide and those that are nationwide. The groundwork for the system is theKyoto Protocol, which (1) defines the pollutants and sets the countries' emissionstargets. Within this framework, the EU defines the elementsthat make the EU-ETS work, including industry participants, the unit of trade, trading periods, settling and national inventory and compliance requirements. The EU also defines the scope of participation: Annex 1 countries may implementemissions trading programs and non-Annex 1 countries can participate through theCDM. improvements in emissions rates,CO 2 emissions in the EU continue to rise because of increased miles driven,increased size and weight of cars, and falling car occupancy rates. Attempts to balance the burden between ETS and non-ETS sectors have already created tension in Germany with respect to the second trading period. Germany is proposing to permitevery new power station built between 2008 and 2012 to opt out from CO 2 caps andthe ETS for 14 years. These emissions increases will have to be covered by the non-ATS sectors --commercial, residential, and business. the 2005-2008 NAPs producing anover-allocation of allowances, and one major Member State, Germany, attempting to direct its second NAP toward carbon-intensive, coal-fired electric generating facilities. Reluctance by countries to redirecttheir NAP's and an inconsistent price from the ETS make the long-term effect of theETS uncertain. Norway, a non-EU country, also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on January 1, 2005. Norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing, and has severalfeatures in common with the EU ETS. The carbon tax is levied on about 64% of the country's CO 2 emissions. Other parts of Norway's industry, particularly its offshore oiland gas sector, are covered by the carbon tax of almost 40 euro per metrictonne of CO 2. The firstphase of the trading program covers the period 2005-2007, with a second, expandedphase to begin in 2008. Developing its initial trading scheme independently of the EU, Norway's"Quota Quota" scheme is expected to be completed by the end of 2009. by the EC to determinecompliance with 11 criteria (12 for the second period) For the first period, the EC approved most of the necessary NAPs by the end of 2004. Thelast NAP was approved June 20, 2006 (from Greece). 2004. Excessive allocation problems resulted from statesthat left a gap in how they would achieve their target, to be filled with measures to be defined later. Ex-post adjustments by states are not allowed; such adjustments are seen by the EC as potentially disruptive to the emissions market. only 20% ofFrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered, compared with 69% of Estonia's emissions. National Allocation Plans (NAPs) are central to the EU's effort to achieve its Kyotoobligations. Each Member of the EU must submit a NAP that lays out its allocation scheme under the ETS. These NAPs are assessed by the EC to determinecompliance with 11 criteria (12 for the EU) for the first trading period, and for the second period. The EC harmonizes the NAPswith respect to penalties, allocation method (e.g., grandfathering), monitoring, andregistries with the goal of achieving the Kyoto targets. It allows Members flexibilitywith respect to allocations to individual participants, the extent to which banking ispermitted, and whether to permit the auctioning of up to 10% of allowances in thesecond trading period. As a result of this framework, there are significant differencesbetween Members with respect to participant definitions, industry level emissionscaps and allocations. with respect to participant definitions, industry level emissionscaps and allocations, and enforcement. To increase the economic and administrative efficiency of the ETS, somestakeholders are interested in improved harmonization of NAPs by the EC. Table 5 illustrates the scope of potentialharmonization issues facing the EU-ETS. The issue of new entrants and definition of affected units specifically identified by theEC survey, harmonization issues include allocation methods and the use of auctions. The degree to which JI and CDM credits may be used for compliance, and monitoring,verification, and reporting rules. The EC does not have the authority to scrutinizeallocations at the facility level. Any allocation harmonization would be on avoluntary basis ("soft harmonization") Also, allocation schemes, such asbenchmarking, may not be suitable for some industries. The EC'ssurvey of ETS stakeholders revealed that more than two-thirds of stakeholders support soft harmonization. More than two thirds of stakeholders also support the use of benchmarking standards in setting allocations. The EU ETS Implementation: Room forHarmonisation (The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2005) EC'ssurvey of ETS stakeholders revealed that more than two-thirds of therespondents from the cement, aluminum, and chemical industries thoughtbenchmarking was an "interesting alternative" Less than a third of the respondentsfrom the pulp and paper industry and refineries thought so. In many ways, diversity between Member countries with respect to the ETSis inevitable. The final way in which the EU ETSdiffers from many other trading systems is in the devolution of allocation responsibilities, in this case to its 25 Member States. States. This was an essential part of thedeal that enabled the adoption of the Directive. Member States would have neverceded to the European Commission the power to distribute valuable assets to theirindustries. Nor is the EU ETS unique in devolving powers of allocation: it is typicalin a number of US systems. Moreover, there are different degrees of harmonization,applicable to different aspects of theEU ETS. The economic value of allowances is nowhere more evident than indiscussions of new entrants. of the treatmentof new entrants and closures across the EU. Analogous to the U.S. acid rain program, EU states have set up reserves toprovide allowances to new entrants. In general, these allowances are provided free,as that is widely seen as helping boost new investment. Most states have yet to dip intotheir reserves for new entrants; however, the importance of the reserve will increase as the ETS enters its second, and eventually third, trading period. The manner inwhich new entrants receive allowances may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment.

ROUGE-1: 82.93, ROUGE-2: 73.62, ROUGE-L: 29.53
BERTScore: 54.73

==============================================
==================== [61/100] ====================
Summary:
Overall, 84% of children had one preventive health care visit in the year preceding the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. Non-Hispanic white children had the highest rate (86%) of preventive health visits in the preceding year, followed by non-Hispanic black children (84%) and Hispanic children (81%). Children who were uninsured (54%) were less likely than those covered by public insurance ( 84%) to have received preventive care in the past year. Older children and teenagers less likely to have gotten preventive care than infants and preschool-aged children. preventive care than infants and preschool-aged children. Children with special health care needs often need health, mental, and social services beyond preventive care. They also are more likely to have injuries that require medical care. Accessing these additional services may create additional access and financial burdens on families. They may qualify for Medicaid or CHIP, and they are more Likely to have health insurance. In the 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs, access to preventive and health care services is measured by a series of questions on use of services. by a series of questions on use of services and unmet needs. Overall, 76% of children did not have an unmet need for specific health care services in the year prior to the survey. Shared decisionmaking between families of children with special health care needs and their children's health care providers is another goal for the MCH Services Block Grant. The 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs found that families with insurance coverage were more likely to report family-centered coordinated care than families without insurance coverage. Almost 95% of all children have health insurance coverage, according to the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. However, the survey found that the proportion of children with unmet health care needs is higher. Participants were asked if their children had at least one preventive care visit in the prior year, whether they had unmet Health Care needs, and whether or not they had a medical home. They were also asked whether they have public, private, or no insurance coverage. The National Survey was conducted by the National Institute of Health and Human Services. without insurance coverage. 45% of families with private insurance coverage reported that they received family-centered care. 47% of children with special health care needs had a medical home, according to the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. As others have noted, access to medical homes for children has been associated with improved health care among children withspecial health careneeds. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The rate of pregnant women entering prenatal care in the first trimester is generally higher among non-Medicaid populations than among women enrolled in Medicaid. There may be a number of reasons women do not receive prenatal care, including lack of insurance coverage and lack of access to a primary care provider. These barriers tend to be higher among racial and ethnic minorities. Among Medicaid enrollees, researchers have identified limited availability of maternity care providers,limited availability of transportation, and late enrollment in Medicaid as barriers to early prenatal care. Of the 50 states, Mississippi had the highest IMR (9.97 per 1,000 live births) and New Hampshire had the lowest (3.95) Risk factors for infant mortality, including higher rates of teenage births, prematurity, and inadequate prenatal care in the first trimester, disproportionately affect low-income families. The infant mortality rate is generally higher among Medicaid-eligible populations.higher in the South and Midwest, and lower in other regions. HRSA data show that, in addition to the state-by-state differences in infant mortality noted above, the disparity in IMR is even more pronounced. In South Dakota, the infant mortality rate for women enrolled in Medicaid was 10.3 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, compared with 7.7 for those not in the Medicaid program. Prenatal care is recognized as an important factor in the health and well-being of mothers and children. Women who receive late or no prenatal care are more likely to experience complications of childbirth, including complications of the placenta and the umbilical cord. In the U.S., the rate of infant mortality varies widely by state. HRSA differentiates between health "performance" measures and health "outcome" measures. The performance measures include data on breastfeeding, oral health care, the suicide rate, and the teenage birth rate. Outcome measures include the infant mortality rate, the ratio of the black infant mortality rates to the white infant mortality Rate. These measures are compiled from a number of different sources, including state birth and child death rates. The data is based on data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Most recent data reported to HRSA by the states are shown in Figure D -1. IMR is generally higher in the South and Midwest, and lower in other parts of the country. Comparing data from both HRSA and CDC, the data show similar variability in rates by state and region. The most recently available single-year linked birth and death certificate information on IMR has been published by CDC's National Center for Health Statistics. For more information, visit the CDC's website. The proportion of children with health insurance coverage varies considerably by race, ethnicity, and poverty status. For example, 81% of children living in households at or below the federal poverty level have health insurance. 90% of Hispanic children had health insurance, compared with 96% of non-Hispanic white children and 95% ofNon-Hispanic black children. The infant mortality rate (IMR) is frequently used as a proxy indicator for the health status of children. For more information, visit www.healthinsurance.gov. are eligible for programs such as Medicaid and SSI are receiving services, or whether pregnant women have access to adequate prenatal care. For example, states report the number of Medicaid-eligible individuals who received a service paid for by the Medicaid program. HRSA must annually compile the information reported by states and present the data to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Senate Committee on Finance in a Report to Congress. The Secretary must also provide a report on funded SPRANS and CISS projects to those committees. States are required to report data on these maternal and child health indicators by county, race, and ethnicity. States are also required toreport data on whether individuals who are eligible for programs such as Medicaid and SSI are. States must report pediatric and family practice workforce data to HRSA, including information on the number of obstetricians, family practitioners, certified family nurse practitioners and certified nurse midwives who were licensed in the state in that year. State must also report information on how many people are enrolled in Medicaid or SSI. Grant, as well as other maternal and child health funding, are discussed in the following section. Progress toward national health objectives, such as reduction of the infant mortality rate, has shown past improvement but has stagnated in recent years. Title V funding is only one component affecting these measures. Other federal and state programs and policies, including Medicaid and WIC, also affect the health and well-being of low-income children and their families. Due to the flexibility of funding, varying circumstances in and submit an annual report to the Secretary on all Title V activities. States must provide a list of activities and recipients of Title V funding, along with a description of progress toward meeting national and state health objectives. The reports must be presented in a standardized format. While the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states, they are not intended to replace state-by-state reporting. The measures are intended to provide a framework for state-to-state comparisons. They are not meant to replace individual state- to state reporting. Goals are to ensure access to quality health care for mothers and children, especially those with low income or limited availability of care. The seven goals are as follows: reduce infant mortality, provide access to comprehensive prenatal and postnatal care to women (especially low-income and at-risk pregnant women) Increase the number of children receiving health assessments and follow-up diagnostic and treatment services; provide and ensureAccess to preventive and health care services for certain blind and disabled children, as well as rehabilitative services; implement family-centered, community-based systems of coordinated care for children with special health care needs. Since 2011, all states have reported annually on their progress toward achieving the targets they set for 18 National Performance Measures (NPMs) The new performance measurement system has three tiers: NPMs, national outcome measures (NOMs), and evidence-based/informed strategy measures (ESMs) A comprehensive list of national performance measures is provided in Appendix E . In addition to state-reported measures, the Maternal and Child Health Bureau administers two surveys, the National Survey of Children's Health and the National survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs. be performed every two years. HRSA, in turn, must report to Congress on the activities carried out under the SPRANS and CISS programs. States have also developed and reported additional state-level measures. The first national performance measures (NPMs) for MCH were instituted in 1997. In 1998, HRSA introduced the Title V Information System (TVIS) to collect and publicly report state- level Title V data. This interactive, web-based system provides public access to Title V performance measures. include alignment with and support of the Title V Block Grant, specifically population domains and National Performance Measures, where reasonable. The overall number of performance measures has been reduced from prior DGIS data collection. The structure of the data collection has been revised to better measure the various models of programs and the services each funded program provides. This revision will allow a more accurate capture of the scope of services provided through this grant funding. The average number ofperformance measures each grantee will be required to report is reduced as well. shows the national performance measures for Title V for FY2016 and later years. In addition, the Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) funds more than 700 projects each year through discretionary grants. The MCHB Discretionary Grant Information System (DGIS) electronically captures performance measures (see Table E-5 ), program, financial, and abstract data, and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the M maternal and child health bureau. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The MCHB is planning to revise the performance measures requirements for its discretionary programs. The notice pertaining to changes in the DGIS was published in the Federal Register on March 15, 2016. The purpose of revising performance measures is to better measure progress toward program goals. These program goals include alignment with and support of the Title V Block.and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the grantees. The data collected are used to monitor and assess grantee performance as well as assist in monitoring and evaluating M CHB's programs. each funded program provides. This revision will allow a more accurate and detailed picture of the full scope of services provided through grant programs administered by MCHB. It will also give a better idea of the cost of the services provided by each funded program. It is hoped that the revision will provide a better picture of how much money is spent on each program. The total cost of each program is estimated to be around $1.5 million. The cost of a single program is approximately $1,000,000.  Block grants to states provide funding for core public health services provided by maternal and child health agencies. These core services are often presented as a four-level pyramid. The four levels of services are infrastructure building, population-based, enabling, and direct health care. There is no federally prescribed means test for recipients of services funded by the block grants toStates. The allocation formula, and not as a criterion for receiving Title V-funded services, should be used as a guide for state funding. are foundation-building activities that provide for the development and maintenance of health services systems. Infrastructure building services increase a health system capacity by supporting training and other workforce development activities. Population-based services promote core public health functions such as universal screening, health promotion, and disease prevention campaigns. Enabling services are services that facilitate access to services for vulnerable populations, including those with special health care needs. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. It is impossible to globally track the direct impact of maternal and child health block grant funds on national health indicators such as IMR. Congress and the executive branch cannot direct states to specifically target one data point with block grant funding, but may use other approaches. Some have argued that the decentralized nature of block grants makes it difficult to measure program performance and accountability and to hold state and local governments accountable for their decisions. In addition, the quality of services provided under block grants is not currently tracked. requirements of federal funds, which provides more flexibility for the states to direct those funds where they are needed. State funds are not required to be directed toward specific populations in the same proportions as the federal block grant allocation. The following sections present selected national and state indicators of maternal and child health. Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), when available, are also presented as a point of comparison. Selected measures are presented in this report to provide readers with context to help them understand the data. block grants to states are intended to fill gaps in a broad range of health services provided to women and children. Funds may not be used for inpatient services, other than for children with special health care needs, high-risk pregnant women, and infants (unless approved by the Secretary of HHS) States may not use the block grant funds to provide cash payments to recipients of health Services. Block grant funds may not been used for research or training at a private, for-profit entity. In order to receive block grant money, states must submit an application that includes a statewide needs assessment (to be conducted once every year) Block grant funding is also used to support school-based health centers. Title V programs serve women and children who are covered by public and private insurance, as well as those who have no insurance coverage. By law, at least 30% of federal block grant funds must be used for primary and preventive care for children with special health care needs, unless a waiver is granted by HRSA. State matching funds and other sources of maternal and child health funding are not required to follow the allocation requirements of federal funds. with special health care needs (CSHCN), and 40% for services for either of these groups or for other appropriate maternal and child health activities. Services funded by the block grant may include prenatal care, well-child care, dental care, immunization, family planning, and vision and hearing screening services. Block grant funding is also used to support school-based health care services. They may also include inpatient services for children with special health needs, screening services for lead-based poisoning, and counseling services for parents of sudden infant death syndrome victims. Direct health care services provided under Title V are intended to fill the gaps in primary and preventive health care that are not otherwise available through other funding sources or providers. Enabling services are services that facilitate access to care, such as case management, transportation, purchase of insurance, and coordination with other programs. In FY2015, the largest category of expenditures nationwide under the block grant was direct health care Services for low-income mothers and children and children with special health care needs (63.3%) In 2012, state toll-free hotlines recorded 1.3 million calls regarding Medicaid enrollment. The Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant is not a single program. It is a combination of block grants to states and two discretionary grant programs to achieve national maternal and child health objectives, including Medicaid coverage for children with special health care needs. To facilitate access to coverage, state hotlines provide callers with state-specific Medicaid enrollment information. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Title V requires the state agency or agencies administering the Title V program to create an agreement coordinating block grant services with the state's Medicaid program. The primary purpose of this coordination effort is to make Medicaid services accessible, to enroll those who are eligible, and to avoid duplication of effort among the programs. States may also include coordination with other services, such as WIC, under the agreement. HRSA's 2008 analysis recommended specific components for interagency agreements and provided a model interagency agreement. The SPRANS program is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program for state programs. avoid duplication of effort among the programs. State block grant administrators must also coordinate with other related programs, including the Special Supplemental Program for Women, Infants, and Children. Most state MCH and Medicaid agencies have created interagency agreements that outline the expected areas and levels of coordination. Most states specify the services provided by each agency under the agreement. Commonly, the Title refers to the block grant program, not to the individual program or the program's funding source. The federal government provides block grants to states for health, developmental disability and family planning programs. Title V was enacted by Congress in 1935 as part of the Social Security Act (SSA, P.L. 74-271) to promote and support the health of mothers and children. Two grant programs were established under the original Title V of the SSA, to enable states to improve maternal and child health services, especially those in low-income and rural areas. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA, P-L. 99-272 ) Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA, P.L. 99-272 ) replaced the term "crippled" with "children with special health care needs" CSHCN is defined by HRSA as "those who have or are at increased risk for a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition" Over time, additional programs targeting children and low-income women and children were added to the Public Health Service Act (PHSA) and the SSA. Title V was converted to the MCH Services Block Grant in 1981 by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) OBRA 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above. Title V includes certain services for children with disabilities who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI, formerly §1615 [c] of the SSA) Title V also includes lead-based paint poisoning prevention programs, genetic disease programs, hemophilia treatment centers, adolescent pregnancy grants and sudden infant death syndrome programs. OBRA 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above into a single block grant. The consolidated block grant was intended to give the states more flexibility in determining how to use federal funds to address maternal and child health needs. Additional changes were made to the block grant under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989. These changes increased the authorization of appropriations, called for greater accountability, and created stricter rules for application and reporting requirements for the program. It required that each state receive the combined funding of the programs that were consolidated under OBRA 1981. state, or federal funds may be used to support MCH activities, and certain MCH programs generate income through insurance payments and Medicaid reimbursements. In FY2014, 59 states and jurisdictions received MCH Services Block Grant Funding. These programs directly served 2.0 million pregnant women and 36.9 million children (aged 1 to 22) Figure 4 shows the proportion of children, pregnant women, infants, children with special health care needs (CSHCN), and others (called "classes of individuals") served nationally. In FY2014, there were nearly 50.4 million persons served by Title V programs. The largest category of individuals served nationally are children aged 1 to 22. Women of childbearing age, infants, children with special health care needs, and pregnant women are also served. Title V Programs serve women and children who are covered by private and public insurance, as well as those who have no insurance coverage. In FY2012, the most recent year for which data are published, the number of people served by the MCH Services Block Grant was more than 50 million. Title V contains a number of provisions that were added or amended by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Most of the provisions created under the ACA included mandatory appropriations for FY2010 through FY2014. However, the existing data required by Title V may be used to determine whether states are efficiently funding their gap areas with block grant funds. In addition to the MCH Services Block Grant, Title V also includes the Postpartum Depression Block Grant. This appendix provides a summary of those provisions. For more information, visit http://www.tracked.org/. P.L. 114-10 (the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015) extended PREP ($75 million per year) through FY2017 (i.e., September 30, 2017) Appendix B. Source of Funding for Title V Block Grants to States, the District of Columbia, and Other Jurisdictions, by State, FY2015 Appendix C. MCH Services Block Grant Funding History Appendix D. Selected Maternal and Child Health Measures, by state, FY2011-2015. FY2012, the most recent year for which data are published from the HRSA TVIS, 33% of pregnant women who received Title V-funded services were covered by private health insurance. 56% were enrolled in Medicaid, 4% had no insurance coverage, and the insurance coverage status of 7% of Title V clients was unknown. Insurance coverage status was unknown for 27% of children receiving Title V services. Among children ages 1 to 22 years old who receivedTitle V- funded services, 34% werecovered by Medicaid. The MCH Services Block Grant provided services to over 34 million children in FY2013. Of those children, nearly 15 million had Medicaid or CHIP coverage. Changes to public and private insurance markets under the ACA may affect the number of pregnant women and children served by the block grant. States may argue that block grant funds can and should be redirected to meet other maternal and child health goals, and not decreased, if Medicaid coverage expands to those who currently receive block grant-funded services. One general concern with block grants is that federal funds are being used to address state-specific issues. issues and are not held accountable to national concerns. Congress has addressed the issue of national concerns with MCH Services Block Grant by requiring the SPRANS set-aside. States may be best suited to use block grant funds in situations where there is wide variability in burden and cost, as shown by data collected by both HRSA and CDC. Filling in the gaps left by Medicaid and CHIP is one such area, due to variable enrollment eligibility among the states. The indicators discussed in this report are referred to as outcome measures and performance indicators by HRSA. Title V of the Social Security Act (SSA) authorizes funding for services and projects that are intended to improve the health of mothers and children. This report focuses on the MCH Services Block Grant, which receives the largest single appropriation under Title V. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) administers the grant. The indicators have been selected for this report based on their relevance to the seven goals of the M CH Services Block grant. Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau through the block grant to states. Some of these funds are reserved for CISS grants, and others are devoted to research via the SPRANS grants. Title V of the Social Security Act established seven broad goals for the MCH Services Block Grant. Maternal and child health services, research, training, demonstrations, and other activities funded by the block Grant must be linked to one or more of these goals. includes a statewide needs assessment (to be conducted once every five years) and a plan for meeting the needs identified in the needs assessment. The needs assessment must identify statewide health status goals (consistent with national health objectives, such as Healthy People 2020) The plan must include a description of how and where block grant funds will be used within the state to address those needs. Beginning in 2015, the result will be the result of the state's needs assessment, which will be published in 2015. the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states, there is still variation among states in terms of capacity for collecting and reporting data. Priority needs that were frequently identified in states' FY2013 MCH Services Block Grant applications include family support services, oral health services, childhood obesity treatment and prevention and access to services for children with disabilities. The statute requires states to report 7 to 10 priority needs in their five-year strategic plans. states may annually adjust the strategic plans as their priorities change. and children with special health care needs (63.3%), followed by enabling services (18.7%), population-based services (10.5%), and infrastructure (7.6%). Although the expenditures nationwide are inverse to their location in the MCH pyramid, the distribution of funds between service categories varies widely by state. Distribution of funds depends on the needs of the states' populations, and the gaps left by other health and social service programs that are identified by the states. Additionally, direct health care services may cost more per person served than other services. determined by a formula that takes into consideration the proportion of the number of low-income children in a state. The first $422 million is distributed to each state based on the amount the state received under the consolidated MCH programs in 1983. Any funds above that amount are distributed based on number of children in each state who are at or below 100% of the federal poverty level (FPL) In addition, the funds are distributed as a proportion of total number of kids below 100%. The Personal Responsibility Education program is administered by the Administration for Children and Families. It is designed to educate adolescents on both abstinence and contraception for prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS. The adulthood preparation subjects are (1) healthy relationships, including marriage and family interactions; (2) adolescent development, including the development of healthy attitudes and values about adolescent growth and development; and (3) body image, racial and ethnic identity.Funds were not appropriated for this program. for follow-up services. Preference is given to applicants who demonstrate that activities in these categories will be carried out in areas with a high infant mortality rate. In FY2016, these congressional directives comprised about 16% of SPRANS funding. In addition, the Family-to-Family Health Information Centers (F2F HICs) program funds family-staffed and family-run centers in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. The F2FHICs provide information, education, technical assistance, and peer assistance. The F2F HICs provide information, education, technical assistance, and peer support to families of children (including youth) with special health care needs. They also assist in ensuring that families and health professionals are partners in decisionmaking at all levels of care and service delivery. CISS is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program that funds projects which seek to increase service delivery capacity at the local level. It aims to promote community-based health systems for mothers and children, particularly for children in rural areas. The MCH Services Block Grant is to fill gaps in core public health services for low-income mothers and children. The law provides that block grant funds are to be used by the states "to provide ... access to quality maternal and child health services" States are required to use at least 30% of their block grant allocations for preventive and primary care services for children, and 40% for services for those with special health care needs. Public or private organizations or institutions are eligible for these grants. The SPRANS program is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program for research and training for maternal and child health and children with special health care needs. Public or nonprofit private institutions of higher learning are eligible for these grants. SPRANS projects must (1) support national needs and priorities or emerging issues, (2) have regional or national significance, and (3) demonstrate ways to improve state systems of care for mothers and children. Approximately 15% of the grants are awarded to non-profit organizations. 15% of MCH Services Block Grant funds are set aside for SPRANS programs. The FY2016 budget included appropriations language that provided SPRANS set-aside funds for oral health, epilepsy, sickle cell, and fetal alcohol syndrome. SPRANS may also be used for genetic disease testing, counseling, and information development and dissemination programs. Preference is given to applicants who demonstrate state systems of care for mothers and children. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. a not-for-profit hospital; maternal and child health projects to serve rural populations; and outpatient and community-based services programs for children with special health care needs. The statute provides that roughly 85% of the funds appropriated for MCH Services Block Grant must be distributed by formula to states and territories. It also requires that 12.75% of any amounts appropriated above $600 million must be reserved for CISS. Individual state allocations are determined by a formula that takes into consideration the proportion of CISS funding. program also receives 15% of funds remaining above $600 million after CISS funds are set aside. Congress has directed some SPRANS funds through authorizations and appropriations for specific programs. Currently, SPRANS has additional funding of $5 million to develop Family to Family Information Centers through FY2017. The CISS program is initiated whenever the MCH Services Block Grant appropriation exceeds $600m. Of any amount appropriated over $600M, 12.75% is set aside for CISS. These funds are distributed on a competitive basis to public and private organizations. of children below 100% of the FPL nationally. In addition, the MCH Services Block Grant requires a state match. Each state must contribute $3 for every $4 of federal funds awarded. States may use no more than 10% of their federal allocations for administrative costs. states are required to maintain at least the state's FY1989 level of funding for maternal and child health programs. Block grant funds are awarded each fiscal year in quarterly installments and remain available for expenditure for the current and subsequent fiscal year. ACA, including the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting program, is funded through FY2016. entities that propose activities focusing on areas with a high infant mortality rate are given preference. The MCH Services Block Grant program is currently authorized to receive $850 million annually. The final appropriation for FY2016 was $638.2 million. Full-year appropriations for FY2017 have yet to be enacted. However, decreased federal funding for the block grant may be temporarily offset by funding for new Title V programs authorized in the ACA, including the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting programs. created stricter rules for application and reporting requirements for the states, including the addition of a statewide needs assessment requirement. The MCH Services Block Grant was appropriated $638.2 million in funding for FY2016. The majority of this funding is distributed to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, the a state chooses to not apply for block grant funds, or indicates that it does not plan to use its full allotment. for FY2010 through FY2014 for the home visitation grant program. 3% must be reserved for research and evaluation, and 3% for making grants to tribal entities for home visitation services to Indian families. This program provides grants for epidemiologic research, improved screening and diagnosis, clinical research, and public education to expand understanding of the causes and treatments for postpartum depression and related conditions. The ACA authorized funding of $3 million for these grants for FY2010, and such sums as necessary for each of FY2011 and FY2012. FY2010 through FY2014, with the exception of the Postpartum Depression program, which was authorized but has not been funded. SSA §510, Abstinence Education This program provides funding to states for abstinence education. ($50 million per year) through FY2015 (i.e., September 30, 2015). P.L. 113-93 (the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014), which was enacted on April 1, 2014, extended the Title V Abstinent Education block grant. and values about adolescent growth and development, body image, racial and ethnic diversity, and other related subjects. The ACA appropriated $75 million annually for each of the five fiscal years FY2010 through FY2014. P.L. 113-93 (the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 extended PREP ($75 million per year) through FY2015) P. l. 114-10 (the Medicare Access and CHIP Act of 2013 extended PREp ($75million per year), through FY 2015.

ROUGE-1: 79.83, ROUGE-2: 72.23, ROUGE-L: 23.81
BERTScore: 54.31

==============================================
==================== [62/100] ====================
Summary:
regarding such issues as capacity and location of refineries, crude oil production, and consumption of petroleum products. To assess the reliability of EIA data, we took several steps including reviewing documentation, interviewing EIA staff, and consulting with stakeholders. To provide information about the future of the domestic petroleum refining industry and major factors that could affect it, we also reviewed forecasts from EIA, the International Energy Agency (IEA), and IHS. We selected these forecasts because they made projections through 2020, contained information broadly relevant to our report, and covered multiple scenarios. we reviewed all 27 scenarios in EIA’s 2013 forecast. We identified some differences in the metrics reported in the four forecasts. We did not make direct comparisons in these instances. We conducted this performance audit from November 2012 to March 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate information to make a judgment on the impact of climate change. We found no evidence that climate change is a major threat to the U.S. economy. Retail prices for regular gasoline averaged $3.63 per gallon in 2012, the highest annual average price when adjusted for inflation since 1976. Retail prices have declined in 2013, but are still near historic highs. According to EIA data, increases in crude oil costs have been the largest component of the recent increases in gasoline prices. The refining component of prices—including labor, materials, energy, and other costs of the refining—is the largest contributor to price increases. In 2012, refineries received the majority of their crude oil by pipeline (over 50 percent) and by tanker vessel (37 percent) The outlook of the U.S. refining industry depends on future domestic consumption of petroleum products, which is uncertain. Economic growth tends to increase consumption, and EIA’s forecast scenario with higher economic projected to exceed global consumption. IEA projects refining capacity may grow even faster, resulting in excess capacity of nearly 15.5 million barrels per day by 2020, in contrast to an estimated 4.8 million barrels by 2020. The difference is equivalent to about eight average-size U.s. refineries. from 2005 through 2012, and forecasts we reviewed project consumption of three major petroleum products—gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel—will be stable to slightly increasing through 2020. IHS projects an increase in the consumption of both gasoline and diesel, with more robust growth projected for diesel. All EIA scenarios projecting gasoline consumption to decline or remain stable. EIA’s projections suggest higher refinery production than in scenarios with lower domestic consumption. The size of the domestic market for petroleum products may affect future U.S. refinery production. Consumption of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel peaked in 2007 and declined by over 8 percent through 2012. EIA estimated that petroleum product consumption increased in the first 11 months of 2013. Economic activity and crude oil and petroleum prices can affect consumption of petroleum products. Shifts in consumer behavior and demographic trends may reduce consumption of these products, the authors say. The study was based on data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration and the International Institute for Energy Economics and Sustainability. Most of the system of crude oil pipelines in the United States was constructed in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. According to DOE officials, this infrastructure was designed primarily to move crude oil from the South to the North. Emerging crude oil production centers in Western Canada, Texas, and North Dakota have strained the existing pipeline infrastructure. Though pipeline capacity has increased—investments increased pipeline capacity to deliver crude oil to a key Cushing, Oklahoma hub by $1.5 billion. Some refineries may not have been able to take full advantage of crude oil production increases or had to rely on other more expensive crude oil transportation options such as truck, rail, or barge. Two of the refineries we visited recently installed facilities to enable them to receive crude oil from North Dakota or Canada by rail. According to EIA data, while refinery receipts of crudeOil by these refineries increased by about 815,000 barrels per day from 2010 through 2013, crude oil deliveries to the Cushing, Oklahoma hub have been inadequate. EIA data, while refinery receipts of crude oil by these methods of transportation is a small percentage of total receipts, they have increased 57 percent from 2011 to 2012. Infrastructure constraints have, according to EIA, contributed to discounted prices for some domestic crude oils. Increasingly, the crude oil being produced in the United States and Canada has different characteristics from the crude oils that some domestic refineries are configured to use. Production of new domestic crude oil has tended to be light and sweet, whereas a portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour. U.S. crude oil production has increased significantly in recent years. Much of the increase has been from shale and other formations, such as the Bakken in North Dakota and the Eagle Ford in Texas. The rapid growth has lowered the cost of crude oil for some domestic refiners that have the access and ability to process these crude oils. For example, West Texas Intermediate crude oil was $17.60 per barrel less expensive in 2012 than Brent, an international benchmark crude oil from the European North Sea. U.S. and Canadian crude oil production has increased in recent years. This has led to lower crude oil costs for some refiners, according to several stakeholders. According to EIA data, U.S., production of crude oil reached its highest level in 1970 and generally declined through 2008. During this time, the United States increasingly relied on imported crude oil to meet growing domestic energy needs. However, recent improvements in technologies have allowed companies that develop petroleum resources to extract oil from shale formations that were previously unknown. Sea that was historically about the same price as West Texas Intermediate. Those refineries able to take advantage of these lower priced crude oils have benefited because crude oil costs are the largest cost for refiners. Some of the growth in production has been in areas with limited transportation linkages to refining centers. The development of domestic and Canadian crude oil production has created some challenges for U.S. crude oil transportation infrastructure. Most refineries may not have been able totake advantage ofThese crude oils to the same extent for two key reasons.  horizontal drilling techniques and hydraulic fracturing have increased U.S. crude oil and natural gas production. As shown in figure 7, monthly domestic crude oil production has increased by over 55 percent through September 2013 compared with average production in the past five years. hydraulic fracturing is a process that injects a combination of water, sand, and chemical additives under high pressure to create and maintain fractures in underground rock formations that allow oil andnatural gas to flow. It is used to extract oil from shale formations that were previously considered to be inaccessible because traditional techniques did not yield sufficient amounts. The upstream segment consists of the exploration for and production of crude oil. The midstream segment includes pipelines and other infrastructure used to transport crude oil and refined products. The downstream segment includes the refining and marketing of petroleum products such as gasoline and heating oil. Biorefineries produce renewable fuels that are blended with petroleum products at wholesale terminals before being distributed to consumers. To varying degrees, refiners may primarily operate refineries, or may be integrated, participating in various other related industry segments, such as renewable fuels. One barrel of crude oil can be processed into varying amounts of gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and other petroleum products. Through the addition of specialized equipment, refineries can be optimized to produce greater proportions of specific types of products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry consists of firms of varying sizes that, in addition to operating refineries, may also have operations in other related industry segments: (1) the transportation sector; (2) the home heating sector; and (3) the liquefied petroleum gases industry. There were 143 petroleum refineries in the United States as of January 2013, with a capacity to process 17.8 million barrels of crude oil per day. Most refining capacity (almost 90 percent) is located in the Gulf Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. These refineries employed over 70,000 people in 2013. Refineries process crude oil into products primarily through a distillation process that separates crudeOil into products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry is one of the largest industries in the world. EIA data indicate that as domestic consumption has declined, refiners have looked to foreign markets to sell products. Since 1949, the United States had been a net importer of petroleum products. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product exports in 2020 is above 2010 levels. The extent to which domestic refiners are able to export their products will depend on the competitiveness of U.S. refiners compared with foreign refiners, the authors say. The authors say the industry’s future competitiveness is uncertain and that foreign markets present both challenges and opportunities. The United States recently exported more petroleum products than other leading exporters. Exports of petroleum products represented 7 percent of refinery production in 2007. Major markets for U.S. exports include Central and South America, Mexico, and Europe. EIA scenarios project export levels from 2.6 to 3.4 million barrels per day by 2020, a relatively wide range.. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product. exports will remain strong, according to most of the EIA and IHS forecasts. This report provides information on the domestic petroleum refining industry and its market and regulatory environment. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. Based on our research and information from stakeholders, we identified five key regulations that were recently strengthened or proposed. The Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard was identified as one of the key regulations to be addressed. We also asked agency officials and other stakeholders we contacted to recommend studies. We conducted searches of various databases, such as ProQuest and PolicyFile, for studies since published 2009. Stakeholders and information we reviewed suggest that various factors may affect the U.S. refining industry’s future competitiveness. IEA data indicate that competition from foreign refiners may increase as global refining capacity is projected to exceed global consumption. New Middle Eastern refineries are intended to be export facilities. Costs associated with environmental regulations could collectively impose additional costs on the domestic refining industry. In addition, regulatory uncertainty can affect refiners’ competitiveness if it inhibits the industry from making investments that are attractive to foreign buyers. by 2020, in contrast to an estimated 4.8 million barrels per day of excess capacity in 2012. A large share of the new capacity is expected in China, India, and the Middle East. Two refiners indicated concern that capacity additions in some of those regions may present competition for U.S. refiners. Several other stakeholders were optimistic about domestic refiners’ ability to compete in the future. According to IEA,capacity additions in China and India are intended to boost the global economy. The domestic petroleum refining industry has been and is expected to continue to be affected by several profound changes. Some of these changes, such as the growth in crude oil production in the United States and Canada, are reshaping the industry and creating new business opportunities. To take advantage of some of these opportunities, refiners and other market participants will need to invest—to upgrade refineries to be able to process different crude oils or to build pipelines or rail connections to move more crude oil from production to refining centers. the refineries we visited are not generalizable to all refineries. The stakeholder views we summarize were not necessarily supported by all types of stakeholders. Stakeholders and information we reviewed identified a number of changes that have affected the industry. We report on those that were most often cited. We summarized historical data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) regarding such issues as capacity and location of refineries, crude, and other issues. We identify differing views where appropriate, and we report on the most common. competitiveness if it inhibits the industry from making investments that would otherwise lower costs. Not all of the key regulations we reviewed would be expected to affect the industry’s competitiveness. CAFE and GHG vehicle standards do not impose requirements on refiners. RFS and Tier 3 standards could impose requirements with potential associated costs on some refiners, but they would not apply to exported fuels. Potential for increased exports to nations with stringent fuel standards. In general, U.S. refineries are among the most competitive in the world. stringent fuel standards. U.S. refineries are among the most sophisticated in the world. IEA has pointed out that refiners in many parts of the world face challenges producing fuels that meet high product quality and environmental performance standards. In this regard, actions refiners may take to reduce gasoline sulfur to comply with proposed Tier 3 standards could enable them to export to markets—such as Japan and much of the rest of the Asia-Pacific region. The IEA says some U.K. refiners could benefit from any trend toward higher quality and more stringent environmental performance Standards. U.S. and Canadian crude portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour crude oils. Some refineries can use these crude oils, but some have invested in new equipment in order to do so. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards and the RFS have likely recently contributed to declining consumption of petroleum fuels, and compliance with the R FS has increased costs for some refiners. Overall, Overall, after decades of generally increasing domestic consumption of. petroleum products, consumption has declined since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic market for refiners, according to several stakeholders we contacted. The U.S. market is important for domestic refineries because they have historically primarily sold their products domestically. On average, the United States exported almost 1 million barrels per day of domestic petroleum products from 2000 through 2005. The refining industry has shifted sales to export markets amid a declining domestic market. Two recently strengthened key environmental regulations have likely affected the refining industry by reducing the consumption of petroleum fuels, and compliance with the RFS. The RFS is responsible for administering the EPA's CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards. economic activity and crude oil and petroleum prices. Recession of 2007 to 2009 reduced economic activity and demand for gasoline. Historically high gasoline prices have discouraged the use of gasoline. Stakeholders and information cited the effect of more stringent fuel economy standards and the RFS, which are discussed in the next section. Several stakeholders told us that this broad shift from growing to falling consumption of petroleum products has affected the domestic refining industry because it has resulted in a smaller domestic market. The U.S. market is important for domestic refineries. Current regulations do not require existing facilities to take any steps to control GHG emissions unless they undertake a major modification. Examples of major modifications at a refinery include a significant expansion of crude oil processing units. The LCFS would change the mix of fuels and vehicles in California to reduce emissions throughout the fuel ‘life cycle’ The goal of the LCFS is to reduce the level of carbon in transportation fuels by reducing the overall carbon intensity (CI) score for each fuel. The CI score is used to reflect each fuel’s life cycleGHG emissions. LCFS refiners can meet the CI reduction targets using a variety of low carbon fuel technologies. Low carbon technologies include renewable fuels from waste and cellulosic materials, natural gas, electricity used in plug-in vehicles, and hydrogen used in fuel cell vehicles. The original LCFS statewide reduction targets for gasoline, diesel, and their substitutes started at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 0.50 percent in 2012. The CI reduction target for gasoline and diesel is based on the annual carbon intensity target for a given year. at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 10 percent by 2020. In 2013 a state Court of Appeal found that CARB must correct certain aspects of the procedures by which the LCFS was originally adopted. CARB officials subsequently announced a regulatory package would be proposed in 2014. The 2013 standards—a 1 percent decrease in carbon intensity from 2010 values—will remain in effect through 2014. To comply with LCFS, refiners can produce their own low carbon fuels or buy such fuels from other producers to blend into their products.  LCFS is the subject of several ongoing lawsuits, which resulted in a 4-month delay in some regulatory activities. A study conducted by a consultant on behalf of industry says the legal challenge is creating uncertainty that discourages new investments by industry. EPA officials also explained that, in some cases, delays can occur when the refinery applicant has not provided EPA with the proper information to proceed with processing the permit. The Clean Air Act requires that EPA approve or deny such permits within 12 months of receiving a complete application. California refiners have thus far been able to comply with LCFS requirements by blending lower carbon intensive renewable fuels. Stakeholders and a refining industry trade association told us that California refiners could face higher costs or compliance challenges unless CARB adjusts future low carbon fuel requirements. CARB has estimated that the cost of LCFS on gasoline and gasoline- substitute fuels is likely to range between an increase of and a decrease of $1.5 billion per year. The decisions CARB makes with respect to the LCFS may affect California refiner’s ability to stay in business and compete with refiners in other states and countries. of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels per day by 2025, equivalent to almost 15 percent of crude oil used by refineries in 2012. Under the RFS statute, unless waived by EPA, renewable fuels blending is required to double by 2022. EPA estimated that the LCFS could cost the refining industry an average of $0.70 per gallon by 2020. The study also projected that 5 to 7 of 14 California refineries could cease production by 2020, and theLCFS could raise other compliance challenges. CARB estimated that the 2020 targets would reduce GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector in California by 10 percent in 2020. Refiners can also generate credits—which can be banked and traded—if their use of low carbon fuels results in greater-than-required carbon intensity reductions. Stakeholders identified three major changes that have likely recently affected the domestic petroleum refining industry. First, crude oil production in the U.S. and Canada has increased, which has lowered carbon emissions. According to several stakeholders, RFS compliance has been most difficult for refiners with less of a retail presence, known as merchant refiners. EPA officials told us that the RFS program affects all refiners equally because obligations are the same regardless of whether refiners blend renewable fuels themselves or purchase RINs. For example, an ExxonMobil official said that RIN costs did not have a significant impact on the company’s financial performance during the second quarter of 2013 because ExxonMobil meets the majority of its obligation by blending its renewable fuels itself. To demonstrate compliance with the RFS, refiners and importers must provide sufficient RINs for the volume of gasoline and diesel they produce for use in the contiguous United States and Hawaii. For example, to comply with the 2013 total renewable fuels standard, a refiner selling 100 million gallons of gasoline would have to provide 9.74 million total Rins to EPA. Refiners and other obligated parties with more RINS than needed to meet the year’s blending standard can hold them for use the following year. we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To demonstrate compliance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) annual blending requirements under the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), refiners use renewable identification numbers (RIN), which we refer to in this report as credits. A RIN is a unique 38-character code that renewable fuel producers and importers assign to each gallon of renewable fuel produced. RINs reflect the cost of renewable fuels compared with the petroleum fuels they displace. Prices for corn-based ethanol increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in RIN prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuels, referred to as the “blend wall” EPA officials told us that high corn prices, which made ethanol more expensive relative to gasoline, also contributed to higher Rin prices during this period. to blend or use renewable fuels by purchasing credits. These credits can be freely traded, and prices for credits are established based on the market. In 2013, prices for these credits increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July before declining to about $0.20 per gallon as of mid- November 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in credit prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuel. 2013 to EPA’s statements expressing its desire to address the blend wall. While the RFS applies to all refiners in the same way, effects of rising or falling RIN prices may vary depending on each refiners’ situation. RFS may increase costs for some refiners depending on the percentages of renewable fuels required by EPA and on other factors. The blend wall may remain a concern into the future because statutory renewable fuel blending requirements continue to increase while the consumption of petroleum products is expected to increase only slightly. Blending more than 10 percent ethanol with gasoline (called E10) is affected by constraints such as the limited availability of vehicles that can use higher ethanol blends. EIA: Higher ethanol blends are less widely available than E10 and must be priced at a discount to encourage greater consumption. EPA officials recently said the blend wall would be reached in 2014 when about 13.2 billion gallons of E10 could be consumed. Blending additional renewable fuels can be difficult and costly once the blending wall is reached. EPA is authorized to waive the RFS levels established in the act if the Administrator determines that implementing the requirement would severely harm the economy or environment. The major source of renewable fuels has traditionally been ethanol produced from corn. As we reported in 2009, the increased cultivation of corn for ethanol, its conversion into renewable fuels could affect water supplies, water quality, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity. Under the R FS’ under the act, the EPA can waive the requirement if there is an inadequate domestic supply, or in certain other situations. quality, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity. Under the RFS’ statutory provisions, the increasing amounts of renewable fuels are to primarily come from renewable fuels other than corn ethanol. The RFS could reduce GHG emissions by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, the EPA says. According to EPA, achieving the R FS’s statutory blending levels in 2022 could result in total benefits of between $13 and $26 billion, the agency says. The benefits include those related to fuel costs, energy security, health, and GHG effects. not subject to RFS requirements, or increase exports to nations where the RFS does not apply. The RFS has contributed to the declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels. As a result, refiners and other industry participants have blended increasing amounts of renewable fuels. According to EIA, increased ethanol use since 2007 displaced over 4 billion gallons of gasoline, or about 3 percent of gasoline consumption in 2012. As discussed previously, decreases in consumption affect refiners by decreasing the size of the domestic market. Congress established the RFS in light of concerns such as climate change and the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil. The potential for RFS to reduce petroleum-based fuel consumption will depend on the percentages finalized by EPA. The Administrator of EPA is authorized to waive RFS levels established in on actions by regulators and market and other developments. For example, as discussed above, EPA has proposed to reduce renewable fuel requirements for 2014 due to an inadequate supply. The proposal could be affected by legal challenges, as well as market infrastructure. RFS annual standards are issued on time. We provided drafts of this report to DOE, DOT, and EPA for review and comment. The three agencies provided technical comments on early or final drafts, which we incorporated as appropriate. EPA also provided a letter in which it generally agreed with our findings and recommendations and clarified three topics discussed in the report. Based on our work, refiners that purchase credits for compliance. differed from EPA's views on the effects of compliance with the RFS, we found.  compliance has recently increased costs for some refiners, according to information we reviewed. Required blending of renewable fuels has contributed to declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels. EPA’s delays in issuing annual RFS standards may have contributed to investment uncertainty for some Refiners. RFS has had three main effects on the domestic petroleum refining industry or individual refiners. In addition, EPA has been late in issuing Annual RFS Standards, and several factors contribute to the delays. The RFS regulations require U.S. transportation fuels to include renewable fuels. The outlook of the U.S. refining industry will also depend on the extent to which some key regulations—RFS, Tier 3, stationary source GHG requirements, and LCFS—increase costs for refiners. Increasing costs may be absorbed by refiners themselves (i.e., by reducing their profits), be passed on to consumers through higher product prices, or both. The requirements on domestic refiners from the key regulations we reviewed generally are expected to have a greater effect in the future. nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. Stakeholders included representatives from refining companies, environmental organizations, consultants, and officials from federal and state agencies. We also visited several refineries of selected refining companies. Because we used a nonprobable sample, the views of these stakeholders are not generalizable to all potential stakeholders, but they provide illustrative examples of the range of views. For example, to select refiners, we considered the size and location of their refineries, and whether they were vertically integrated or merchant refiners. proposed: (1) the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard regulations, (2) the Department of Transportation's Corporate Average Fuel Economy, and (3) the state of California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard. We reviewed agency regulatory impact assessments and industry and other studies on the effect of these regulations on industry. Other regulations may also affect the industry. We also summarized the results of semistructured interviews with a nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. EPA officials say delays in issuing RFS standards have largely been due to the length of the regulatory development process. Interagency review process is to ensure that regulations are consistent with the President’s priorities, among other things, and that decisions made by one agency do not conflict with the policies or actions taken or planned by another. Under the public review process, EPA must publish a proposed standard in the Federal Register, provide the public with the opportunity to review and comment on the proposal, and address comments received before finalizing the regulation. the regulation. According to EPA officials, the interagency and public review processes can be time consuming. The RFS standards involve complex and controversial issues and balance competing agricultural, energy, and environmental policy interests. In 2009, we recommended that EPA and other agencies track their performance for developing significant regulations against targeted milestones to identify opportunities for improvement. We found that monitoring actual versus estimated performance could help agency managers identify steps in the process that account for substantial time and provide information necessary to evaluate whether time was well spent. management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA stated at the time that this process helps management identify regulations that are off-track so that corrective steps can be taken to expedite their completion. EPA has not conducted a systematic review of its experience issuing RFS regulations to identify the underlying causes of repeated delays. EPA officials told us that they develop RFS Regulations using the same procedures used for developing all EPA regulations. The agency has not met its statutory deadlines under the RFS in the five annual standards since 2009. EPA tracks 14 milestones as it develops proposed rules and additional milestones in developing final regulations. For example, EPA tracks when its senior management approves of a document describing the scope of the regulation and the analytical work necessary to develop it. In comments to our 2009 report, EPA stated that it used an internal tracking system along with additional information to develop regulatory management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA stated at the end of the 2009 report that it uses an agency-wide Action Development Process to develop proposed rules. EPA proposed the 2014 standards on November 29, 2013, and EPA officials told us that they plan to finalize the standards in Spring 2014. The RFS compliance period is set by statute to be a full calendar year, and delays do not change this compliance period. As a result, when the RFS standards are issued late, the industry has less time to plan or contractual constraints, among various other factors, that could result in different outcomes in the short run. EPA stated that it adjusted the 2013 deadline to provide additional time to demonstrate compliance. EPA has not issued annual RFS standards on time since 2009. Uncertainty can affect the market climate within which these investment decisions will be made. EPA may waive the statutory volumes in whole or in part according to statutory criteria, which EPA has identified as potentially factoring in the blend wall, market developments, and other issues. However, EPA has missed the annual deadline for issuing annual standards under the RFS in most years. Most recently, EPA issued 2013 standards in August 2013—over 8 months late. EPA delays in issuing RFS standards are important because delays do not change refiners’ compliance periods accordingly. Uncertainty among refiners, renewable fuel producers, and other market participants about how EPA will address the blend wall could harm investment. EPA has some systems in place to monitor and evaluate progress in developing regulations, which could provide useful information for understanding delays in RFS. But EPA has not identified the underlying causes of delays, and it has not developed a plan to address delays. participants about how EPA will address the blend wall, which can be exacerbated by the prospect of litigation. To improve EPA’s ability to meet the annual statutory deadline for issuing annual RFS standards, we recommend that the Administrator of the EPA take the following two actions: Assess past experience to identify the underlying causes of delays. Develop and implement a plan to address the causes of delay and help ensure RFS annual standards are issued on time. We provided drafts of the two actions. Since 2011, construction of any new refineries and certain refineries that are modified have generally been subject to the use of the “best available control technology’ for GHG emissions. The best available controlTechnology is determined for each facility based on an analysis of available technologies considering cost and other factors. According to EPA, in most cases, the best availablecontrol technology selected for GHGs are energy efficiency improvements. For example, for refineries, this could involve the installation of heat recovery units, which capture and use otherwise wasted heat in the refinery process. received major source GHG permits since the GHG permitting program was implemented in 2011. A refining company representative expressed concerns to us about the lengthy permitting process to authorize GHG emission increases. An EPA official said that, in most cases, best available control technologies selected to comply with GHG requirements for refining facilities involve energy efficiency improvement measures that could help refiners reduce fuel consumption and save money. Further, EPA officials also explained that,  in addition to GHG emissions, refiners can also use other energy efficiency measures to reduce their fuel consumption. well as costs for vehicle manufacturers to improve the emissions performance of vehicles. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to take certain steps to address emissions from stationary sources, including refineries. EPA recently issued rules concerning how GHGs are to be included in certain existing permitting processes. Since 2011, construction on the Keystone XL pipeline in Texas has been delayed by two months. The pipeline is expected to be completed in time for the start of the 2016 presidential campaign. The project is expected in time to meet the president's goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent by 2016. underlying causes of repeated delays and has not identified changes in its approach that may help to avoid these delays in the future. Without such analyses and a plan to address the underlying causes of the delays, EPA risks repeating them. The other key regulations that we reviewed have had minimal effects to date because these regulations either have not yet been implemented (Tier 3 standards) or, with respect to the other two, have not affected industry operations or costs in a major way, according to stakeholders and information we reviewed. way, according to stakeholders and information we reviewed. Tier 3 standards were proposed on May 21, 2013, and EPA announced final standards on March 3, 2014. Stationary source GHG requirements have been burdensome to refiners, but several other stakeholders said they have not had a major effect. EPA officials told us they were aware of only three refineries that have received majorSource GHG permits since the GHG permitting program began in 2010. The EPA says it has no immediate plans to change its GHG standards. with the agency for comment. EPA stated that the final Tier 3 program is very similar to what it proposed, though EPA made some changes based on public input and updated its analyses. EPA provided technical comments to incorporate information from the final rule which we incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We were not able to obtain stakeholder and other views on the finalTier 3 rule for this report. See appendix IV for EPA’s letter. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30. future delays would contribute to investment uncertainty and higher costs for refiners. EPA officials said that they did not believe delays have affected market participants. The extent to which the RFS increases costs in the future could also be affected by the outcome of any relevant litigation and of legislative proposals to change the Rfs or how EPA implements it. According to EPA, to meet the Tier 3 fuel sulfur standards, refiners would need to install or install or upgrade to meet Tier 3 sulfur standards. The RFS is expected to be implemented by the end of 2015. and places no requirement on existing refineries unless they undertake a major modification. EPA entered a settlement in which the agency agreed to develop national performance standards for GHG emissions from new and modified refineries. Although EPA has no current schedule to issue these standards, EPA committed in its settlement to issue them. A stakeholder told us that until EPA clarifies its approach for NSPS, many refiners will not comply with the new standards. The standards could impose more strict controls involving higher costs at refineries, he said. The EPA projected that 67 out of 108 refineries would modify or purchase some equipment. The capital costs of installing this equipment and operating costs to run it would total $804 million in 2017. An industry study of the Tier 3 proposal estimated that the regulation would increase costs by up to $0.09 per gallon for the highest-cost refinery, and several refinery representatives told CNN that this figure is likely too high. The regulation would also require refiners to install or upgrade hydrotreating capacity or other steps to reduce the sulfur content in fuels. the current caps, but far more difficult if the caps were lowered. Stationary source GHG requirements could become more stringent in the future. One study estimated that industry could incur additional capital expenses to achieve lower sulfur caps, ranging from $2 billion to over $6 billion dollars depending on the sulfur cap level in the final standards. The current permitting framework is a case-by-case determination that takes into account costs, among other factors, and places no requirement on existing refineries unless they undertake it. The extent to which the refining industry will be affected by Tier 3 standards would have been greater if EPA decreased the per-gallon maximum allowable sulfur levels in gasoline. In the final standards, EPA maintained the current 80 ppm cap, but had sought comment on whether it should decrease the cap to as low as 20 ppm. A stakeholder told us that Tier 3 would be manageable if EPA kept the current caps, but far more difficult if the caps were lowered. The final standards were released on Wednesday. during model years 2011-2025. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to establish certain standards for new motor vehicles and fuels to address air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. According to EPA, more than 149 million Americans experience unhealthy levels of air pollution. Cars and light trucks are significant contributors to air pollution, and EPA estimated that the Tier 3 standards will reduce pollution from cars and trucks by about 20 percent. The standards will also reduce the sulfur content of gasoline. estimated that the Tier 3 standards will reduce pollution from such sources. The standards set more stringent tailpipe emission standards for new vehicles. By 2030, annual emission reductions would generate annual benefits of between $6.7 and $19 billion and prevent up to 2,000 premature deaths annually. EPA estimated that the vehicle and fuel standards would cost approximately $1.5 billion in 2030, including costs for refiners to install and operate equipment to remove sulfur from gasoline, and costs for vehicle manufacturers to improve the emissions. CAFE standards are administered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) CAFE standards require that vehicle manufacturers meet fleet-wide average fuel economy standards for vehicles. NHTSA and EPA put the national program into place by issuing coordinated regulations covering vehicle model years 2012 to 2025.by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, equal to taking about 27 million vehicles off the road. Although the CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards are distinct, their targets were aligned for compliance purposes. The RFS has recently increased costs for some refiners, as well as other challenges. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards will require more efficient vehicles in the future, which may reduce future consumption of fuels. EPA estimated that the model year 2012-2025 standards are projected to reduce U.S. consumption of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels per day by 2025. The other three key environmental regulations have had minimal effects to date because they have either not yet been implemented or have generally not affected the industry. CAFE standards contributed to a reduction in transportation fuel consumption of 2.8 million barrels per day in 2002. EPA estimated in 2010 that vehicles were expected to save 1.3 billion gallons of gasoline in 2013 compared with model year 2011 standards. This is equivalent to about 1 percent of EIA’s projection of gasoline consumption in 2013. A stakeholder told us that the CAFE and GHG vehicle emissions standards have likely had a relatively large impact on petroleum demand declines in the past few years. EPA estimated that the 2011-2025 standards may save consumers and businesses $1.7 trillion. The standards may reduce oil consumption by 12 billion barrels, and reduce GHG emissions by 6 billion metric tons over the lifetime of the vehicles sold. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA has the authority to set the standards for vehicles sold during model years 2011- 2025. For more information on the standards, visit EPA.gov/fueleconomy or go to www.epa.gov. so, namely the cost for the renewable fuel compared to the petroleum fuel it displaces. In addition to the individual named above, Christine Kehr (Assistant Director), Elizabeth Beardsley, Catherine Bombico, Keya Chateauneuf, Nirmal Chaudhary, Quindi Franco, Cindy Gilbert, Katharine Kairys, Michael Kendix, Armetha Liles, and Alison O’Neill made key contributions to this report. GAO-12-732. Oil and Gas: Information on Shale Resources, Development, and Environmental and Public Health Risks. 2009. Federal Rulemaking: Improvements Needed to Monitoring and Evaluation of Rules Development as well as to the Transparency of OMB Regulatory Reviews. 2007. Vehicle Fuel Economy: Reforming Fuel Economy Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light. 2008. Energy Markets: Increasing Globalization of Petroleum Products Markets, Tightening Refining Demand and Supply Balance, and Other Trends Have Implications for U.S. Energy Supply, Prices, and Price Volatility. 2009. Energy markets: Refinery Outages Can Impact Petroleum Product Prices, but No Federal Requirements to Report Outages Exist. Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light Trucks, and Other Options Could Complement These Standards. GAO-07-921. Washington, D.C.: August 2, 2007. Motor Fuels: Understanding the Factors That Influence the Retail Price of Gasoline. GAE-05-525SP. Washington,. D.c.: May 2, 2005. MotorFuels: understanding the factors that influence the retail price of Gas gasoline. GAo-05/525SP: Understanding The Factors That influence the Retail price of gas. this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and to the Secretaries of Energy and Transportation and the Administrator of the EPA. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao,gov.

ROUGE-1: 73.03, ROUGE-2: 65.95, ROUGE-L: 22.94
BERTScore: 57.82

==============================================
==================== [63/100] ====================
Summary:
In fiscal year 2012, the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) program produced over 9,000 active duty, guard, and reserve officers. Table 6 provides a listing of the number of officers produced by unit, school location, and service. Table 7 presents the Army’s enrollment information as of November 2012, table 8 presents the Navy’S enrollment information in November 2012 and table 9 presents the Air Force's enrollment information. The enrollment information is alphabetized by state or U.S. territory and then by unit. about 53,000 students enrolled across all years of study in 2012. The Army had over 33,000Students enrolled, the Navy had over 6,000 enrolled, and the Air Force had over 14,000 Students enrolled. GAO: Data on Officers’ Commissioning Programs is Insufficiently Reliable and Needs to be Corrected. Military Personnel: Strategic Plan Needed to be Strengthened to Meet the Needs of Military Personnel. Military personnel: Strategic plan needed to meet the needs of military personnel. D.C.: March 8, 2007. Military Personnel: Strategic Plan Needed to Address Army’s Emerging Officer Accession and Retention Challenges. GAO-07-224. Reserve Officers’ Training Corps: Questions Related to Organizational Restructuring.GAO/NSIAD-96-56. Officer Commissioning Programs: More Oversight and Coordination Needed. GAo/NSiAD-93-37. Reserve officers’ training corps: Less Need for Officers Provides Opportunity for Significant Savings. Army Cadet Command, Fort Knox, Kentucky Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Manpower Personnel Education and Training, Arlington, Virginia Naval Service Training Command, Great Lakes, Illinois Department of the Air Force, Jeanne M. Holm Center for Officer Accessions and Citizen Development, Montgomery, Alabama Marine Corps Recruiting Command, Quantico, Virginia We conducted this performance audit from February 2013 to November 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our conclusions. academies in preparing selected students for commissioned military service and to provide officers for the reserve forces. The services organize their ROTC programs into administrative units and assign a command structure, including a commanding officer, to each unit. Most states have a unit from each service located within the state, and all states have at least one unit located in the state. Each unit may support students at more than one school, and students travel from affiliate school to host unit for their RotC activities. The military services typically operate ROTC programs using a 5-year production cycle, beginning the year prior to school entry and culminating in the graduation year. The services’ headquarters determine the number of newly commissioned officers needed annually to support the services' congressionally mandated end strength requirements for military personnel. By statute, at least one ROTc unit must be established and maintained in each state if certain conditions are met by the state. The U.S. military uses a combination of the Army Reserve and the National Guard to train new officers. ROTC is the largest of the three major officer commissioning programs for DOD. The other two major commissioning officer sources include the military service academies and Officer Candidate Schools/Officer Training School. ROTC programs prepare college and university students to serve as officers in the military services. The program was established by the National Defense Act of 1916 to supplement the military academies in preparing selected students for commissioned military service and officer training. In fiscal year 2012, nearly half of all the newly commissioned active duty officers came from the ROTc program. Each service came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding its overall ROTC officer production goals. The Army and the Air Force each exceeded their production goals for 3 of the 5 years we studied. In the event that an over- or underproduction of officers is anticipated, each service correspondingly adjusts the number of people they plan to produce. The military services annually issue guidance that specifies goals for the number and types of officers that their respective RotC programs need to produce to meet their current authorized end strength. through 2012, the Army’s ROTC program goal for newly commissioned officers ranged from 4,500 to 5,350. The Army met at least 95 percent of its goal, the Navy met at at least 91 percent, and the Air Force met at  96 percent. The services generally met these overall production goals for Newly commissioned officers. Furthermore, theArmy and the Army and the Navy and the Marine Corps generally met their overall goals for new officers. The Air Force, however, generally met its overall goal of 1,788. programs met goals and minimum requirements for producing officers over a 5-year period. We obtained and analyzed ROTC unit production data from each of the military services for fiscal years 2008 through 2012. We compared overall officer production with other major commissioning sources. We also reviewed fiscal year 2012 staff data of military personnel located at each unit and DOD’s fiscal year2012 composite rates to determine the cost ofMilitary personnel per each ROTc unit in fiscal year 2013. In addition, we reviewed the fiscal year 2014 budget for each service. The military services’ ROTC programs each came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding the annual officer production goals that they established to meet their respective authorized end strengths. Each service reported that various factors may affect their ability to meet these goals, and that they have faced challenges commissioning officers for certain occupational specialties. In addition, half of all RotC units did not produce the minimum average annual production of officers over a 5-year period required by DOD to justify investment in an ROTc unit. DOD's production requirement does not take into account a service's investment in a particular ROTC unit. It does not account for cost-related factors, such as the differences in the cost of tuition for public and private colleges. The tuition cost difference is not insignificant, with some schools costing six times more than the annual average in-state tuition of about $7,100 for a 4-year college or university. Despite the significant variance in tuition, all RotC units are subject to the same numerical production requirement regardless of the actual cost. or provide additional support for their position that approving a methodology, as set forth in the DOD instruction, is not an appropriate oversight function to be performed at the department level. In light of the ad hoc reviews by the services noted earlier in this report, such oversight by the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness that is clearly delineated in guidance could support efforts to improve the consistency of the services’ application of performance measures and evaluations. Second, OSD officials told us that they stopped enforcing a requirement for annual reports from the services identifying the cost. time without justification. For our other five recommendations, DOD concurred with each of them and estimated actions would be completed by July 2015. We encourage DOD to begin taking actions now to facilitate implementation of these recommendations as soon as possible. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the Under Secretary of defense for Personnel and Readiness, the Secretaries of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and appropriate congressional committees. We therefore continue to believe that these inconsistent measurements limit the services’ ability to compare program progress, results and efficiencies over time. told us that they do not review and approve the services’ methodologies for proposed unit closures because they see it as encroaching on their authority. Given that DOD Instruction 1215.08 requires this approval, which is to occur when a military department proposes closure of a particular unit, it is difficult to understand how this methodology approval function, in connection with a proposed decision of a military service, could be viewed as an encroachment. DOD officials did not further elaborate on or provide additional support for their position. Navy officials pointed out that the U.S. News and World report ranking correlates to the quality of applicants to the Navy Nuclear Propulsion Program. It is not clear specifically how the Navy made that correlation, nor why the Navy added this ranking for its 2012 review. We recognize that the services need some flexibility to prioritize factors on the basis as one of twelve factors included in its unit closure consideration process. We also clarified that because the services are required to subjectively determine how factors should be applied, these factors can change over time. used by each service to identify units for potential closure. In fiscal year 2012, the Navy included the U.S. News and World Report ranking of the schools associated with the units as 1 of 12 factors in its closure considerations. The Air Force included “strategic partnerships” as an important consideration. Neither service identified specifically how these factors correlate to the factors in DOD’s instruction, defined how they contribute, and incorporated them into the closure consideration process, the report says. number and location of units in an area or state where the unit being considered for closure resides. However, several of these factors, which officials told us are the measures they currently use to assess the programs, are not clearly defined. DOD’s instruction directs the services to consider the quality of officers produced by a unit that is being evaluated for closure. The instruction does not include guidance on how the services should define and assess quality, which could lead to the inconsistent application of the measure by the services. the same numerical production requirement regardless of the actual cost each service incurs at a particular college or university. Because such cost data are not consistently accounted for, it is not clear how the production requirement can be used to justify DOD's investment. The absence of clearly defined measures also affects the objectivity of DOD’s unit closure consideration factors because it requires the services to subjectively determine how each factor should be defined and applied. Further, these determinations can change over time without explanation. For example, we reviewed the methodologies used by each service to identify units for potential closure. We reviewed the fiscal year 2014 budget documentation to identify the average operation and maintenance cost (excluding scholarships) per ROTC unit in fiscal year 2012. We determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for determining the extent to which the military services are meeting RotC production goals and unit level requirements as well as the cost per unit. We followed up with service officials to attempt to reconcile these differences. We reviewed relevant legislation, specifically sections 2101- 2111b of Title 2101. We used these data to determine the cost of ROTCs that did not meet DOD minimum production requirements. requirement for annual reports from the services identifying the cost and budget for their respective ROTC programs. OSD removed reporting requirements related to internally generated oversight reports. To regain some of the information on program visibility that it no longer obtains through the reports, OSD officials told us that they instead use data from service budget submissions to estimate cost data that is less specific than the data that were previously obtained through the services’ automatic submission of these reports. Also, the department says it is using data from the service budget to estimate ROTc program cost data. the Navy conducted 4 evaluations over 3 years; and the Air Force conducted 4. evaluations over 8 years. These evaluations provided information about individual ROTC unit performance, with a focus on officer production. However, the evaluations did not assess the overall ROTc program against strategic goals and objectives. Without routine evaluations that measure progress toward strategic goals, decision makers cannot determine the cost-effectiveness or efficiency of RotC programs over time, the authors say. The authors conclude that results-oriented management is critical to the increased use of performance information. routine and systematic and have not yielded closures that service officials believe are needed. The military services’ ROTC programs have, over the past decade, conducted a total of 11 evaluations. These practices indicate that a body of evidence is more valuable to decision makers than a single study, the authors say. In addition, their past work has shown that key elements of a results-oriented oversight framework include communicating results and using performance information to make decisions for improvement. The authors say this is best facilitated when organizations reach out early to gain buy-in and engage in regular communication. Each service correspondingly adjusts the number of people they plan to admit into future classes. Neither OSD nor the services have established performance measures that provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall effectiveness and efficiency of ROTC programs. Current measures do not take into account a service’s investment in a particular RotC unit, and are not clearly defined to help ensure that they are objectively applied, the authors say. Because they receive the data after it is submitted for the budget, there is little opportunity for the office to make changes or affect future management decisions. In absence of fully developed performance measures, the military services have evaluated aspects of their respective ROTC programs. The evaluations are not routine and systematic and have not yielded closures that service a total of 11. Until clearly defined and comprehensive performance measures are established to evaluate overall program performance, the services will have limited information available about their ROTc programs’ overall progress toward their goals, the authors say. They recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the Under Secretary of defense for Personnel and Readiness, in conjunction with the Secretaries of the military service, to establish a systematic process to routinely evaluate ROTT program performance. the services have conducted a total of 11 evaluations to identify units for consolidation or closure. However, the evaluations have largely occurred on an ad hoc basis and are narrowly focused on assessing the productivity of individual ROTC units. DOD’s management of ROTc programs is hampered by not having performance measures that provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall cost-effectiveness and efficiency of RotC programs. Key attributes of successful performance measures determine the cost- Effectiveness or efficiency of programs over time and cannot reliably identify trends in program performance. ROTC programs continue to be the largest and most important source of newly commissioned officers for DOD. But half of the units do not meet DOD’s production requirements. Service efforts to revise this inefficient structure are hampered by performance measures that are not clearly defined, allow for inconsistent application of factors for closure, and do not provide a comprehensive understanding of programs’ efficiency or cost- effectiveness, authors say. They interviewed knowledgeable officials from the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and the military services. by each service in recent assessments of unit productivity. Although the services’ evaluations of ROTC units yielded recommendations for consolidation or closures, no closures have occurred as a result. The military services have been unsuccessful in completing any of these politically sensitive consolidations or closures in part because and prior the services do not proactively and periodically engage congressional stakeholders on RotC program performance. DOD Instruction 1215.08 does not require congressional notification about ROTc program performance and that the decision to close units is the prerogative of the Secretary. that recommended closures and consolidations have not been acted on. Some senior service officials have concluded that it is easier to maintain underproductive ROTC units than attempt to secure the congressional support needed for their closure. DOD’s instruction gives service Secretaries discretion on which units to close. However, until the services conduct routine evaluations of RotC programs that are based on a comprehensive set of performance measures, the programs risk having more units than needed or units that are not most effectively located to meet service goals. services need some flexibility to prioritize factors on the basis of their individual needs for newly commissioned officers. inconsistent measurements limit the services’ ability to compare program progress, results, and efficiency over time. We reviewed service policies for ROTC programs and likewise found no additional guidance on how to define or apply the closure consideration factors in DOD’s instruction. Although the Army regulation specifies a process for categorizing potential closures, Army officials told us that the disestablishment categories specified in the regulation have not been used for years because the process was too time consuming. OSD and the military services are generally assigned responsibility for conducting oversight of ROTC programs. Although the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness conducts some oversight functions such as setting policy, DOD’s Instruction 1215.08 does not specify department-level review of performance measures. Further, services do not consistently communicate with key stakeholders, such as members of Congress and schools, about performance. This has contributed to difficulty gaining political support for such closures, the authors say. The authors recommend that the secretary of Defense direct the under secretary to take the following three actions. The military services have had difficulty gaining buy-in for recommendations to close ROTC units. This is in part because they do not have an effective strategy for communicating with stakeholders. Stakeholder involvement is best facilitated when organizations reach out early to and address the retention or disestablishment of underproductive units. Clear lines of responsibility when combined with performance measures provide leadership and decision makers with the transparency and authority required to make difficult decisions about the program, the authors say. The authors reviewed and analyzed relevant OSD and military service guidance to identify guidelines and responsibilities for conducting oversight. aligns with the updated DOD instruction; and develop and implement, in conjunction with the Secretaries of the military services, a strategy to periodically communicate with Congress and other key stakeholders on ROTC program performance. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD concurred with our six recommendations to make management, oversight, and accountability improvements to ROTc programs. DOD also described steps that it planned to take in response to our recommendations. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix IV. on military service correspondence with schools about ROTC program performance and compared them with provisions in DOD Instruction 1215.08 pertaining to communication with schools. We also interviewed knowledgeable officials from OSD and the military services on the activities and mechanisms used to conduct oversight of, and to communicate with stakeholders on, RotC programs. We visited or contacted the following organizations during our review: Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy, Directorate of Accession Policy, Arlington, Virginia. Deputy Chief of Naval. example, in our 1973 and 1977 reports we found that the services’ reporting to DOD and Congress were inadequate to make necessary judgments on ROTC program effectiveness. established at a college or university, school administrators have to agree to various requirements, to include granting the academic rank of professor to the senior commissioned officer assigned to the program at that institution. In 1991 and 1993, DOD and the services had not made any significant progress in improving their ability to report RotC program performance.. of schools in meeting annual production goals. Army and Navy officials told us that they currently do not regularly communicate with school administrators about the level of officer production at their respective college or university. Air Force officials said they provide written notification annually to participating colleges and universities. Until the military services establish a formal strategy to communicate with key stakeholders on ROTC program performance, the military will find it difficult to obtain the support that is needed to make the necessary changes to improve the program, the authors say. Navy, and the Air Force, and appropriate congressional committees. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. To assess the extent to which the military services’ ROTC programs met goals and minimum requirements for producing officers over the age of 25. To see the full report, visit the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604.

ROUGE-1: 68.57, ROUGE-2: 63.20, ROUGE-L: 27.13
BERTScore: 63.29

==============================================
==================== [64/100] ====================
Summary:
We reported in 2008 that DB plan investments in hedge funds and private equity have grown, but such investments are generally a small portion of plan assets. According to a Pensions & Investments survey, the percentage of large plans (as measured by total plan assets) investing in Hedge funds grew from 11 percent in 2001 to 60 percent in 2010. Data show that larger plans are more likely to invest in hedge Funds and private Equity compared with midsize plans. The average allocation to hedge funds among plans with such investments was a little over 5 percent. positions and trading tactics in order to achieve a desired return as changing market conditions warrant. It is difficult for plans to independently ascertain the value or fully assess the degree of investment risk. As with hedge funds, valuations of private equity investments are uncertain during the investment’s long duration, which often lasts 10 years or more. Some hedge funds have improved disclosure and transparency about their operations because of the demands of institutional investors. Several pension plans cited limited transparency as a prime reason they had chosen not to invest in hedge funds. Unlike investments that are traded and priced in public markets, plan officials have limited information on the value of private equity investments until the underlying holdings are sold. While any plan investment may fail to deliver expected returns over time, hedge fund investments are more likely to do so. The investment’s long duration, which often lasts 10 years or more, is a key factor in assessing a private equity fund's value. In some cases, private equity funds estimate the value. of the fund by comparing the. value of companies in their portfolio with thevalue of comparable publicly traded assets. transparency, valuation procedures, redemption provisions, and degree of leverage employed. Pension plans may want to ensure that they will not pay a performance fee unless the value of the hedge fund investment passes a previous peak value. Key contract terms for private equity may also include fee structure and valuation procedures. One plan sponsor noted the ability to negotiate favorable contract terms is limited when investing in top-performing funds, because investing in such funds is highly competitive. Due diligence and ongoing monitoring, beyond those required for traditional investments, are also required. For hedge funds, due diligence can be a wide-ranging process including study of a hedge fund’s investment, valuation, risk management processes, and compliance procedures. As with hedge fund investments, plans take additional steps to mitigate the challenges of investing in private equity through extensive and ongoing monitoring, beyond that required for traditional investments. Plan representatives said these steps include regularly reviewing reports on the performance of the underlying investments of the private equity fund and having periodic periodic reviews of the hedge fund's performance. Plan official may not be able to obtain timely information on the value of assets owned by a hedge fund. Hedge fund managers may decline to disclose information on asset holdings and the net value of individual assets. Even if hedge fund managers were to provide detailed positions, these managers may seek to profit through complex and simultaneous positions and can abruptly change their positions and trading tactics in order to achieve a desired goal. The release of such information could compromise their trading strategy, according to the plan official's report. its investments—and can often require additional capital over the life of the investment. A private equity fund cycle typically follows a pattern known as the J-curve, which reflects an initial period of negative returns during which investors provide the fund with capital. Pension plans investing in hedge funds are also exposed to operational risk because of inadequate or failed internal processes, people, and systems, or problems with external service providers. Operational problems can arise from a number of factors, including a lack of confidence in the investment process. Operational problems can arise from a number of sources, including inexperienced operations personnel. Many hedge funds engage in active, complex, and sometimes heavily leveraged trading. A failure of operational functions, such as processing or clearing one or more trades, may have particularly grave consequences for the overall position of the hedge fund. Pension plan officials we spoke to said most investments can pose some type of operational risk, according to a report by an investment consulting firm. The report was based on interviews with hedge fund executives and pension plan officials. Pension plan officials cited attaining returns superior to those attained in the stock market as a reason for investing in hedge funds. Hedge funds and private equity are also relatively illiquid investments. One plan official noted that as long as hedge funds add value net of fees, they found the higher fees acceptable. But these constraints also pose certain disadvantages to plan sponsors, such as inhibiting a plan’s ability to limit a hedge fund”s investment loss.net investment returns. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Hedge fund and private equity investments pose investment challenges beyond those posed by traditional investments. Both managers may use leverage to potentially increase an investment’s return. Although registered investment companies are subject to strict leverage limits, a hedge fund or private equity fund can make relatively unrestricted use of leverage. Leverage can magnify profits, but can also magnify losses to the fund if the market goes against the fund”s expectations. In addition, a may fail to deliver expected returns over time. Investing through a fund of funds does not relieve plan sponsors of their fiduciary duties. Smaller plans may have only one-or two-person staffs, or may lack the resources to hire outside consulting expertise and may be locked out of top-performing funds. A representative of one pension plan with more than $32 billion in total assets noted that before investing in hedge funds, the plan had to conduct a due diligence review of the firm. The plan sponsors must act prudently in selecting and monitoring funds of funds. Hedge funds and private equity funds can also feature relatively costly fee structures compared with those of mutual funds. Despite these fee structures, pension plan officials to manage a portfolio of hedge funds. investing through a fund of funds may provide a plan better access to hedge funds or private Equity funds than a plan would be able to obtain through direct investment. The returns for such concentrated, undiversified funds are highly susceptible to the success or failure of each underlying company and related market sector conditions. The market goes against the fund’s expectations. The extent to which these smaller plans invest in hedge funds and private equity is unclear. Pension plan officials take a number of steps in an attempt to mitigate the risks and challenges. Plan sponsors emphasize defining a clear purpose and strategy for their hedge fund investments. Several sources stated that private equity investments have greater risks. The full report is available at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/27/pension-plan-investments-in-hedge-funds-and-private-equity-report. underlying investments of the private equity fund and having periodic meetings with fund managers. Investing in a fund of funds provides investors with diversification across multiple funds, which can mitigate the effect of one manager’s poor performance. A fund of private equity funds can allow plans to invest in a variety of managers, industries, geographies, and year of initial capital investment. In some cases, plans participate on the advisory board of a private Equity fund, which provides a greater opportunity for oversight. Investors must invest with top- performing funds in order to achieve long-term returns in excess of those of the stock market. Plan sponsors and others also cited the importance of negotiating key terms of investments in hedge funds and private equity. Such terms can include fee structure and conditions, degree of transparency, valuation procedures, redemption provisions, and degree of leverage employed in the case of hedge funds, they said. In private equity investments, there is greater variation in performance among funds, particularly among venture capital investments. equity market volatility, it is reasonable to expect that the number of plan sponsors making such investments will increase in the future. Such assets may serve useful purposes in a well-thought- out investment program, offering plan sponsors advantages that may not be as readily available from more traditional investment options. However, investments in such assets place demands on plan sponsors that are significantly beyond the demands of more traditional asset classes. These challenges can be daunting even for large plan sponsors. Accordingly, we believe that, as we recommended in 2008, take to address these challenges. Labor’s Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) could outline the implications of a hedge funds’ limited transparency on the fiduciary duty of prudent oversight. While EBSA is not tasked with offering guidance to public sector plans, such plans may nonetheless benefit from such guidance, the authors say. They say smaller plans might not have the resources to take actions consistent with the best practices, and thus would be at risk of making imprudent investments in hedge funds. guidance to public sector plans, such plans may nonetheless benefit from such guidance. Labor generally agreed with our recommendation, but said the lack of uniformity among these investments could complicate the development of comprehensive guidance for plan fiduciaries. To date, Labor has not acted on this recommendation. As plan sponsors seek to better ensure adequate return on assets under management, recent trends suggest that investments in alternative assets such as hedge funds and private equity are becoming more commonplace. In light of these trends and ongoing public equity market volatility, it is reasonable to expect that the In 2008, the ERISA Advisory Council recommended that Labor publish guidance to clarify the role of ERISA fiduciaries in selecting, valuing, and accounting for hard-to-value assets. In 2009, the Investor’s Committee published a report in January 2009 on the best practices for hedge fund investors. The report acknowledged that hedge fund investments are not necessarily suitable for some investors and provided many recommendations for investors selecting and monitoring their Hedge Fund investments, such as obtaining a written statement of the fund's valuation policies and procedures. $32 billion in total assets noted that before investing in hedge funds, the plan would have to build up its staff in order to conduct the due diligence necessary during the fund selection process. Department of Labor (Labor) can play a role in helping to ensure that plans fulfill their Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) fiduciary duties. For example, in 2006, the ERISA Advisory Council recommended that Labor publish guidance about the hedge fund investment process. In 2011, the council concluded that Labor should publish guidance on hedge funds and private equity. sponsors. We believe that, as we recommended in 2008, the Secretary of Labor should provide guidance regarding investing in hedge funds and private equity specifically designed for qualified plans under ERISA. In particular, we believe that a discussion of the challenges that such investments pose to small plan sponsors would be beneficial. This concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions that the council may have. For further questions on this statement, please contact me at (202) 512- 7215. statement include Michael Hartnett, Sharon Hermes, David Lehrer, and Amber Yancey Carroll. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.

ROUGE-1: 78.86, ROUGE-2: 70.71, ROUGE-L: 39.49
BERTScore: 67.64

==============================================
==================== [65/100] ====================
Summary:
Not since the creation of the Department of Defense (DOD) more than 50 years ago has the government sought an integration and transformation of this magnitude. In DOD’s case, the effective transformation took many years to achieve, and even today, the department continues to face enduring management challenges and high- risk areas that are, in part, legacies of its unfinished integration. Effectively implementing and transforming DHS may be an even more daunting challenge. DOD was formed almost entirely from agencies whose The magnitude of the responsibilities, combined with the challenge and complexity of the transformation, underscores the perseverance and dedication that will be required of all DHS’s leaders, employees, and stakeholders to achieve success. Mergers of this magnitude in the public and private sector carry significant risks, including lost productivity and inefficiencies. Generally, successful transformations of large organizations, even those undertaking less strenuous reorganizations, can take from 5 to 7 years to achieve. Necessary management capacity and oversight mechanisms must be established. The new department is also being formed from components with a wide array of existing major management challenges and program risks. For instance, one DHS directorate’s responsibility includes the protection of critical information systems that we already consider a high risk. Many of the major components merging into the new department, including the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), FEMA and the U.S. Coast Guard, face at least one major problem, such as strategic human capital risks, critical information technology challenges, or financial management vulnerabilities. of challenges and risks to program operations. TSA has had considerable challenges in meeting deadlines for screening baggage. The Coast Guard faces the challenges inherent in a massive fleet modernization. DHS’s national security mission is of such importance that the failure to address its management challenges and programs risks could have serious consequences on our intergovernmental system, our citizens’ health and safety, and our economy. Overall, our designation of the implementation and transformation of DHS as a national security agency is a significant step in the right direction. DHS was formed almost entirely from agencies whose principal mission was national defense. DHS will combine 22 agencies specializing in various disciplines: law enforcement, border security, biological research, disaster mitigation, and computer security, for instance. The magnitude of the responsibilities, combined with the challenge and.daunting challenge, is the reason for the creation of the new agency, according to the White House. It is hoped that the integration of these agencies will help provide better security against terrorism, the Whitehouse said. implementation and transformation of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. Failure to effectively carry out its mission would expose the nation to potentially very serious consequences. In the aftermath of September 11, invigorating the nation’s homeland security missions has become one of the federal government's most significant challenges. DHS, with an anticipated budget of almost $40 billion and an estimated $40 million in annual operating costs, faces a wide array of existing challenges. mechanisms must be established. Critical aspects of DHS’s success will depend on well-functioning relationships with third parties. Creating and maintaining a structure that can leverage partners and stakeholders will be necessary to effectively implement the national homeland security strategy. The new department is also being formed from components with homeland security responsibilities, such as the Department of State, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, DOD, and the Dept. of Health and Human Services. It will take time to establish and maintain. the first plan that will become even more problematic in the future as the magnitude and complexity of the system acquisition increases. responsibility for implementing U.S. VISIT now resides in the Border and Transportation Security directorate. We are currently reviewing the fiscal year 2003 expenditure plan and will ascertain whether these problems were addressed. We designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors. First, the implementation and transformed of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take years to complete. our designation of the implementation and transformation of DHS as a high-risk area stems from the importance of its mission. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Seto J. Bagdoyan, Michael P. Dino, Darryl W. Dutton, Barbara Guffy, E. Anne Laffoon, and others. I would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other Members of the Subcommittee may have. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Richard M. Stana at (202) 512-8777. with the areas that had the largest influx of illegal aliens. The strategy postulated that as resources were applied in one area, the flow of illegal alien traffic would shift to other locations where resources had yet to be applied. The Border Patrol currently has about 9,500 agents deployed along the southwest border. It is still about 2,200 agents short of the minimum number, 11,700, the Border Patrol said it needed to fully implement the Southwest border strategy. Currently, the border patrol has 567 agents along the northern border. border strategy. We reported that it would take at least 5 more years (until 2006) to reach the minimum number of agents the Border Patrol believed it needed along the Southwest border. This estimate was made before the September 11, 2001, attacks and the subsequent concerns regarding the need for additional resources to deter illegal entry along the northern border. BCBP continues to face hiring challenges to meet its estimated needs. The Border Patrol remains committed to protecting the U.S. from illegal immigration and drug trafficking. negative effects the increased traffic had on the community. When apprehensions surged in communities into which the illegal alien traffic was reportedly pushed, officials and residents in one community reported experiencing loss of business, destruction of private property, and environmental degradation. Concerns have been raised over the environmental impact of current plans to build additional fencing along the border in Arizona. Some local residents in the border area southwest of Tucson, Arizona, are patrolling the border to report illegal crossings raising the concern of law enforcement officials. The Border Patrol has realized its goal of shifting illegal alien traffic away from urban areas into more remote areas. However, rather than being deterred from attempting illegal entry, many aliens have instead risked injury and death by trying to cross mountains, deserts, and rivers. This prompted the Border Patrol to implement a Border Safety Initiative consisting of, among other things, a media campaign to warn aliens about the dangers of crossing illegally. We further reported in August 2001 that although alien apprehensions had shifted along the border as expected, overall apprehensions were down. alien apprehensions had shifted along the border as expected. Overall apprehensions along the southwest border had continued to increase to over 1.6 million in fiscal year 2000. The Border Patrol has developed a plan designed to evaluate the impacts of its southwest border strategy. However, the evaluation has yet to be completed and may have many reasons for the decline in apprehensions, the authors say. They conclude that the strategy's effect on overall illegal entry along the Southwest border has not been fully evaluated. The report was published by the Center for Immigration Studies. implement its strategy, some of which still appear to be problematic. For example, it had taken the Border Patrol longer to implement the strategy than originally planned. The Border Patrol experienced difficulties hiring agents and delays in obtaining approvals needed to deploy technology and build fences. It also recognized the need to make outreach efforts to communities because its initial failure to warn some communities about anticipated increases in illegal alien traffic caught community officials by surprise and angered some residents due to the negative effects the increased traffic had on the community. face an array of challenges in ensuring that its border inspectors are adequately trained. For example, former INS and Customs inspectors are still being trained at separate basic training academies using two different curricula. A unified curriculum and training approach will need to be developed and implemented. The training challenges will continue beyond the academy—BCBP will also need to ensure that a field training program is established that meets the needs of the newest as well as experienced inspectors at the ports. Our ongoing work at land border ports suggests that neither the former INS nor Customs agencies had a standard on-the-job training program for their inspectors working at landborder ports. its strategy while simultaneously addressing emerging concerns over illegal entry along the northern border. BCBP inspectors continue to face challenges that those from their predecessor agencies also faced in balancing the need to identify violators of immigration and other laws while facilitating the movement of lawful travelers. Today, I will touch on several issues relating to the inspection of entry documents, inspector training, intelligence information needs of the field, and BCBP plans for implementing the U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indication Technology system. Model. Customs has made progress in implementing some, but not all, of our recommendations. Customs is in the early stages of acquiring ACE, many challenging tasks remain before Customs will have implemented full ACE capability. To prevent illegal entry of individuals into the United States between the ports of entry, BCBP has deployed significant resources but estimates significantly more are needed. Continued implementation of the southwest border strategy faces a range of challenges, including meeting hiring goals and obtaining needed approvals to deploy fencing and technology to implement its strategy. implement a system to track the entry and exit of all aliens. Deterring illegal entry between the nation’s ports of entry will continue to be a challenge for BCBP. Since 1994, the Border Patrol has been implementing a phased strategy to increase deterrence to illegal entry beginning, first, with the areas that had the largest influx of illegal entry. In previous work, we reported that the Border patrol had estimated that significantly more resources would be needed to fully implement its border control strategy. The former INS recognized the need for more intelligence support in the field. In 1997, an INS-contracted study reported the lack of an intelligence capability at all INS locations, including districts and ports. More recent studies suggest needs in this area persist. Although some steps have been taken to bring the intelligence function to the field level, additional steps remain if the intelligence needs of the field are to be met. These steps must be taken by the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection (CBP) in the coming years. intelligence needs of the field are to be met. These challenges include, but are not limited, to decisions related to staffing and training, as well as merging intelligence positions from the former Customs and INS. One of the most significant challenges facing DHS at ports of entry is the implementation of the U.S. VISIT system. This significant undertaking is intended to capture both entry and exit data on travelers. It will also have many implications for operations at U.s. ports ofentry, including expenditures, staffing, inspection procedures and infrastructure. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indication Technology system, known as the U.S. VISIT system. At land border ports of entry, inspectors must quickly make decisions about whether to admit a traveler into the United States or refer travelers for more intensive inspection. Two of the factors that challenge inspectors’ ability to verify the travelers’ identity and admissibility are that some travelers may enter the US without having to present a travel document and travelers can present a variety of documents to gain entry. reviewed INS’s fiscal year 2002 expenditure plan and associated system acquisition documentation and system plans. We found that the initial plan did not provide sufficient information about INS commitments for the system. We concluded that this lack of detail is a material limitation in the first plan that will become even more problematic in the second plan. The report was published in the online edition of this magazine, which is published by arrangement with the Center for American Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. entry into the United States, some of which can be easily counterfeited. U.S. and certain Canadian citizens are exempt from having to present any document upon entry. According to immigration data, inspectors at land ports intercepted nearly 60,000 fraudulent documents in fiscal year 2002. A wide variety of documents can be presented for inspection, including more than 8,000 state and local offices issue birth certificates, driver’s licenses, and other documents, any of which could potentially be counterfeit. in fiscal year 2002, including over 10,000 U.S. citizenship-related documents. Earlier this year, we testified on how our investigators entered the country from Canada, Mexico, and Jamaica through land, air, and sea ports of entry using fictitious names, and counterfeit driver’s licenses and birth certificates. INS and Customs Service inspectors never questioned the authenticity of the counterfeit documents, and our investigators encountered no difficulty in entering the country using them. BCBP will also face an array of challenges in ensuring that its border is secure. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. BCBP has undertaken efforts to focus its enforcement on selecting and inspecting the highest-risk incoming cargo. It has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving its ability to identify potentially risky cargo for inspection. BCBP relies on the use of threat assessments and actionable intelligence, and the ability of inspectors to quickly discover or sense an unlawful cargo. Information is key to identifying high-risk cargo, but unreliable information can adversely impact BCBP’s ability to target and inspect the highest risk cargoes. destruction. Automated Targeting System, which is used by the National Targeting Center and field targeting units in the United States and overseas. Separating high-risk cargo from low- or no- risk cargo is extremely important to BCBP because searching each and every cargo and traveler that enters the U.S. would cripple the flow of legitimate trade and travel and would require a huge resource. We have work underway to review most of these initiatives and will make our results available to the Subcommittee as soon as the work is completed. and how such cargo is inspected at ports. In this regard, we are reviewing how BCBP developed the model used in targeting. Since this work is ongoing, and involves information that BCBP also considers to be law enforcement sensitive, we're precluded from discussing specific aspects of this matter. However, in the broadest terms, our work to date shows thatBCBP’s targeting efforts face a range of challenges relating to threat assessments, actionable intelligence, and other issues that need to be addressed. BCBP's priority mission is to prevent terrorists and terrorist weapons from entering the United States. BCBP has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving security, including the Container Security Initiative. Non-Intrusive Inspection technology increases the ability to detect conventional explosives, nuclear weapons, radioactive components, and other weapons of mass destruction. The National Automated Targeting System, which is used by the National Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism, is designed to increase supply chain security and expedite the clearance of legitimate trade. BCBP has made some progress in implementing initiatives that are designed to improve the efficiency of its regulation of commercial activities. Additional challenges remain, particularly in view of the new and heightened emphasis on terrorism. These challenges include (1) continuing to improve its evolving trade compliance program and (2) acquiring a new trade processing system. Although tempered recently by the global economic slowdown, growth in the volume and value of imports continues to create profound challenges for BCBP. The volume of trade is expected to surpass $2 trillion in the year. BCBP has worked with importers on concerns such as where their goods originated, the physical security and integrity of their overseas plants and those of their foreign suppliers. BCBP has reaffirmed to importers the importance of knowing their customers and has examined the security practices of their freight forwarders and the routes their shipments travel. Although BCBP have made some progress in implementing initiatives that are. of legitimate international commerce and travel, they say they are still in the early stages of implementation. The agency says it is committed to ensuring the safety and security of the nation's citizens. receives cargo manifest information. The database is intended to allow Customs to analyze incoming package information and make more informed decisions about what packages to inspect. Large-scale x-ray and gamma–ray imaging systems, portal radiation monitors, and portable and hand-held radiation detection devices can reduce the need for costly, intensive inspections and save inspection time and resources. As important as the use of technology is, there are certain limitations and challenges that need to be considered. For example, we reviewed Customs’ acquisition and deployment of radiation. For example, we reviewed Customs’ acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment. Experts we contacted did not view pagers as search instruments but rather as personal safety devices. In trying to achieve the commercial-security balance, BCBP is challenged to ensure that antiterrorism efforts do not slow the flow of legitimate international commerce and travel. According to BCBP, it says it is working on a plan to reduce the number of radiation pagers being used by the Customs service to a maximum of 1,000. a range of challenges relating to threat assessments, actionable intelligence, and nonintrusive inspection technology. Having sufficient numbers of well-trained and motivated staff is also key to identifying high-risk cargo. Inspectors and canine officers are trained to detect unusual or abnormal behaviors or circumstances that suggest a potential threat or unlawful activity. Many have developed a ‘sixth sense’ in that they pick up on latent clues and unconnected information. Nevertheless, these inspectors are challenged by the tight timeframes and pressures they work under to move legitimate cargo through the ports. Recent work on the inspection of international mail showed that relying on inspectors alone can increase the risk that contraband enters the country. The inspection of incoming foreign mail remains largely a manual process that relies primarily on physical examination. One courier was working with the former Customs Service to pilot test an advance manifest system. The database is intended to allow for a computerized database that receives cargo manifest information. The results were law enforcement sensitive, so we are not discussing them here. We found several challenges relating to this process, but BCBP’s determination that our results were Law enforcement sensitive precludes our discussing them. Trade is expected to surpass $2 trillion in the year 2006. BCBP’s predecessor, Customs, developed an “informed compliance strategy. Customs’ ongoing effort to acquire a new trade processing system is key to modernizing how Customs tracks, controls, and processes all commercial goods imported into and exported out of the U.S. The study indicated that the strategy improves compliance, but the impact on overall compliance rates is much of an enforced compliance process, and it was discontinued. improves compliance, but the impact on overall compliance rates is small. For example, one initiative, the Company Enforced Compliance Process (CECP), was to address large importers’ noncompliance. The study concluded that CECP was not much of an enforced compliance process, and it was discontinued. According to the study, Customs was to punish noncomplying companies by imposing “confirmed risk” designations. But the confirmed risk status was only used six times, and loss of privileges and referral for penalties were never used. than 15 years, to a system integrator responsible for developing and deploying ACE. Successfully managing a project as large and complex as ACE is a challenging undertaking. Over the last 4 years, we have reported on ACE and recommended steps Customs needed to take to minimize project risks. To its credit, Customs has taken action to implement our recommendations, as follows: We recommended Customs incrementally justify the ACE investment. Customs defined and committed to implement process controls for justifying and making ACE investment decisions incrementally. human capital management strategy for the Customs modernization office, which is responsible for managing the ACE acquisition. We recommended Customs develop rigorous and analytically verifiable cost estimating. Customs has made progress in implementing some, but not all, of our recommendations. We continue to make progress and have plans to establish effective software acquisition process controls, as embodied primarily in the second level of SEI’s Software Acquisition Capability Maturity Model. We recommend Customs employ effectiveSoftware Engineering Institute (SEI) processes. The Automated Commercial Environment (ACE) is expected to cost about $1.7 billion. ACE is to replace Customs’ antiquated system. Expected benefits from ACE include speeding the flow of legitimate commerce into and out of the United States. ACE will identify and targeting high-risk commerce requiring greater scrutiny, and provide a single interface between the trade community and the federal government for trade data. In April 2001, Customs awarded a 5-year contract, with options to extend the contract to not more than 15 years, to a system integrator.

ROUGE-1: 84.89, ROUGE-2: 75.90, ROUGE-L: 26.02
BERTScore: 54.93

==============================================
==================== [66/100] ====================
Summary:
EA-6Bs are included in all aircraft carrier deployments and support the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. Because of its limited numbers and high rate of use, DOD designated the EA-6B as a “low density, high demand” asset. The Navy is currently taking action to remedy EA- 6B wing fatigue and engine failures. However, because wing fatigue has continued to grow, the Navy has been unable to meet some of its training and exercise requirements. The Navy grounded over 50 engines until they could be overhauled. Premature failure of certain engine bearings caused some engines to fail. The constant deployment of this “low density” EA-6B fleet for contingency operations has contributed to its deterioration and to other maintenance- related problems. Even if problems are remedied, the Navy says it will be unable to meet force structure requirements in 2009, and 2009 and 2010. The Navy took spare parts and personnel from nondeployed squadrons to maintain readiness of squadrons deployed to Kosovo. The Navy plans to replace a total of 67 wing center sections to remedy the problem. The Navy will spend $4.4 million each for such replacements for 17 aircraft in the fiscal year 2002 budget. In 2001, the Navy also began experiencing problems with the EA-6B’s engines. Premature failure of certain parts of the aircraft could lead to groundings, a Navy official says. The U.S. Navy is programming funds for 10 more wing replacements for each year in the Future Years Defense Plan. for closing the gap in capabilities. Specific locations we visited are listed in appendix I. We performed our review from October 2001 through August 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. As you know, the head of a federal agency is required under 31 U.S.C. 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs and the House Committees on Government Reform not later than 60 days after the date of the report. The agency’s first request for appropriations should be made within 60 days of the release of our report. Committees on Appropriations with the agency’s first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of the Army, Air Force, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and interested congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions, please contact me on (202)512-4841. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Air Force, Army, Marine Corps, and Navy meet in Washington, D.C. Defense Intelligence Agency also meets in Washington. Defense Secretary Leon Panetta is expected to attend the meeting. The meeting will be followed by a joint statement from the White House and the Joint Chiefs. The Joint Chiefs will also hold a joint meeting with the Defense Department next week to discuss how to improve the intelligence community's ability to detect and thwart threats to U.S. national security. The Navy has been upgrading its EA-6B electronic warfare equipment. The modification program, known as the Improved Capability Program (ICAP) III, provides improved radar locating and jamming capabilities. The Navy expects ICAP III to reach initial operational capability in 2005 and to be installed on allEA-6Bs by 2010. As of January 2002, according to DOD, air defense threats. were about 94 percent complete, and the modification began testing on the first aircraft in November 2001. Congress asked DOD to conduct Airborne Electronic Attack Analysis of Alternatives for replacing the EA-6B. DOD indicated in its response to our January 2001 report that the analysis would lead to a DOD-wide strategy and balanced set of acquisition programs to address the overall gaps between suppression needs and capabilities. However, it was found that DOD has had little success in closing the gap. The Navy and the Air Force proposed options for replacing EA- 6B capabilities, and DOD is currently evaluating these proposals for consideration in 2004 budget submission. recommend any particular option. These options ranged in estimated 20-year life cycle costs from $20 billion to $80 billion. In conjunction with the analysis, the services formed a Joint Requirements Coordination and Oversight Group to coordinate operational requirements. A key activity of the group is to coordinate Navy and Air Force proposals for replacing the EA-6B. According to group members, this mechanism will help address airborne electronic attack needs through the coordination of complementary systems agreed to by the services. It will also review ongoing and planned production programs for the mission. attack needs through the coordination of complementary systems agreed to by the services. The Navy proposed to replace the EA-6B with an electronic attack version of its new F/A-18E/F fighter and attack aircraft. The Air Force proposed adapting the B-52H bomber for standoff suppression by adding jamming pods to it, plus a stand-in suppression capability. The services see these proposals as a coordinated, effective solution to the near- and far-term needs for airborne electronic attack. system or a combination of systems to operate at a distance from enemy targets. A stand-in system that would provide close-in suppression protection for attacking aircraft where the threat is too great for the standoff systems. The analysis established the capabilities of the EA-6B upgraded with ICAP III as the foundation for any future system. It presented the Navy and the Air Force with detailed models of estimated costs and capabilities of 27 mixes of new and/or upgraded aircraft to consider for follow-on electronic attack capabilities. The F-16C/Ds will be modified to carry the HARM Targeting System. The Advanced Target Pod will enable them to deliver precision-guided munitions. Once 31 additional systems are delivered in 2002, the F- 16CJs will have a total inventory of 202 systems, short of the Air Force’s original goal of 1.1 systems per aircraft, or about 240 systems. The Air Force completed the R-6 upgrade on fielded systems in December 2001 and systems subsequently produced will have it. The upgrade provides better and faster targeting information to the missile. The Air Force is procuring 30 additional F-16CJ suppression aircraft to meet force structure requirements for the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. In all, 219 F- 16CJ aircraft will be available. The Air Force also plans to increase the capability of the latest model F/16C/Ds (block 40) to be used for both attack and suppression missions. To accomplish this, they will be modified to carry the EA-6B jammer pods. in 2003, and plans to fully fund the upgrade in the 2004 budget cycle. The Air Force is also upgrading the capabilities of the EC-130 Compass Call Aircraft, which perform primarily communications jamming missions. The upgrades are intended to improve the aircraft’s jamming capabilities, reliability, and maintainability. TheEC-130 is another “low density, high demand” asset with a total of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being upgraded. It is a ‘low density’ asset, with only a small number of operational aircraft. The Navy projects that the declining EA-6B inventory will be insufficient to meet DOD’s needs beyond 2009. The Air Force and the Navy have improvements underway for other systems such as the EC-130 and antiradiation missiles but face funding challenges. To the extent there are gaps in suppression capabilities, U.S. fighter aircraft and helicopters must rely on self-protection equipment to suppress enemy air defenses, but some of this equipment is not available to the Air Force or Navy. The Navy does not have enough EA-6Bs to meet DOD’s suppression needs due to wing fatigue and engine problems that have grounded aircraft. The services have some programs underway to improve this self-protection equipment, such as developing new towed decoys, but, as discussed below, these programs have been hampered by technical and funding issues. Because of its limited numbers and high rate of failure, the Navy has been forced to rely on the U.S. Air Force to suppress enemy air defenses. of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being funded for upgrade. Gaps in the services’ air defense suppression aircraft make it essential that other aircraft have the ability to protect themselves. The services have already identified serious reliability problems with current self-protection systems on U.S. combat aircraft. Most of the current systems use older technology and have logistics support problems due to obsolescence. Also, as we reported last year, the self- protection systems on strike aircraft may have more problems than the services estimate. The Miniature Air Launched Decoy (MALD) is supposed to mimic an aircraft and draw enemy air defenses away from the real aircraft. MALD had been funded by the Air Force for an initial small procurement of 300 decoys, with potential for further procurement. After experiencing technical problems, MALD did not meet user needs, and its procurement cost estimates increased. The Air Force canceled the MALD program after it was found to not meet its needs and cost estimates were increased. For more information on MALD, visit: www.mald.org. overall gaps between suppression needs and capabilities. The Navy took the lead on the joint analysis with participation by all the services. The analysis, completed in December 2001, concluded that the services needed a standoff system or a combination of systems to operate at a stand-off. It was only intended to address the airborne electronic attack aspect of the suppression mission. It did not address the acknowledged problems with aircraft self-protection systems or the technical and funding challenges of other service programs such as the Navy’s ITALD program. F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were subsequently found to have one or more faults in their self-protection systems. Coupled with the problems in the suppression aircraft, these shortcomings could create survivability problems for the aircraft should they encounter significant enemy air defense capabilities in some future conflict. The services have some programs underway to improve self- protection capabilities such as the joint Navy and Air Force Integrated Defensive Electronic Countermeasures (IDECM) system. The IDECM system will provide the F-15, F/A-18E/F, and B-1B. The IDECM system will provide the F-15, F/A-18E/F, and B-1B aircraft with improved self-protection through jammers and towed decoys. The PLAID system will provides aircrews with accurate location and identification of enemy air defense systems. The services expect to field both systems in 2004. They face technology challenges and/or a lack of funding priority for many of these programs. They have initiated additional research and development efforts to improve their ability to suppress enemy air defenses. have more problems than the services estimate. For example, 41 of 44 F-15C aircraft and 10 of 10 F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were not. The faults ranged from the identification of parts needing to be replaced inside the electronic combat systems, to the wiring, antennas, and control units that connect the systems to the aircraft. The Joint Service Electronic Combat System Tester was developed by the U.S. Air Force and the European Air Force in the 1990s. its procurement cost estimates increased. The Air Force canceled the procurement and restructured MALD to address deficiencies highlighted in the demonstration. The Navy has been developing its own decoy, the Improved Tactical Air Launched Decoy (ITALD), but it has procured only part of its inventory objective. Despite recurring congressional increases for the past several fiscal years, the Navy has not submitted budget requests for ITALDs or procured units to complete the inventory objective because of competing priorities. Also the Navy is upgrading the HARM missile used to attack shipborne and ground-based radars. The first phase of the upgrade improves missile accuracy by incorporating global positioning and inertial navigation systems into the missile. A second upgrade, the Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile, will add millimeter wave capability to allow the missile to target radars that have stopped emitting.and ground-based radars. DOD has acknowledged the gap in U.S. air defense suppression capabilities for some time and has conducted several studies to identify solutions, but it has had little success in closing the gap.  suppression aircraft such as EA-6B and the now-retired EF-111 and F-4G played a vital role in protecting other U.S. aircraft from radar-guided missile systems. Strike aircraft were normally not permitted to conduct air operations unless protected by these suppression aircraft. According to DOD, countries have sought to make their air defenses more resistant to suppression. These efforts include increasing the mobility of their surface-to-air missiles and radar equipment, connecting radars together into integrated air defense systems. EA-6Bs and EC-130s saw combat in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. Air defenses there were relatively weak compared to those faced by U.S. aircraft in Yugoslavia. This gave the EA-6B an opportunity to exploit new techniques to jam ground communications. Since our January 2001 report, the services have had some success in jamming infrared missile threats, says CNN's John Defterios. To see the rest of the report, go to CNN.com/soulmatters. When the Air Force retired the EF-111 without a replacement, the Navy's EA-6B became DOD’s primary airborne radar jammer. High demand for the aircraft has exacerbated current wing and engine problems, and the Navy has been unable to meet its overall requirements. Efforts are underway to address the EA- 6B’'s problems and improve its suppression equipment, but the Navy projects that the declining EA-5B inventory will be replaced by the EA/6B. The Institute for Defense Analyses studied problems in acquiring electronic warfare systems. The Institute found several causes for the problems, including uncertainties in characterizing rapidly changing threats and systems requirements. Other assessments have also pointed to the lack of a coordinated approach to addressing the gap in air suppression capabilities. While DOD has not established a coordinating entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has not been directed to develop a comprehensive strategy and monitor its implementation.to the overall suppression needs. In addition, the Joint Requirements Coordination and Oversight Group provides a mechanism to coordinate the services’ efforts. to address the gaps that need to be filled in the enemy air defense suppression mission. The strategy should provide the means to identify and prioritize promising technologies, determine the funding, time frames, and responsibilities needed to develop and acquire systems, and establish evaluation mechanisms to track progress in achieving objectives. In written comments to a draft of this report, DOD concurred with our recommendations and supported the need for a mechanism to coordinate electronic warfare strategy and systems acquisition. DOD stated that the Office of the Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) is currently restructuring its staff to focus on electronic warfare. The quantity and quality of the services’ suppression equipment have declined while enemy air defense tactics and equipment have improved. DOD relies on individual service programs to fill the void, but these programs have not historically received a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. We reviewed pertinent DOD, service, and contractor documents addressing the status of suppression capabilities, plans for maintaining them, and potential solutions for closing the gap in capabilities. We interviewed Defense Intelligence Agency officials and reviewed related intelligence documents to ascertain the capabilities of current and future air defense systems. gap. DOD provided technical comments that we incorporated into the report where appropriate. We interviewed service program managers for the EA-6B, EC-130, F-16CJ, HARM, aircraft self-protection systems, and programs under development. We also met with officials for the Air Force, Army, Navy, and Marine Corps. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix II. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. We continue to believe that a formal coordinating entity needs to be established to bring the services together to develop an integrated, cost-effective strategy. A strategy is needed to identify mission objectives and guide efforts to develop effective and integrated solutions for improving suppression capabilities. We believe that creation of a comprehensive strategy and effective coordinating entity would strengthen DOD’s ability to compete for funding and address the gap. In addition, Congress intervened with guidance and increases to services’ budget requests for defense suppression to ensure that DOD addresses the capabilities gap. entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has recognized the need for such entities in other cross-service initiatives. In October 2001, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics established a joint unmanned aerial vehicles planning task force. The task force will develop and coordinate road maps, recommend priorities for development and procurement efforts, and prepare implementing guidance to the services on common programs and functions. The air defense suppression mission continues to be essential for maintaining air superiority. Over the past several years, however, the quantity of UAVs has declined.  suppression aircraft focus on trying to neutralize, degrade, or destroy the enemy’s air defense radar equipment. Radar is the primary means used by enemy forces to detect, track, and target U.S. aircraft with missiles and guns. Aircraft launch antiradiation missiles that can search for and destroy enemy radars if they are turned on. At some risk to the aircraft and aircrews, suppression aircraft must be in the vicinity of the enemy air defenses to complete their mission.  Integrated networks provide air defense operators with the ability to track and target aircraft even if individual radar elements of the network are jammed or destroyed. Since the end of Desert Storm in 1991, U.S. suppression aircraft have been continuously deployed to protect fighter aircraft maintaining the no-fly zones over Iraq. More recently, these planes have been used to protect U.N. peacekeepers in the Mideast from attacks by al-Qaeda and the Taliban. These aircraft have also been used for air defense operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. In 1999, during Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia and Kosovo, these aircraft were extremely important for protecting strike aircraft from enemy radar-guided missiles. These aircraft were unable to destroy their integrated air defense system because Yugoslav forces often engaged in elaborate efforts to protect their air defense assets. These efforts reduced Yugoslav opportunities to engage U.S. and coalition aircraft because their airdefense assets could not be used and protected simultaneously. Nevertheless, in two separate incidents, Yugoslav forces were able to destroy the aircraft. More recently,these aircraft have been deployed to Yugoslavia and Afghanistan. In two separate incidents, Yugoslav forces managed to shoot down an F-117 stealth fighter and a F-16CG. The inability of the United States to counter Yugoslav air defenses made it necessary for U.S. forces to (1) fly thousands of dedicated suppression missions, pushing suppression forces in Europe to their limits, and (2) raise their strike missions to higher altitudes or keep low-flying aircraft such as the Army’s Apache attack helicopters out of combat to reduce risk from infrared missile threats.

ROUGE-1: 80.40, ROUGE-2: 71.90, ROUGE-L: 30.31
BERTScore: 53.34

==============================================
==================== [67/100] ====================
Summary:
A state permit "program" is the body of authorities, activities, and procedures that the permitting authority uses to implement and enforce regulations applicable to a solid waste disposal facility. Permit programs may include, among other elements, state laws that specify the types of facilities required to obtain a permit. Permits are legally enforceable documents detailing requirements applicable to the permittee (owners and operators of a specifically regulatedSolid Waste disposal facility) A state's permit program may be created by amending existing laws to specify the entity required to operate using a permit and authorize the appropriate state agency to promulgate regulations. States would determine when owner/operators would be required to comply with the requirements implemented via the permit program and when they would issue permits. Participating states would certify that they have a program in place within three years of enactment of proposed Section 4011, including a legal certification that the state has "fully effective statutes or regulations necessary to implement a coal combustion residuals permit program that meets the [statutory] specifications" The requirements adopted by the state would likely meet a state-determined standard of protection. to EPA, a state would require the owner or operator of each regulated "structure" to comply with the groundwater monitoring requirements. EPA's proposed criteria at Section 257.71 would require facility owners and operators to implement standards necessary to prevent contaminant spread. After states promulgate regulations implementing the Section 4011 requirements and permit programs, among other program elements, it could then be determined whether states would uniformly apply permit program conditions to all CCR landfills and surface impoundments within the state's jurisdiction. until a state defines a structure. Section 4011 also omits other basic program elements typically specified in regulations. It would not provide explicit deadlines for many program requirements, though EPA or the courts might read reasonable deadlines into the section. Certain deadlines are specified in the Permit Program Specifications. For example, not later than one year after the state certifies it has a program in place, that state shall require the owner or operator of each regulated structure to comply with applicable groundwater monitoring requirements promulgated by the state. 40 C.F.R. §257.60, "Placement above the natural water table," included among the Location Restrictions criteria. 4011(c)(1)(D) Wind D ispersal —similar to EPA's proposed 40 C.f.r.§257.80, "Air Criteria," intended to address issues associated with fugitive emissions of coal ash dust. State Notification and Groundwater Monitoring: Groundwater monitoring —within one year of submitting its program certification to EPA, a state would require the owner or operator to submit a report to EPA. specify deadlines for facility compliance, and clarify requirements applicable to existing versus new facilities. Since those standards are necessary to implement a program, states would likely include them in their own CCR Permit Program. State inclusion of those criteria would likely vary from state to state. Decisions regarding the applicability of state regulations and compliance deadlines that existing facilities would be required to meet would be particularly relevant in determining the degree to which a state program may protect human health from risks specific to CCR disposal. or operator, with or without oversight or participation by a regulatory agency. Owner/operators of regulated disposal units were required to comply with applicable criteria by the applicable deadlines. States were not precluded from adopting regulations more stringent than the federal criteria. Facility compliance with the minimum national standard was intended to achieve a consistent level of protection from environmental harm, according to the agency's report. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit that promotes free speech and scientific inquiry in the public interest. required components of program application, including detailed information that must be provided by a state in the narrative description of its program. Adequacy Determination Procedures —includes criteria EPA would use to make its adequacy determination or to partially approve state programs, procedures. Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs —details minimum permitting requirements, compliance monitoring authority, and enforcement authority a state would need to demonstrate to EPA before the program could be deemed adequate by EPA; and requires state programs to provide for citizen action in the state civil enforcement process. requirements specifying general compliance standards, location restrictions, operating criteria, design criteria, groundwater monitoring and corrective action, closure and post-closure care, and financial assurance. When individual requirements are largely similar, only the regulatory heading is included. When there is a significant difference between two requirements, additional information is provided to clarify that difference. Those descriptions are not intended to summarize the full range of detail in each requirement. The most significant differences pertain to the potential regulation of surface impoundments. narrative description provided in the program certification (required in the State Actions provisions in 4011(b), and maintains fully effective statutes or regulations necessary to implement a CCR Permit Program. States would be obligated to provide information necessary for EPA to make its deficiency determination within 90 days of EPA making the request. If EPA identifies a program deficiency, the agency would be directed to collaborate with the state to establish a reasonable deadline to address it. What constitutes a "reasonable deadline" is not explicitly defined. Bills would require EPA to identify certain state program elements that may be "deficient" EPA could potentially find certain program elements deficient and be required to implement a CCR Permit Program. Deadlines for compliance and details regarding program applicability would not be known until states promulgate regulations that would be implemented by the permit program. If a state fails to remedy program deficiencies identified by EPA within the time frame negotiated between the state and EPA, the agency would berequired to implement the program. required to apply. According to that precondition, it is arguably implied that states choosing to adopt and implement a CCR Permit Program would promulgate regulations applicable to "CCR structures" The time frame for that could vary depending on the compliance deadlines established by the state. If EPA implemented a permit program for a state, what regulations would EPA implement—its own or a state's? If EPA uses its own rules, how would the agency interpret permit program requirements that would otherwise be left to states to implement? Proposed bills would allow states to create their own programs to regulate CCRs. States would be expected to notify EPA within six months of the bill's enactment Section 4011. Within 36 months of bill enactment, states must submit to EPA a certification explaining how their program meets the Permit Program Specifications in proposed Section4011(c) Some in Congress who have expressed concern that EPA has "overreached" its existing legislative mandates have supported legislation that would limit EPA's role in regulating CCR disposal. The bills considered in the 112 th Congress were proposed in the wake of a June 2010 proposal by EPA to regulate CCRs. Administrator could rely on her authority under Section 2002 of RCRA to "prescribe, in consultation with Federal, State, and regional authorities, such regulations as are necessary to carry out [her] functions under this Act" Section 4011(e) cites existing provisions in Subtitle D as the authorities the agency would use to implement a CCR Permit Program.  Submit to EPA certification that their CCR Permit Programs meet the Permit Program Specifications delineated in proposed Section 4011(c). There is no explicit directive in the bills that the requirements applied via the permit program be those necessary to protect human health. CCR regulations promulgated under a state's own authorities would then apply to CCR structures based on meeting any standard of protection deemed appropriate by that state. The program Minimum Requirements also include five provisions that appear to be drawn, in part, from selected " Requirements for Adequate Permit programs" interpretation envisions a more proactive role for EPA. In this interpretation, rather than wait to make decisions regarding deficiencies after the fact, the Administrator might issue guidance before the states implement their programs. Anticipating criticism that such guidance would constitute regulations in disguise, EPA might actually issue regulations. EPA has already—in its June 2010 proposal—done much of the work of writing such regulations or guidance. It has identified the CCR management practices that it wants to address, the standards it would set, and the time frames. EPA's authority with regard to state program elements found to be "deficient" involves the use of a term not found in the RCRA statute. EPA could implement the state's entire program, with the deficient components corrected. In a second interpretation, EPA would promulgate its own program applicable to CCR structures. A third interpretation envisions a more proactive role for EPA. In this case, the agency's regulations would be required to consist of the Permit Program Specifications in Section 4011(c) The potential flexibility in state program development and implementation. A state-determined standard of protection —permit programs were created previously under RCRA when Congress wanted to ensure that the government did not abuse its power. The potential flexibility of state program implementation —in the absence of provisions comparable to general regulatory standards, it would appear that each state could determine key elements related to program implementation. and facility compliance, at least to the degree that such state determinations did not undercut a viable state program. Proposed Section 4011 would not create a permit program, per se. Instead, it would provide the framework that states may be expected to use. The key definition is that of a "structure" that may receive CCRs. All Minimum Requirements and Revised Criteria that must be applied by a CCR Permit Program would be required to apply to "structures" It would appear. A to implement a program according to the requirements specified in Section. 4011 includes no explicit directive to states or EPA. in part, from selected individual criteria included among the Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs in Subpart C of Part 239. Proposed definitions comparable to those in 40 C.F.R. Part 239 are those for "coal combustion residuals permit program" and "permit" The applicability of a CCR Permit Program would also depend on the definition of a "structure" (at proposed Section 4011(k)(6), which would mean a structure of some kind. Each bill would have added to Subtitle D of RCRA a new Section 4011, Management and Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals. Compared to H.R. 2273 , the Senate-introduced bill (S. 3512) included more detailed provisions. Legislation addressing CCRs may be considered in the 113 th Congress.. The approach to creating state permit programs was largely the same in each bill. That approach is unique within RCRA. The bills would encourage states to create permit programs. The proposed amendments to RCRA would not create a "permit program," per se. Instead, selected provisions in the bills would form a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCR management. Provisions included throughout the bills use the term "CCR permit program" to refer to state programs to regulating CCRs. To distinguish between "permits" as they have been previously created in RCRA and programs that could be created pursuant to the approach taken in the proposed bills, use of the phrase 'CCR Permit Program' will mean a 'permit' program. A structure would be defined as "a landfill, surface impoundment, or other land-based unit" that may receive CCRs. The proposed definitions do not include details regarding what may constitute a "CCR landfill" The applicability of any regulations a state would promulgate and implement would depend on that state's definition of a structure, the authors say. The bills would afford states broad latitude in construing these terms, they say. They say existing RCRA regulations established by EPA explicitly define terms necessary to determine the applicability. management requirements? When would owners and operators of CCR structures be subject to any new regulations? If a state were to promulgate new regulations, how would that state determine the level of protection that C CR structures would be required to meet? How would EPA interpret its obligation to identify program deficiencies? Would EPA identify a program as having a deficiency if EPA determined it was not adequate to ensure facility compliance with requirements necessary to protect human health? For example, would EPA identify as a deficiency a state's definition of a "CCR landfill" that EPA determined was insufficient to ensure that uses of C CRs that constitute disposal on land are regulated? The 112 th Congress would use a fundamentally different framework to create state programs to regulate CCRs. The bills did not explicitly require EPA to set uniform national standards of protection or promulgate regulations. How would states interpret minimum program requirements and the MSW landfill criteria listed in the bills? If so, how much would EPA's guidance influence states? When would owners and operators of CCR structures be subject to state permit program conditions? How would EPA issue guidance to clarify what it would consider a CCR "structure"? Some stakeholders debate the appropriateness of EPA's definitions. The bills leave that issue unresolved, opening the door to a diversity of state solutions. Until states promulgate regulations that include a more detailed definition of a CCR "structure," program applicability will not be determined with specificity. The regulated universe of "owners and operators" will notbe known until a state defines a structure. Section 4011 also omits that EPA's definition of "owner and operator" is not inclusive enough. to regulate CCRs only insofar as such detail is helpful to clarify risks associated with CCR management. The approach to creating the permit program in the bills considered in the 112 th Congress differs from what is typical in federal pollution control laws. Congressional consideration of such legislation will occur in the context of ongoing concern about the impacts of current CCR facilities, changing economics for coal-fired electricity, and a range of perspectives about the appropriate role of EPA in the CCR industry. In light of EPA's June 2010 proposal and uncertainty regarding the agency's future regulatory plans, it is likely that CCR legislation will be considered by the 113 th Congress. The proposed bills would define a "coal combustion residuals permit program" as "all of the authorities, activities, and procedures" that comprise the system of prior approval and conditions. State regulations implemented by that program would not be explicitly required to meet a federal protection standard or other minimum standard of CCR.terms in Table A-2 ). Hence, whether a particular entity may be subject to CCR regulations would depend on a state's exercise of broad latitude in defining "CCR landfill" or "CCC surface impoundment" use of the phrase "CCR Permit Program" will mean a program that could be developed, adopted, or implemented by or for a state according to provisions in proposed Section 4011. The bills would establish a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCR CCR disposal. Supporters of this approach have suggested, given the unique conditions in each state, that such programs could be at least as effective as federal requirements that may be established by EPA under either regulatory option proposed in June 2010. Proposed amendment would have provided no explicit authority for EPA to directly enforce regulatory criteria applicable to CCR disposal units. Instead, the proposed Section 4011 would itself list Permit Program Specifications that individual states would be required to apply to "CCR structures" EPA would be given a more limited role in development of the regulatory program for CCR facilities, compared to the existing program to regulate MSW landfills. The most significant differences in EPA's role are with regard to promulgating regulations applicable to the CCR facility. Some argue that by requiring EPA to implement a CCR Permit Program for a state under specific conditions, the bills would provide EPA with authority to backstop state programs. Under current law, the term "backstop authority" is not formally defined in statute or regulation, and whether EPA is said to have backstop authority or not has no legal consequence. The term has been widely used to refer to explicit authority provided to EPA to enforce standards at individual facilities in a state authorized to implement and enforce federal standards. Under the Constitution, Congress has no power to compel states to exercise their sovereign authority. Congress has authorized EPA to promulgate and enforce certain regulations. Subtitle D included provisions that specified narrow conditions under which EPA could directly enforce the federal regulatory criteria. Given the options of allowing EPA to enforce a federal standard at facilities in the state or adopting and enforcing the regulations themselves, states generally choose the latter, the authors say. They say Congress may not require states to adopt federal regulations or implement certain requirements using a permit program. EPA determined did not have an adequate permit program; EPA has never exercised its authority to directly enforce the federal criteria. Concern over the possibility that EPA could do so likely served as an incentive to states to adopt and implement permit programs that would be deemed adequate by EPA. EPA could potentially withdraw its approval of a state program, if EPA were to receive information indicating that the program is not being implemented as originally described by a state. The bills considered in the 112 th Congress would use a fundamentally different approach. various concerns, many of which were centered on EPA's lack of authority to directly enforce the standards. Given the argument by many states that the material is being managed sufficiently under current state regulatory programs, environmental and citizen groups have expressed doubts over the degree to which states would adopt new standards. In its June 2010 proposal, EPA's primary objective was to address gaps in state programs to regulate CCRs by establishing national standards that would achieve a minimum level of protection from risks specific to CCR disposal and use. its analysis of risk assessment data, studies, reports, and various other data used to determine regulatory criteria that it (EPA, in conjunction with state agencies and other interested stakeholders) determined are necessary to achieve a certain national standard of protection. In its proposal to regulate CCRs, various stakeholders have disagreed with EPA's assessment of what criteria should be applied. The administrative process, however, provides some transparency regarding how EPA arrived at its determination. It also provides a forum through which stakeholders can provide their views and supplement data EPA may draw from. EPA considers risk to be the chance of harmful effects to human health or to ecological systems resulting from exposure to an environmental stressor. A stressor is any physical, chemical, or biological entity that can induce an adverse response. Stressors may adversely affect specific natural resources or entire ecosystems, including plants and animals, as well as the environment with which they interact. EPA uses risk assessments to characterize the nature and magnitude of health risks to humans and ecological receptors (e.g., birds, fish, wildlife) Analysis of selected elements of the legislation considered during the 112 th Congress is provided in this report as background for future legislation that may take a similar approach. The approach, proposed in the 112th Congress, was to create state programs to regulate a particular type of waste (CCRs) The report does not attempt to identify detailed requirements that may be applied by a state regulatory program. The report also does not compare provisions in House and Senate bills proposed in  the 112Th Congress or provide detailed analysis of provisions. The proposed approach to regulate CCRs is similar to the now-mature and already EPA-approved state programs to regulate MSW landfills. EPA has no effective authority to step in and enforce federal regulatory criteria at an individual MSW landfill. EPA's only available method to directly enforce the federal landfill criteria would be to first rescind its earlier approval of a state Subtitle D program, which the agency has never done. A CCR Permit Program would draw from selected elements of existing dumping prohibition at facilities subject to theMSW landfill criteria. programs to regulate MSW landfills, regulations or other requirements established by individual states would be designed to protect human health. EPA's June 2010 proposals to regulate CCRs reflect EPA's effort to determine those risks and protective measure to address them. There is no legislative history for the Senate-proposed bill. However, since it also uses the MSW landfill criteria as its framework, there may have been a similar expectation that the use of those criteria would create a permit program that would meet a similar standard. The approach used in the 112 th Congress bills would not have provided an explicit mandate that EPA or the states promulgate regulations applicable to CCR disposal facilities. Instead, the proposed Section 4011 would using statutory criteria drawn from regulatory criteria previously created pursuant to RCRA. The proposed amendment would not explicitly require the agency implementing the program (presumably states) to promulgate Regulations applicable to waste disposal facilities that may receive CCRs. The absence of certain requirements among the Permit Program Specifications does not mean that states would not establish those criteria in their own regulations. The majority of data EPA may draw from to form a final decision. The proposed bills include no explicit directive (to states or to EPA) to promulgate regulatory criteria or standards. Instead, minimum program requirements specify that the CCR Permit Program "shall apply" selected MSW landfill criteria to owners and operators of structures. The similarities between the existing program to regulate MSW landfills and the proposed CCR program lie primarily in the requirement that a CCRpermit Program would apply selected MSw landfill criteria. The state regulations applicable to CCR structures may meet standards of protection determined by each state, in accordance with that state's interpretation. proposed in the 112 th Congress would use as their framework the existing program created under Subtitle D to regulate MSW landfills. A unique element of the proposed amendment to RCRA would be the creation of a permit program absent a directive to EPA to promulgate standards applicable to the entity potentially regulated pursuant to the program. The proposed bills include no explicit owners and operators of CCR structures would depend on each state's interpretation of the criteria listed among the proposed Permit Program Specifications. The CCR Permit Program would draw from selected elements of existing state programs to regulate MSW landfills. The bills would provide no formal role for EPA in this regulatory development process. It is difficult to determine in advance how EPA may interpret directives regarding its role or how the proposed authorities may affect state adoption and implementation of a permit program. EPA played a significant role in developing regulations applying to MSW landfill facilities. Once those state permit programs were approved by EPA, however, the agency had little role in state implementation, including enforcement. EPA did not intend the SIR to be a rigid set of criteria. States could regulate MSW landfills based on the federal MSW landfill criteria. EPA has since approved all state programs, deeming them adequate to enforce the federal regulatory criteria. The SIR allowed states to adopt regulations that may not have been the federal criteria. It also allowed owners and operators to use site-specific alternative approaches to meet the federal performance standards (i.e., to protect human health and the environment) The report explains existing federal-state programs to regulate MSW landfills. It also explains risks EPA apply to owners and operators of MSWLandfill. The report compares three program elements: flexibility provided to states in implementing the proposed Permit Program Specifications; the standard of protection state regulations may provide; and EPA's potential role in program implementation. It concludes that all states are currently implementing permit programs approved by EPA. The proposed amendment would require states to adopt, implement, and enforce federal criteria applicable to owner/operators of waste facilities. Congress intended states to be the primary entities to implement and enforce federal standards applicable to waste management activities. However, amendments to Subtitle D in HSWA created a role for EPA in state adoption and implementation of the MSW landfill criteria. All state programs approved by EPA were determined to be adequate to assure facility compliance with standards protective of human health and the environment. EPA could use authorities available in Sections 3007 and 3008 in Subtitle C to directly enforce the open dumping prohibition at MSW landfills. EPA was authorized to enforce the federal standards from 18 months after the MSW landfill criteria were finalized to the point at which a state adopted a program approved by EPA as adequate. EPA never stepped in have an EPA-approved program in place. As a result, EPA authority to directly enforce the criteria may not currently be invoked by the agency since that authority is limited to states found by EPA to have an inadequate program to implement MSW program. Currently, given that all states have EPA- approved permit programs, EPA has no authority to directly enforce the MSw landfill criteria. Proposed Section 4011(d) would require EPA to identify and notify a state of "deficiencies" in specific elements of its program. Program elements that could be identified by EPA as having some deficiency would include the state's obligation to submit required notification, submit the required program certification, and maintain an approved permit program to implement MSW landfill criteria. Those directives do not involve a substantive review of the program, only a determination that the state submitted required interpret the directives in proposed Section 4012(d). Congress required EPA to determine whether each state program was "adequate" EPA subsequently interpreted that mandate to mean that it was required to ensure that regulated facilities would operate in compliance with regulatory criteria that met a baseline level of protection. Unlike "deficient," the term 'adequate' now has decades of agency interpretation providing a mature understanding of its precise meaning for evaluating state programs. Some have argued that by requiring EPA to assess state programs, the mandate is a violation of the Clean Water Act. that states would promulgate such regulations. The majority of the Permit Program Specifications are criteria that would be applied by the permit program. The absence of certain provisions in Section 4011 comparable to requirements relevant to existing state programs to regulate are compared to the regulatory requirements applicable to the permit programs. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the coal industry's request for a permit to dump coal residuals at landfills in the state of West Virginia. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court by the West Virginia Department of Justice. each state "developed an adequate program" (i.e., a program adequate to assure facility compliance with the MSW landfill criteria) That determination could be made in conjunction with EPA's decisions to approve, disapprove, or partially approve state solid waste management plans. The resulting state permit programs were the body of laws, authorities, and procedures that comprise the state's system for regulating the location, design, operation, groundwater monitoring, closure, post-closure care, corrective action and financial assurance of regulated MSW landfills. The creation of state programs to regulate MSW landfills involved two different but related elements. EPA approval of a state permit program to implement the MSW landfill criteria was dependent on whether EPA determined that the state's program was "adequate" In the proposed amendment to RCRA, however, EPA would be directed to notify a state of a "deficiency" if a state is not implementing a CCR program that meets statutory specifications (in proposed Section 4011(c) How EPA would interpret the directives in proposed Section 4001(d) using this new authority under which the requirement is proposed. 40 C.F.R. Part 258 is the federal MSW landfill criteria. EPA's involvement in the creation of state programs to adopt, implement, and enforce those criteria evolved during the 1990s, but largely ended in the early 2000s. These now-mature state MSW programs reflect a variety of state approaches, but share common elements. For example, those programs have similarities with regard to the following: Regulations —the federal MSw landfill criteria at 40 C.f.r.part 258 are those EPA determined are necessary to protect human health. Household waste is exempt from Subtitle C requirements. But that doesn't mean it doesn't pose potential risks to human health and the environment. Congress took an approach that could be implemented under Subtitle D. That approach resulted in more detailed regulations than those applicable to sanitary landfills. It also included a stronger enforcement mechanism to ensure consistent state conformance with the national standards.. HSWA amended Sub Title D to add Section 4010, in which Congress directed EPA to study the extent to which the Subtitle. D guidelines and criteria applicable to solid waste management and disposal facilities were adequate to protect human health. implemented as proposed, each regulatory option would result in a similar level of protection. Adoption and enforcement of the Subtitle C "cradle to grave" regulations would involve stricter waste management standards implemented at a higher cost to both industry and state waste management agencies. Implementing the Sub Title D option would establish standards applicable only to owners and operators of CCR landfills and surface impoundments (i.e., it would create a regulatory program applicable to the CCR "grave," not every stage of management) Subtitle C requirements, unless or until EPA determines that such requirements are warranted. EPA has two options: (1) it could determine, reversing previous rulings, that hazardous waste regulation is warranted for CCRs, and promulgate regulations under Subtitle C, or (2) it can promulgate standards applicable to CCR landfills and surface impoundments under its Subtitle D authority. On June 21, 2010, EPA proposed for public comment two among other things, to facilities that may receive hazardous household wastes. EPA first proposed hazardous waste management regulations in 1978. In these proposed regulations, EPA identified six categories of wastes it deemed "special wastes" that would be deferred until further study and assessment could be completed to determine their risk. In 1980, Congress included provisions commonly referred to as the "Bevill Amendment" Under those provisions Congress specifically excluded CCRs from regulation under RCRA Subtitle C, pending EPA's completion of a report to Congress and regulatory determination on whether hazardous waste regulations were warranted. submitted its "Regulatory Determination on Wastes from Fossil Fuel Combustion" to the White House Office of Management and Budget, for review. In this March draft, EPA determined that CCRs warranted regulation under Subtitle C when land disposed (e.g., managed in landfills or surface impoundments). Further, EPA stated that it was considering developing national management standards that would include a contingent hazardous waste listing. When improperly managed, the wastes would become a listed hazardous waste. risks associated with contaminant migration. EPA determined that national standards were needed to protect human health from risks specific to CCR management. EPA options to regulate CCRs are limited under its current authorities in Subtitles C and D. Pursuant to the Bevill exclusion, C CRs are explicitly excluded from the Subtitle C requirements, unless or until EPA determines that such such an exclusion is necessary. The EPA has no authority to regulate surface impoundments under the Clean Water Act. Under the Subtitle C option, EPA would reverse a previous regulatory determination to exempt CCRs from the hazardous waste requirements. The proposal drew comments from industry groups, environmental and citizen groups, state agency representatives, and some Members of Congress. If finalized, EPA could encourage states to adopt and enforce Subtitle D standards, but would have no authority to enforce the standards directly, according to EPA's proposed Sub Title C and D requirements. In contrast to its broad authority to enforcement the SubTitle C requirements,EPA could promulgate the Sub Title D standards. or in their exercise of existing authorities. Further, citing its concern regarding the potential mismanagement and inconsistent state regulation of CCRs, EPA stated that it would revise its determination if it found that a need for regulation under Subtitle C was warranted. EPA's June 2010 proposal reflects the agency's revised determination. The proposal was released in June 2010 and is available on the EPA's Web site for download. It is the first time the agency has released a proposal on the CCR issue in more than a decade. If finalized, the Subtitle D option would be implemented pursuant to EPA's authority under RCRA Section 4004 to identify criteria necessary to determining whether a facility should be classified as a "sanitary landfill" or an "open dump" At a minimum, a facility would be deemed a sanitary landfill if solid waste disposal at such a facility posed no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment. Disposal facilities that did not meet the criteria for sanitary landfills would be considered open dumps. Under RCRA Subtitle D, states have primary authority to regulate nonhazardous solid wastes. EPA's role has largely been to promulgate criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. The creation of state programs to regulate time frames that it considers adequate for compliance could be adapted to guide the process of identifying deficiencies, the authors say. The authors say EPA has no authority to require or approve/disapprove of state solid waste permit programs applicable to facilities receiving any other type of solid waste regulated under Sub Title D. Under Subtitle C of RCRA, EPA has primary authority to regulate hazardous wastes. Congress wanted to ensure that certain solid waste disposal facilities would be subject to regulatory criteria that achieved a minimum national standard of protection. The proposed statutory criteria included among the Permit Program Specifications are not comparable, in scope or in detail, to those identified by EPA as those necessary to protect human health from risks specific to CCR disposal and use. The absence of any explicit directive that the CCR Permit program or state regulations applied by that program meet a standard of Protection does not mean that a state would not require its program to achieve a state-specific standard. and the environment." That generally is understood to mean regulatory criteria necessary to ensure that toxic constituents likely present in a waste, disposed of under certain conditions, will not degrade, migrate off-site. There is no provision in Section 4011 that explicitly requires regulations promulgated by the state and implemented by a CCR Permit Program to achieve a certain level of protection. In particular, the House report for H.R. 2273 includes the following statement: The Committee believes that it is not adequate to protect human health. not clearly distinguish the purpose of federal regulations that meet a minimum standard of protection from permit programs used to implement and enforce those regulations. Creation of a state program to regulate a particular type of waste, according to statutory provisions in federal law, without detailed federal regulations or guidance, would be a novel approach in RCRA. That a RCRA program has never been authorized or established by Congress using such an approach does not mean that this new approach would not meet a particular objective. The proposed bills, however, did not include a specific statement of the objective of This report looks primarily at how state programs to regulate CCRs may be developed and implemented by a state. The report also describes selected elements of RCRA Subtitles C and D, relevant to both EPA's proposal and legislative proposals to create state programs. Under Subtitle D, states have the authority to regulate nonhazardous industrial solid waste, such as household garbage and non Hazardous Industrial Solid Waste (HISW) This report also looks at a range of perspectives about the appropriate role of states and EPA. treatment, storage, and disposal facilities (TSDFs) In lieu of the federal program, states can be authorized by EPA to implement regulations applicable to those facilities, including permitting those facilities. Most states have requested and received such authorization. While under certain conditions, EPA could rescind state authority to implement a previously authorized state hazardous waste management program, EPA has never done so. EPA has taken enforcement actions against individual TSDFs in states authorized to implement federal Subtitle C requirements. In contrast to such programs where EPA has primary oversight and enforcement authority, EPA's authority to MSW landfill criteria are intended to apply to facilities that dispose of largely "dry" waste. New MSW landfills were required to ensure compliance with the standards before they began operation. Owner/operators of existing facilities that did not comply with applicable criteria by deadlines specified by EPA would be in violation of RCRA's prohibition on open dumping. Each standard is designed to be implemented by the owner or operator, with or without oversight or participation by a care, and financial assurance. The general standards specify the intended scope, purpose, and applicability of the regulations. EPA established minimum national criteria applicable to MSW landfills. The criteria are those necessary to protect human health and the environment from risks associated with the disposal of MSW in a landfill. To identify risks specific to the management to migrate off-site. Included workers, recreational visitors, and ecological receptors from chemical contaminants and other stressors that may be present in the environment. In 1991, the agency promulgated the following requirements: General standards; detailed compliance deadlines; and specific regulatory criteria. EPA says it will use criteria from 40 C.F.R. Part 265 to develop standards for surface impoundments. EPA says MSW landfill criteria did not address risks from contaminant spread. Final regulations represent the "minimum national standard" applicable to waste disposal facilities, EPA says. The standards would be expected to would achieve the standard of protection set in the regulations, the agency says. It says the standards will be applied to TSDFs and MSW landfills in the future. Each state was required to "adopt and implement a permit program or other system of prior approval and conditions" Ground water monitoring as necessary to detect contamination should be required, EPA says. The criteria should establish criteria for the acceptable location of new or existing facilities, and provide for corrective action as appropriate, it says. It says each state should develop a program to ensure that each solid waste management facility within such state which may receive hazardous household waste "will comply with the [the newly revised] criteria" A 2009 survey of states found that more than 60% of states required neither liners nor groundwater monitoring for surface impoundments. The majority of states responding to the survey also did not have siting controls, inspection, or structural integrity requirements. EPA noted that the survey results are "particularly significant as groundwater monitoring is a minimum for any credible regulatory regime" and is a "minimum" for any "credible regulatory regime," according to the agency's report. The report also found that many states had no requirements for liner or groundwater monitoring. to protect human health and the environment from groundwater contamination. EPA was required to determine whether each state developed an adequate permit program. The landfill criteria and required elements of an "adequate" permit program were developed and implemented using data and information gathered over a more than 20-year period. Over that time, working cooperatively with states, EPA has identified risks to human health from waste management, regulatory criteria that effectively address those risks, and regulatory requirements to address them. The agency has identified and implemented risk-reduction strategies over that time. potential to present danger to human health and the environment in certain circumstances. While industry management practices had improved measurably, there was sufficient evidence the wastes were being managed in a significant number of landfills and surface impoundments without proper controls in place. While there had been substantive improvements in state regulatory programs, EPA identified significant gaps either in states' regulatory authorities or in their exercise of existing authorities. Further, citing its authority, EPA cited its right to protect the environment and public health. EPA determined that the material is generated in large volumes annually (e.g., approximately 130 million tons in 2011) The material contains more than 40 toxic constituents, including antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, that may receive a particular type of waste. Regulatory criteria that meet that directive have been identified in the more than 30 years that EPA has gone through the public rulemaking process. The presence of toxic constituents alone is not enough to protect humans. or release of liquid waste to surface water, as in the structural failure of a surface impoundment (e.g., the Kingston release) or as a result of run-on/runoff across the deposition site during rain/flood events. fugitive dust emissions, when fine particulates in dried ash become airborne, as at landfills or large-scale fill operations. Of those pathways, risk to human health was highest from contaminant leaching and migration to surface and groundwater. Pathways of exposure may include potential release to air or to water from precipitation run-on/runoff across the disposal site. Contaminant leaching to surface water or groundwater at levels that could lead to drinking water exceeding maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) established under the Safe Drinking Water Act. Potential protective measures identified as those that may minimize human exposure to toxins below a standard specified according to federal law. Such practices have included a requirement that composite liners be used at disposal sites. CCRs one of the largest waste streams in the United States. Disposal of CCRs on site at individual power plants may involve decades-long accumulation of waste. TVA estimates that cleanup will continue into at least 2014 and will cost $1.2 billion. EPA has determined that a more common threat associated with CCR management is the leaching of contaminants likely present in the waste, primarily heavy metals, resulting in surface or groundwater contamination. The Kingston release also brought attention to the fact that the management of such large volumes of C CRs is difficult. In 2011, electricity generating units in the United States burned more than 900 million tons of coal. CCRs are the inorganic material remaining after pulverized coal is burned at electric utilities and independent power producers. According to industry estimates, in 2011, as much as 130 million tons were generated, making C CRs one of the largest waste streams in the U.S. EPA with authority to backstop state programs to regulate CCR facilities. The EPA has the authority to regulate facilities that use CCR materials. the combustion of coal or other fossil fuels, including an analysis of the source and volumes of such material generated per year. present disposal and utilization practices; potential danger, if any, to human health and the environment from the disposal and reuse of such materials. alternatives to current disposal methods; the costs of such alternatives; the impact of those alternatives on the use of coal and other natural resources; and the current and potential utilization of suchmaterials. Further, as it has been proved that surface runoff or leachate can pose a danger to health or the environment. EPA was directed to prepare a detailed and comprehensive study on the adverse effects on human health and the environment, if any, of the disposal and use of CCRs. Among the study criteria, EPA was required to identify the source and volumes of C CRs generated annually. EPA also used federal regulatory criteria applicable to the identification and listing of hazardous waste. The study included data regarding the nature and concentration of toxic constituents present in the waste; plausible types of improper management; and documented cases in which danger from surface runoff or leachate has been proved. In May 2000, after review by OMB, EPA issued a revised regulatory determination that stated its intent to leave the Bevill exclusion in place. However, EPA stated that it was convinced that national regulations under Subtitle D were warranted for CCR disposal in landfills and surface impoundments. EPA cited new data that identified significant risks for the waste to leach arsenic, including risk to human health associated with agricultural uses of coal ash as a substitute for lime.or groundwater monitoring. current and potential utilization of such materials. Further, as it deemed appropriate, EPA was required to review studies and other actions of other federal and state agencies regarding the material and invite participation by other concerned parties, including industry. Both legislative and administrative actions regarding the potential regulation of CCRs are summarized in Table C-1. In March 2000, EPA submitted its "Regulatory Determination on Wastes from Fossil Fuel Combustion" and invited participation from all concerned parties. The EPA took action in response to Bevill directive and more recent action taken in the wake of the Kingston release. study and assessment could be completed to determine their risk to human health and the environment. These special wastes were identified because they typically were generated in large volumes. In the months before the hazardous waste regulations were finalized in 1980, Congress was debating RCRA reauthorization. In February 1980, Representative Tom Bevill introduced an amendment to the pending legislation that would require EPA to defer the imposition of hazardous waste regulatory requirements for fossil fuels. The amendment was passed and the RCRA was reauthorized. defer the imposition of hazardous waste regulatory requirements for fossil fuel combustion waste until data regarding its potential hazard to human health or the environment could be determined. Representative Bevill stated that EPA's intent to regulate such waste as hazardous would discourage the use of coal and constitute an unnecessary burden on the utility industry. Ultimately, the Solid Waste Disposal Act Amendments of 1980 (P.L. 96-482) included provisions commonly referred to as the "Fossil Fuel Combustion Waste" provisions. On October 14, 2011, the House passed the Coal Residuals Reuse and Management Act. On August 2, 2012, the Coal Ash Recycling and Oversight Act of 2012 (S. 3512) was introduced in the Senate. The House subsequently incorporated the provisions of the Senate bill in Title IV of H.R. 3409, the Stop the War on Coal Act, passed in the House on September 12, 2012. The bills would have amended the Solid Waste Disposal Act. EPA has gathered data on CCR use and disposal for more than 30 years. In the past 10 years, EPA has found that states appear to be regulating CCR landfills to a greater extent than they had in the past. Based on available data, EPA determined that a majority of states with CCR surface impoundments did not appear to require facility owner/operators to implement protective measures typically deemed necessary to protect human health from contaminant migration. The majority of disposal units were likely to be older and lacked liners and groundwater monitoring. EPA identified common methods of disposal and use, potentially regulated under RCRA, that resulted in documented cases of damages that could cause human health concerns. Those management methods include disposal in landfills, accumulation in surface impoundment ponds, and use in land applications equivalent to landfill disposal such as the placement of large volumes of CCRs on land for use as structural or embankment fill. EPA also identified certain protective measures that may be implemented that would minimize or largely eliminate risks from CCR disposal. EPA identified various pathways in which humans may be exposed to toxic constituents in CCRs at levels high enough to cause health concerns. The pathways under which exposure would most likely occur include the following: contaminant leaching and migration off-site. direct, uncontrolled discharge or release of liquid waste to surface water.embankment fill (e.g., to contour the land at a construction site or raise a roadbed) and uncontrolled discharge of waste to the surface of the water. Almost 80% of CCRs generated in 2011 was managed in a way that involved land application of the material. Such management practices included CCR disposal in landfills, surface impoundments, or mines (as minefill) EPA has identified a number of conditions under which such land applications of C CRs may pose a threat to human health. EPA also identified certain protective measures that could be used to protect against the potential impacts of implementing either EPA regulatory option. The proposals to amend RCRA were introduced in the 112 th Congress. Landfills also include piles, sand and gravel pits, quarries, and/or large-scale fill operations. Sites that are excavated so that more coal ash can be used as fill are also considered CCR landfills. CCR surface impoundments are used to receive CCRs that have been sluiced (flushed or mixed with water to facilitate movement), or wastes from wet air pollution control devices, often in addition to other solid wastes. The definitions were proposed by EPA based on findings in its groundwater risk assessment and its documentation of CCR damage cases. The potential for structural failure could be minimized by various means, including ensuring that the units meet certain design standards and are inspected regularly. Surface impoundments also pose a risk of structural failure. CCR disposal facilities are currently subject to limited federal regulation. Instead, they are regulated by individual states. In a continuing effort to determine whether CCRs should be subject to federal regulation, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is conducting a review of the CCR industry. The agency is working with states to determine the best way to regulate the industry. New disposal units (landfills and surface impoundments) would be required to be placed above the natural water table. New disposal units could not be located in wetlands, within 200 feet of a fault zone, or in a seismic impact zone. Existing facilities in an unstable area would be needed to close within two years of the proposed CCR disposal site's opening. The new standards are among those intended to address concerns associated specifically with CCR disposing of waste in the air. New disposal units would be required to be constructed with a composite liner. New CCR units must have groundwater monitoring systems installed before CCRs could be disposed of in the units. All units wouldbe required to control fugitive dust emissions. Within five years, existing surface impoundments would berequired to have solids removed and be retrofitted with a composites liner. All Units would be. required to comply with the groundwater monitoring requirements within one year of the effective date of a final rule. required to control fugitive dust emissions. All units would be required to have an independent registered professional engineer certify that the design of the run-on/runoff control system meets requirements specified in the regulations. Owners and operators of all existing surface impoundments would be. required to maintain certain information about the units (e.g., a description of the physical and engineering properties of the foundation materials on which the CCR surface. is built) and notify the state that the designs have been placed in the operating record and on the owner's or operator's publicly accessible Internet site. ensure compliance with land disposal standards applicable to owners and operators of TSDFs. Pursuant to its existing authorities under Subtitle D, EPA's second regulatory option would be to promulgate national standards. The proposed standards are structured similarly to regulatory requirements applicable to MSW landfills, supplemented to reflect requirements specific to the management of CCRs. According to EPA, if implemented as proposed, each regulatory options would result in a "General Standards" listed in Table A-2. EPA's proposal included detailed criteria necessary to address risks associated with the disposal of dry CCRs in a landfill and liquid slurry in surface impoundments. The proposed Permit Program Specifications include five provisions that appear to be drawn from EPA's proposed standards applicable to CCR disposal units. Those provisions are not, however, comparable in scope or in detail to the regulatory criteria proposed by EPA under its June 2010 Subtitle D regulatory option. It is unclear whether individual state CCR Permit Programs would address the same range of risks regulation of surface impoundsments. EPA found that many state solid waste management programs adequately regulate CCR landfills, but identified gaps in those programs with respect to the regulation of CCR surface impoundments. In its Subtitle D option, EPA would add to 40 C.F.R. Part 257, "Standards for the Receipt of Coal Combustion Residuals in Landfills and Surface Impoundments" Those standards would apply to solid waste disposal units, defined as follows: CCR landfill or part of a facility where CCRs are placed in or on land. EPA intended those risks to be addressed, at least in part, in its "Design criteria for existing CCR surface impoundments and lateral expansions" (proposed 40 C.F.R. §257.71, included among the Design Criteria). Compared to the bills' structural integrity provisions, EPA's proposed criteria included more detailed requirements comparable to the MSHA standards. As an example of the level of detail provided in regulatory criteria, Table A-3 lists EPA's " design criteria" EPA's Subtitle D regulatory option reflects the framework of 30 C.F.R. Part 77. EPA's decision to draw from the MSHA standards was based on its belief that records compiled by MSHA for its rulemaking. The agency's 40 years of experience in implementing those requirements provided evidence that similar requirements, applied to CCR surface impoundments, will prevent a catastrophic release of CCRs, as occurred at TVA's facility in Kingston, TN. The decision was made to meet RCRA's mandate to ensure the protection of human health and the environment. since criteria applicable to the management of liquid wastes are not included under 40 C.F.R. Part 258. The MSW landfill criteria also do not address structural integrity issues associated with the accumulation of coal ash slurry. To address such risks, selected proposed standards for CCR surface impoundments were modeled on the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) regulations. EPA drew from the MSHA mine safety standards for "water, sediment, or slurry impoundment and impounding structures" For example, the paragraph entitled Revised Criteria begins "The revised criteria described in this paragraph are ... ," followed by provisions such as "the revised criteria for design, groundwater monitoring, corrective action, closure, and post-closure, for structures" The leachate collection system requirements in 40 C.F.R. §258.40(a)(2) do not apply to structures that are surface impoundments. "For all structures that receive coal combustion residuals after the date of enactment of this section, the revised criteria are ... " Proposed Subtitle D design standards would require that new landfills and all surface impoundments that have not completed closure prior to the effective date of the rule. Units would be required to be retrofitted with a liner or closed within five years of the final rule. That is the same time frame EPA proposed under its Subtitle C alternative. EPA also proposed to require the same liner and leachate collection and removal systems as part of the Sub Title D criteria. The technical justification for the requirements is equally applicable to the wastes and surfaces impoundment. the following statement: The Committee believes that it is not necessary for EPA to promulgate new regulations. EPA acknowledged in [its June 2010 Subtitle D] Proposed Rule that the "part 258 criteria represent a reasonable balance between ensuring the protection of human health and the environment" The Committee expects that permit programs using the minimum Federal baseline established by this legislation will meet the standard of protecting human health. The House report further notes the "revised criteria" that would be included in the proposed rule.

ROUGE-1: 57.24, ROUGE-2: 53.50, ROUGE-L: 18.71
BERTScore: 60.25

==============================================
==================== [68/100] ====================
Summary:
Completing the approximate $2.4 billion cost of SSN-23 would require about $1.5 billion in additional funding. The Administration requested $1,507.5 million in FY1996 to complete the cost of the ship. Congress provided only $700 million in procurement funding, leaving about $807.5m to complete cost of ship. Rather than requesting all $807m or so in FY1997, the Administration requested. $699.1m in FY 1997 and deferred the final $105m to FY1998. SSN-23 was originally procured in the FY1992 defense budget, which Congress passed in 1991. In early 1992, the George H. W. Bush Administration terminated procurement of further Seawolf-class submarines. In 1993, as part of its Bottom-Up Review (BUR) of U.S. defense policy and programs, the Clinton Administration decided to reinstate procurement of SSn-23 in FY1995 or FY1996. By this point, $382.4 million had already been obligated and expended on SSN- 23. Low rate of shipbuilding was driving higher costs, which in turn further reduced shipbuilding rates, creating a downward spiral. The committee believes that stable ship requirements, increased funding in the shipbuilding budget, and increased flexibility for funding large capital ships are critical elements of any strategy to reverse this trend. The program of record for CVN-78 has the detail design and construction funding split between two years. This provision would authorize that same funding to be split over four years, thereby allowing needed funding flexibility. The committee is concerned about this delay. The committee has been told there is no technical reason for the delay, but that the delay was driven by budget considerations. Both the Secretary of the Navy and the Chief of Naval operations testified that large capital assets such as aircraft carriers are difficult to fund under the traditional full-funding policy, and that more flexible methods of funding are needed. The delay translates into a cost growth for CVN-78 of approximately $400.0 million, according to the Navy. The Navy originally planned to procure the first CVN-21 class aircraft carrier in fiscal year 2006. Since then, the Navy has delayed procurement to 2008. This has delayed fielding this vital capability, while significantly increasing the aircraft carrier's procurement cost. Procurement delays, excess inflation, and material escalation have been reported as significant contributors toCVN-77 cost growth. The shipbuilder has proposed to achieve significant CVN/21 class program savings through a stable procurement plan, and through procurement of economic order. The Senate Armed Services Committee recommended approval of the Navy's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring LHA-6 and the two lead DDG-1000s. The budget request included $739.1 million in Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) for CVN-78 advance procurement. The provision would also authorize advance requirements to potentially optimize economic order quantity savings and escalation avoidance (to include offsetting factors) for the first three vessels of theCVN-21 class. Under four-year incremental funding, the main portion of the procurement cost of CVN-78, for example, would be divided into four increments that would be provided in FY2008, the ship's year of procurement, and the three following years. Section 121 would also authorize the Navy to contract in FY2007 for the procurement long-lead items forCVN-79 and CVN.80, aircraft carriers that the Navy plans to procure in FY2012 and FY2016, respectively. This authority resembles an economic order quantity (EOQ) arrangement. 2007 budget submission of $520,670,000 for the fifth and sixth LCS flight 0 ships. Navy revealed the LCS unit cost estimate used as a basis for last year's appropriation was exclusive of contract change orders, planning and engineering services, program management support and other costs not included in the ship construction contract. The Committee is troubled by this revelation and recommends rescinding the insufficient fiscal year 2006 funds currently allocated to the fourth LCS fiscal year 2007 budget request is insufficient to procure two ships. Instead, the Committee recommends $300,000,000 to fully fund procurement of one LCS seaframe, which is a reduction of $220,000,.000 and one seaframe from the request. The Committee is aware that the new Chief of Naval Operations [CNO] is actively reviewing shipbuilding programs and is considering several options for controlling long-term costs. In an effort to assist the Navy in the short-term, the Committee recommends providing the Navy financial management authorities that have previously been denied. This authority allows the Navy, through above threshold reprogramming procedures, to increase funding for programs experiencing unforeseen shortfalls. The Committee believes the situation requires more proactive program, budgetary and contract management and encourages the Navy to improve. more proactive program, budgetary and contract management and encourages the Department of Defense to consider whether using advance appropriations in future budgets will improve the shipbuilding program. The fiscal year 2006 President's budget requests $225,427,000 for [the]DDG-51 [destroyer program] for what the Navy describes as "program completion requirements and shutdown costs" These funds are requested for a mix of Class and ship specific plan, basic construction, ordnance, certification, and inspection costs. Such costs are traditionally included in the budget request for each ship. when signing the multiyear contract for the construction of the final DDGs of the Class, the Department decided to change its policy and budget for these costs after the last ship was appropriated. The Committee finds this decision troubling. First, budgeting for such costs after procurement of the last vessel obscures the actual cost to procure each ship and overstates savings attributable to themultiyear contract authority under which these ships were purchased. The Congress approved the Navy's request for multiyear procurement authority in fiscal year 2002 assuming a level of savings to the taxpayer. The Committee is alarmed that the Navy would knowingly sign a multibillion dollar contract for ships that would be both non-operational and undeliverable unless additional dollars, outside the contract, were provided. The Committee directs the Secretary of the Navy to provide a detailed report of all the costs required to complete each of the remaining 11 ships and a rationale for such a contractual arrangement by December 1, 2005. Until sufficient explanation is provided, the Committee recommends only providing funds for plans and those costs directly attributable to ships scheduled to deliver. The Senate Appropriations Committee remains gravely concerned about the overall health and stability of Navy shipbuilding. The Committee finds unanticipated cost overruns to be the root cause of much of the instability in the program. Until budget estimates become more realistic, requirements stabilize and penalties are exercised, ship construction costs are unlikely to improve. The committee is aware that the new Chief of the Navy is aware of the Committee's concerns and is working to resolve the issues as soon as possible. In a letter dated September 29, 2005, the Committee expressed its concern about the stability of the U.S. Navy. The report includes the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account in the list of accounts identified for advance appropriations in the Senate. S.Amdt. 146 to S.Con.Res. 18 is the earlier Senate version of the budget resolution. The amendment would increase the amount of advance appropriations by $14 billion, to $37.393 billion. The report notes that Section 401 reflects an overall limit on advance appropriations of $23.158 billion in fiscal year 2007. Use of advance appropriations for Navy ship procurement was supported by some Navy officials and some Members of Congress. The Navy in 2001 apparently did not receive approval from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to use the approach for ship procurement. The House Appropriations Committee, in its for funding Navy ships, was dismayed that the Navy continues to advocate the use of alternative financing mechanisms to artificially increase shipbuilding rates. In attempting to establish advanced appropriations as a legitimate budgeting technique, those Navy advocates of such practices would actually decrease the flexibility of future Administrations and Congresses. The House Appropriations Committee directed the Navy to reconsider its proposal to request split funding for the LHA(R) over the FY2007-08 timeframe. The Senate did not agree with the House direction. The conference conferees understand the Navy may review whether advance appropriations can improve its procurement of ships and provide savings as it designs its 2007 budget. They agree to consider either split funding or full funding if proposed by the Administration. The Conference Report on H.Con.Res. 95 (Concurrent Resolution on FY2006 Budget) natural disaster, or other impact arising from outside the Navy's shipbuilding program. (Page 180) Appendix B. Legislative Activity for FY2006 H.R. 1815 / P.L. 109-163 (FY2006 Defense Authorization Bill) House In its report ( H.Rept.109-89 of May 20, 2005) on H.r. 18 1515 , the House Armed Services Committee states: [Chief of Naval Operations] Admiral [Vernon] Clark, in his posture statement before the House Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Defense stated, "We need to partner with Congress and industry to regain our buying power" FY2007 budget, approved the Navy's requested first increment of funding for LHA-6. Navy's proposed FY2008 budget requests the second increment of funds for the ship. Navy in its proposed FY2007 budget proposed procuring the first two DDG-1000 destroyers in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. CVN-78 aircraft carrier to be funded over a total of nine years, with about 35.2% of its procurement cost provided in advance procurement funding between FY2001 and FY2007. Section 124 authorizes the procurement of the first two DDG-1000 destroyers in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008, as requested by the Navy. The Navy's proposal requires special legislative authority to be executed. This authority is not included in the House-passed National Defense Authorization Act, 2007 ( H.R. 5122 ). (Page 139) Senate In its report ( S.Rept. 109-292 of July 25, 2006), the Senate Appropriations Committee recommends approving the Navy's request for FY2007 procurement funding. In its report ( H.Rept. 109-452 of May 5, 2006) on H.R. 5122 , the House Armed Services Committee recommended approval of the Navy's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring LHA-6. The committee for FY2007 instead recommended full funding for one DDG-1000, and design funding for a second. The report states: The conferees agree to provide $2,568,111,000 for the DDg-1000 (formerly DDX) Destroyer Program, and agree to delete language proposed by the House requiring full funding of a single lead ship. one of which is funded in the item's year of procurement, the other the following year. The Committee reminds the Navy that this is a unique acquisition strategy and should not be used as a precedent for incrementally funding any future DDG—1000 or any other shipbuilding program. The report recommends funding the procurement of one Littoral Combat Ship, or LCS (rather than the requested two) in FY2007, and rescinding funding (in Section 8043) for one of the three LCSs procured in FY2006. in FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring the two lead DDG-1000 destroyers. The committee for FY2007 instead recommended full funding for one DDg-1000. In the case of the F-22, incremental funding is requested in the middle of the production run. The use of incremental funding mortgages the future of the procurement budget of the Defense Department in a manner that is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee cannot support such a far-reaching policy change which has implications beyond the Navy's. provide the entire cost of the item in the item's year of procurement. For this reason, the full funding policy for DOD procurement programs can be described in simplified terms as "one decision for one pot of money" A few Navy and DOD ships have been procured in recent years, are currently being procured, or are proposed to be procured with incremental funding. Examples include DOD sealift ships, the attack submarine SSN-23, the amphibious assault ships LHD-6, L HD-8, and LHA-6. in the request, including for the first time construction of a surface combatant, the next-generation destroyer DD(X) The committee remains concerned that the use of incremental funding is not a solution to the Navy's problem in funding shipbuilding. While incremental funding can allow the Navy to smooth out the dramatic spikes in shipbuilding funding required as a result of budget cuts, it is not an ideal solution to shipbuilding problems. The Navy sought and was granted the authority to use incremental funding for the next aircraft carrier, which will be recorded as procured in 2008. on the FY1993 defense budget, Congress created the National Defense Sealift Fund (NDSF)—a revolving fund in the DOD budget for the procurement, operation, and maintenance of DOD-owned sealift ships. Since the NDSF is outside the procurement title of the defense appropriation act, DOD's Large, Medium-Speed, Roll-on/Roll-off (LMSR) ships were actually applied to help finance portions of 16 LMSRs whose construction contracts were awarded between FY1993 and FY1997. In explaining its use of funds in the LMSR program, DOD stated: The National Defense sealift Fund is not a procurement appropriation but a revolving fund. that would include the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account on a list of accounts identified for advance appropriations. The amendment was ordered to lie on the table. The Senate passed S.Con.Res. 18 on March 17, 2005. This appendix discusses Navy and DOD ships that have been procured in recent years or are currently being procured using incremental funding. The appendix also discusses DOD LMSR-Type Sealift Ships as part of its action on the FY1993 defense budget. and Clark (TAKE-1) dry cargo ships procured since FY2003 ) have not been subject to the full funding policy as traditionally applied to DOD procurement programs. As discussed in a 1996 CRS report, although individual LMSRs were ostensibly fully funded each year by Congress, in some cases DOD applied LMSR funding provided in a given year to partially finance the construction of L MSRs authorized in various years. For example, although Congress ostensibly approved $546.4 million in FY1995 for the procurement of two L MSR, the FY1995 funds were actually applied to help finance the procurement. by Congress in the two years (FY1997 and FY1998) following the year (FY1996) in which SSN-23 was (for a second time) procured. Congress included a provision in the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) sections of both the FY2000 and FY2001 defense appropriations acts. The ship in question is LHD-8, which was funded on an incremental basis, with the final increment provided in FY2006. The Navy in its FY2007 budget proposed procuring the amphibious assault ship LHA-6 in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. Senate Armed Services Committee approved the Navy's FY2008 request for the second of two increments of procurement funding for the amphibious assault ship LHA-6. House In its report ( H.Rept. 109-452 of May 5, 2006) on conference report on H.R. 1815 / P.L.109-163 of January 6, 2006 authorizes the use of incremental funding in FY2007, FY2008, and FY2009 for the procurement of the aircraft carrier CVN-78. incremental funding was detrimental to funding stability. Future congresses may find themselves unwilling, or unable, to fund completion of ships begun in prior years and only partially funded. The committee has approved the use of split funding for certain ships in certain cases. However, the committee does not believe that a blanket policy supporting incremental funding for any class of ship is appropriate. (Pages 68-69) Senate Section 121 of the Senate version of the FY2007 defense authorization bill would authorize use of four-year incremental funding. Virginia class submarine, the replacement amphibious assault ship (LHA(R), the future major surface combatant ship (DD(X), and the future aircraft carrier CVN-21. Section 1004 of the bill as reported by the committee states: Senate Section 122 of the FY2006 defense authorization bill ( S. 1042 ) would permit the aircraft carrierCVN-78 to be procured with split funding (i.e., incremental funding) during the period FY2007-FY2010. appropriations can be matched to funding requirements for completing natural components of the useful segment. Advance appropriations have the same benefits as regular appropriations for improved planning, management, and accountability of the project (investment) Because advance appropriations involves a one-time decision by Congress to approve the entire procurement cost of the end item, advance appropriations can be described in simplified terms as "one decision for multiple pots of money" Opponents of advance appropriations could argue that it retains one of the key potential disadvantages of incremental finding. preferred because it leads to tradeoffs within the budget year with spending for other capital assets. Full funding for a capital project (investment) over several years with regular appropriations for the first year and advance appropriations for subsequent years may bias tradeoffs. Advance appropriations, because they are scored in the year they become available for obligation, may constrain the budget authority and outlays available for regular appropriations of that year. If lumpiness caused by regular appropriations cannot be accommodated within an agency or Appropriations Subcommittee, advance appropriations can ameliorate that problem. action to cancel or modify an annual funding increment in a future-year budget. In this sense, advance appropriations can be thought of as a legislatively locked in form of incremental funding. OMB Circular A-11 allows for the use of advance appropriations to help finance capital assets under certain circumstances. Regular appropriations for the full funding of a capital project or a useful segment (or investment) in the budget year are preferred. If this results in spikes that, in the judgment of OMB, cannot be stopped, the advance appropriations are used. full funding in the budget year with regular appropriations alone is preferred. Full funding is met as long as a combination of regular and advance appropriations provide budget authority sufficient to complete the capital project or useful segment or investment. Full Funding is preferred because it leads to tradeoffs within the budgetyear. The full funding of a capital project, a useful segment, or an investment should be proposed in the Budget. It is not possible to provide full funding for all projects and investments in the same budget year. This is because of the nature of capital projects and useful segments. Good budgeting requires that appropriations for the full costs of asset acquisition be enacted in advance. Full funding with regular appropriations in the budget year also leads to tradeoffs with other capital assets and with spending for purposes other than capital assets. Full Funding increases the opportunity to use performance-based fixed price contracts, allows for more efficient work planning and management of the capital project. It also allows for the use of more efficient and cost-effective methods of working with contractors and vendors to achieve the goals of the project. When full funding is not followed and capital projects (or investments) or useful segments are funded in increments, without certainty if or when future funding will be available, the result is sometimes poor planning, acquisition of assets not fully justified. Support for the full funding policy has been periodically reaffirmed over the years by Congress, the Congress, and the White House. More efficient work planning and management of the capital project (or investment) and increases the accountability for the achievement of the baseline goals. The result is higher acquisition costs, cancellation of major investments, or inadequate funding to maintain and operate the assets. DOD budgeting and improve Congress's ability to control DOD spending. Understanding total costs and how previously appropriated funds are used are key components of Congress's oversight capability. The full funding policy is consistent with two basic laws regarding government expenditures. The Antideficiency Act of 1870, as amended, and the Adequacy of Appropriations Act of 1861 are key to DOD budgeting. The regulations governing the fullfunding policy are found in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11 and DOD Directive 7000.14-R. Multiyear procurement is a special contracting authority, approved by Congress on a program-by-program basis. It permits DOD to use a single contract to procure a set of end items that are scheduled to be procured across a series of up to five fiscal years. An MYP arrangement approved for the Navy's F/A-18E/F strike-fighter program, for example, permitted the Navy to use one contract for a total of 198 to 224 F/a-18e/Fs. Most Navy ships procured since the late 1950s have been funded in accordance with the full funding policy. Before then, many Navy ships were procured with incremental funding, which is discussed in the next section. These ships constitute recent exceptions to the use of full funding in the procurement of Navy ships. Congress's decision on ship funding approaches could also affect future Navy capabilities, annual Navy funding requirements, and the shipbuilding industrial base. For more information on these ships, see Appendix C of this report. a usable end item (such as a Navy ship) to be funded in the year in which the item is procured. The policy applies not just to Navy ships, but to all weapons and equipment that DOD procures through the procurement title of the annual DOD appropriations act. In general, the full funding policy means that DOD cannot contract for the construction of a new weapon or piece of equipment until funding for the entire cost of that item has been approved by Congress. Congress's intent in imposing the policy was to strengthen discipline in DOD budgeting and improve Congress's ability to control DOD spending. increment as part of its action on that year's budget. A key feature of incremental funding is that a portion of the ship's cost is provided in one or more years beyond the item's year of procurement. Under incremental funding, DOD can contract for the construction of a weapon after Congress approves only the initial increment of its cost. Under advance appropriations, Congress, following its initial decision to fund the item, would need to take a positive action to cancel or modify an annual funding increment. on DOD's ability to accurately predict the total procurement cost of items, such as ships, that take several years to build. preserve flexibility for future Congresses to stop "throwing good money after bad" by halting funding for the procurement of an item under construction that has become unnecessary or inappropriate due to unanticipated shifts in U.S. strategy or the international security environment. In spite of its potential advantages, Congress replaced incremental funding with the full funding policy in the 1950s, and has periodically reaffirmed the fullfunding policy since then. construction to start on a larger number of items in a given year within that year's amount of funding, so as to achieve better production economies of that item than would have been possible under full funding. recognize that certain DOD procurement programs, particularly those incorporating significant amounts of advanced technology, bear some resemblance to research and development activities (which can be funded in increments), even though they are intended to produce usable end items. reduce the amount of unobligated balances associated with DOD procurement Programs. implicitly recognize potential limits on DOD's ability to accurately predict the total procurement cost.  Split funding is a two-year form of incremental funding. Under split funding, a weapon's procurement cost is divided into two portions, one of which is funded in the item's year of production. Weapons under construction could be exposed to potential uneconomic start-up and stop costs that can occur when budget reductions or other unexpected developments cause one or more of the planned increments to be reduced or deferred. The cost of an item may not be known until the item has been completed or has been delivered to Congress. that could require displacing other programs from that year's budget, which can increase the costs of the displaced programs. Avoid a potential bias against the procurement of very expensive items that might result from use of full funding due to the item's large up-front procurement cost. Allow construction to start on a larger number of items in the budget. Allow the item to have a lower life cycle operation and support (O&S) costs compared to alternatives with lower up- front procurement costs. permit construction to begin on an item that has long-term benefits that do not appear in budget. nuclear-propulsion components of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines. Congress in recent years has occasionally approved AP funding for conventionally powered Navy ships, such as destroyers and amphibious ships, for which the Navy did not request any AP funding. Congress has also occasionally approvedAP funding for "advance construction" work on certain ships, which apparently refers to early shipyard activities for building the basic structure of a ship, as opposed to manufacturing long-lead components to be installed into the ship. The use of AP funds for shipyard advance construction activities is not recognized in executive branch budget regulations on the full funding policy. The law governing MYP arrangements is set forth in 10 U.S.C. § 2306b. This provision permits AP funding to be used to finance, at the outset of an MYP arrangement, the procurement of long-lead components for all of the end items to be procured under the arrangement. Congress over the years has granted MYP authority for a relatively small number of procurement programs. The Navy to procure, in total, five Virginia (SSN-774) class nuclear-powered attack submarines over the five-year period FY2004-FY2008, for example. EOQs normally take place within the context of a multiyear procurement (MYP) These ships have not been approved for MYP, and under past practice would not qualify for it under the requirements set forth in the law. MYP arrangements are permitted to cover items to be procured over a period of up to five years, while the authority granted under Section 121 would cover three ships that the Navy wants to procure over aperiod of nine years (FY2008-FY2016). In its report ( S.Rept. 109-254 of May 9, 2006) on S. 2766 , the Senate Armed Services said the authority would be used for the procurement of three ships. Long-lead items are often manufactured not at the end item's final assembly facility (such as a shipyard) but at separate supplier firms. In Navy shipbuilding, AP payments have most commonly been used to pay for nuclear-propulsion components of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines. This up-front batch procurement of long- lead items is called an economic order quantity (EOQ) because it procures (i.e., places an order for) these items in the form of a batch that can be manufactured in an efficient manner.  advance procurement (AP) "down payments" on a usable end item can be provided in one or more years prior to the item's year of procurement. AP funding may be used to pay for long-lead items that have long manufacturing lead times. This is to ensure that these items will be ready for installation into the end item at the appropriate point. AP funds may also be used for components of ausable end item that are not ready for use yet. This can be done to ensure the components are ready to be used in the appropriate way. Advance appropriations is an alternate form of full funding that is permitted under executive branch budget regulations. As a funding approach, it can be viewed as lying somewhere between traditional full funding and incremental funding. Advance appropriations have not been used in Navy ship procurement, but have been used by other executive branch agencies to fund various programs. Under advance appropriations, as undertraditional full funding, Congress makes a one-time decision. Under Advance Appropriations, asunder traditional fullfunding, Congress making a one time decision. is well understood and low risk. The Navy believes the cost and schedule risk in the DDG-1000 program is low enough to permit the twin lead ship acquisition strategy. The conferees are willing to make this one-time exception to the full funding principle because of the unique situation with the shipbuilding industrial base. The unusual procurement of twin lead ships raises the risk that future design changes or production problems will impact two ships under construction simultaneously. This could raise costs significantly compared to other lead ship programs. In Navy ship-procurement programs, the detailed design and nonrecurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs for each class of ship are included in the procurement cost of the lead ship in the class. The practice is not followed by other DOD procurement programs, such as programs for procuring aircraft, ground vehicles, and missiles. One response to the challenge of paying for lead ships whose procurement cost includes significant DD/Nre costs, would be to fund the procurement of lead ships through the Navy's research and development. Congress rejected Navy's proposal to procure the lead DDG-1000 through the Navy's research and development account. Funding the procurement of lead ships through the R&D account would permit them to be incrementally funded without violating the full funding policy. An alternative approach to the challenge of paying for lead ships whose procurement cost includes significant DD/NRE costs would be to treat DD-NRE work as the final stage of the R & D process. Under this option, the DD/ NRE costs for a ship class could be incremental funded without violate the full policy. ship class could be incrementally funded without violating the full funding policy, while the actual hands-on construction cost of the lead ship would be fully funded. Supporters of this option could argue that DD/NRE work is best viewed as the final stage of research and development and should be funded in the R&D account. This option can be viewed as an intermediate approach that is between the current practice of fully funding both DD and NRE costs, and incrementally funding both these costs as would occur under the Navy's proposal. Some observers have proposed procuring Navy ships using funding approaches. These alternative funding approaches include incremental funding, which has been used to fund a few Navy ships in recent years. The issue for Congress is whether to make greater use of incremental funding or begin using advance appropriations for procuring navy ships. Each of these is discussed below. The Navy has proposed in previous years to procure a small number of lead ships of each new class of Navy ships through the Navy's research and development account rather than the ship-procurement account. given total amount of ship-procurement funding. Congress's decision on this issue could be significant because the full funding policy relates to Congress's power of the purse. The issue can be alternately expressed as how to procure Navy ships economically while maintaining key congressional prerogatives. If Congress decides to make more use of incremental funding or to start using advance appropriations, it could temporarily reduce the number of new ships that could be procured. It could also affect future Administrations and Congresses to make rational capital budgeting decisions. The committee notes that Congress adopted the full funding policy in the 1950s in part because of a concern that incremental funding was detrimental to funding stability. During the hearings on shipbuilding, all witnesses emphasized the importance of program and funding stability as the top priority for reducing the cost of shipbuilding and sustaining the shipbuilding industrial base. Future congresses may be able to smooth out the dramatic spikes in shipbuilding funding required as a result of aircraft carrier construction every four or five years, the committee says. procuring almost all ships with full funding, procuring a small number (e.g., aircraft carriers and large-deck amphibious assault ships) with de facto or explicit incremental funding, and approving, for some ships being fully funded, advance procurement (AP) funding that the Navy did not request. Opponents of this option could argue that any use of incremental funding weakens the full funding policy, increasing the likelihood of proposals to use it for long-lead components. This option would involve reducing or eliminating the use of Incremental funding in Navy ship procurement. would have to be weighed against the risk of an increase in cost of an incrementally funded ship due to a decision in a future year to reduce or delay a funding increment. This option could involve starting to use advance appropriations for ships such as aircraft carriers or large-deck amphibious assault ships. Supporters could argue that this option, like the previous one, would take maximum advantage of opportunities for avoiding or mitigating budget spikes associated with the procurement of these ships. They could also argue that compared to the previous option, this option would create less risk. funding policy, would reduce the chance that supporters of other kinds of DOD procurement items, such as aircraft, would seek to have them funded using incremental funding. Budget spikes associated with procuring aircraft carriers or large-deck amphibious assault ships, they could argue, can be anticipated years in advance, permitting their effects to be carefully managed. They could argue that stability in Navy ship-procurement plans can be increased by encouraging the Navy and DOD to better define their thinking regarding Navy requirements. committing a portion of one or more future-year budgets to the financing of an item procured in a prior year and requiring a positive action from future Congresses to undo those commitments. Opponents could also argue that compared to full funding, advance appropriations under certain circumstances could increase ship-construction costs by causing work on a ship to stop and then be restarted. In 2001, some Navy officials advocated the use of advance appropriations for Navy ship procurement, noting at that time that this funding approach was cheaper than full funding. near-term production economies of sale, while still permitting the Navy to procure ships in future years at economic rates of production. This second scenario is dependent on realizing the expected increase in ship-procurement funding in the later years. If this increase is not realized, then the Navy could end up using a combination of the two scenarios to procure new ships in the near term and later years in the future. The Navy could also end up buying new ships at a lower average cost for the entire period in question and thereby reduce the collective cost of all the ships. multi-year procurement, economic order quantity, and other approaches help to stabilize the production path, and reduce the per unit cost of ships and increase our shipbuilding rate. The committee does not agree that creative financing methodologies that delay recognizing the true cost of shipbuilding or that provide ever-increasing amounts of funding to cover the explosion in ship costs are responsible actions. Incremental funding, advanced procurement, multiyear procurement and various creative shipyard work allocation arrangements have failed to control the cost growth of vessel classes such as the Virginia class submarine. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could help reduce instability in Navy ship-procurement plans. This could avoid or mitigate budget spikes that can occur when traditional full funding is used to procure ships. The ships that best fit this description are aircraft carriers and "large-deck" amphibious assault ships. Accommodating budget spikes for such ships can require the Navy to move to other fiscal years or move other ships that the Navy would have preferred to procure in the spike year. Could using incremental funding increase the number of Navy ships that can be built for a given total amount of ship- procurement funding? of that year's budget is already devoted to paying for ships started in prior years with incremental funding or advance appropriations. preserving that portion of the budget so as to avoid disrupting the production schedule of those prior-year ships would mean that the budget reduction would fall more heavily on the remaining part of the ship-procurement budget. This could increase the chance that the reduction would lead to a decision to defer to a future year the procurement of a ship planned for that year. Lastly, if Congress decides to. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations would defer much of the procurement cost of the ships in question to future years. In those future years, the remainder of the cost of these ships would still have to be paid. As a result, other things held equal, the number of new ships that could be procured in future years for a given amount of ship-procurement funding will be reduced. If this increase is not realized, then using incremental funding and advance appropriations could simply trade poor production economies of scale in the near term. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could marginally increase the number of ships that could be built for a given total amount of ship-procurement funding. By avoiding instances in which budget spikes caused ships to be moved from one year to another, using incremental funding can avoid perturbations in the production schedules for these ships. Under certain other circumstances, using  incremental funding could increase rather than reduce ship- Procurement costs. The reduction in ship- procurement costs might be sufficient, for example, to increase from 20 to 21 the total number to be paid for with a certain amount of funding.

ROUGE-1: 66.39, ROUGE-2: 61.96, ROUGE-L: 20.06
BERTScore: 56.56

==============================================
==================== [69/100] ====================
Summary:
Analytical Chemistry (AC) analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture. AC measures the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities a sample contains. At issue: How much AC should be done at LANL, what is needed to make the space and MAR sufficient to support that amount of AC, and how much, if any, AC should being done at other sites? This appendix explains the tasks included in the diagrams of PF-4 and, in so doing, explains whatPF-4 does. dose, and dose is the key factor in determining the amount of MAR permitted. Actual or possible steps include: Installing in production areas containers designed to remain intact in a building collapse. Removing tons of combustible material from PF-4. Anchoring gloveboxes more strongly to the floor to reduce the likelihood that an earthquake would knock them over, exposing plutonium to the air, in which case a fire could generate plutonium oxide particles and release them into the atmosphere. Unlike pit manufacturing, AC involves little MAR because it involves little plutonium. AC involves little MAR because it uses tiny samples, such as a few milligrams of plutonium dissolved in a small amount of acid. AC involves much more space per unit MAR than does pit fabrication because each laboratory instrument is housed in a glovebox or hood that might occupy a dozen square feet of space. Many analyses must be performed for each individual pit, and the number of instruments and their housing increase in tandem with manufacturing capacity. Producing 80 ppy would require increasing AC capacity. This requirement comes from Pit fabrication casts "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium, machines them to remove excess material, and welds two together to form a pit. The current pit fabrication line was intended as a pilot plant; its capacity is about 10 ppy. It is being upgraded to reach a capacity of 30 ppy; further upgrades would be needed to reach 80. Pit manufacturing also involves such supporting tasks as purifying plutonium for use in pits; certification to ensure that finished pits meet required standards. certification to ensure that finished pits meet required standards; material control and accountability; waste management; and analytical chemistry. Analytical chemistry (AC) is essential for pit manufacturing, but this report considers it separately because it has large space requirements. AC analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its fabrication. AC determines the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities it contains. Pit fabrication requires extensive AC for every pit. AC supports other pit manufacturing tasks and non-pit tasks as well. All U.S. plutonium is "old," such as from retired pits. As plutonium decays, it produces other elements, such as uranium and americium. These must be removed by chemical processes to purify. Increasing the amount of plutonium would require adding electrorefining furnaces, increasing space requirements.within specifications would be recycled. Such AC is not time-sensitive. On the other hand, AC to analyze process problems requires fast turnaround to minimize the time the process is shut down. pit manufacturing tasks, and non-pit tasks as well, though historically pit fabrication has been the greatest user of AC. The building at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) that currently performs AC to support pit manufacture and many other plutonium tasks is in poor shape and not seismically robust. DOE wants to halt work there by 2019, so one or more other facilities will be needed. Laboratory floor space , or "space," is where AC, pit fabrication, and other work is done. Make more efficient use of PF-4's basement, which houses the nuclear materials vault and most utilities. It may be possible to move out some operations from the basement, such as drum storage, freeing space to house such laboratory-floor operations as nondestructive analysis. Move some equipment out ofPF-4, including a gas gun, which propels a metal slug into a plutonium target to study how plutonium behaves under impact. The gas gun uses space used for lower-priority programs, as discussed. study how plutonium behaves under impact. The gas gun uses 1,200 sf of laboratory space in PF-4, and some basement space. Moving it to RLUOB (if that building's MAR were to be increased substantially) or to another site would release space inPF-4. Use two or three shifts a day rather than one. So doing would make more intensive use of space by allowing fewer pieces of equipment to produce a given amount of product, thereby reducing space requirements. PF-4 uses 10,400 sf for plutonium recycle and purification. How much plutonium could that area purify per year? How many ppy would that capacity support? How much more space would be needed to provide plutonium for 80 ppy? Alternatively, could these processes be moved to another site, such as Savannah River Site? Pit fabrication generates some plutonium scraps. These must be removed by chemical processes to purify plutonium for use in new pits. (Chemical processes do not remove specific isotopes of plutonium.) from lathes, and pits scrapped because they did not meet specifications. Providing for recycle of this plutonium requires space, and producing 80 ppy would require more space than 30. Major construction could make more space available, but increasing efficient use of existing space could increase the space margin. Designing work flow to minimize space utilization. When DOE decided to move pit manufacture to PF-4, the process line was intended as a pilot plant to develop, quickly, techniques for resuming production. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PRP) uses aqueous (plutonium dissolved in acid) processes and molten processes to recover pure plutonium from scrap or from retired pits by chemically removing impurities. This option would move about 198 kg of MAR out of PF-4. Module 1 would house PRP processes, and Module 2 would house molten plutonium from Pit Fabrication and from PRP. (This would eliminate PRP withinPF-4.) On a scale using total PF- 4 MAR (2,600 kg PE) as 100%, Module 1 is the preferred option. "Material At Risk" (MAR) is "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress" It is material that could be released by a disaster, such as an earthquake that collapses a building followed by a fire. Each building that works with plutonium has a building-specific MAR allowance. MAR is expressed in units of plutonium equivalent (Pu-239) which is the fissile isotope in pits, but pits contain other forms of plutonium. Pu-239 is the fissile isotope in pits. pits contain other plutonium isotopes in addition to Pu-239. That mixture is called weapons-grade plutonium (WGPu) Since some of the other isotopes are more radioactive than Pu- 239, WGPu is about 1.5 times as radioactive as Pu-238. It is relevant to pit manufacturing options because 40% of the MAR allowance in PF-4 is allocated to Pu.238. Moving some or all Pu- 238 work out ofPF-4, the main pit manufacturing tool. Before a pit type can be accepted into the stockpile, it must be certified as acceptable for war reserve use. Validation involves validating weapons codes, among other things. PF-4 supports some of these experiments, such as by preparing samples for analytical chemistry and materials characterization. It also prepares test items for experiments at the Nevada National Security Site that do not produce a nuclear yield. It typically uses samples on the order of milligrams, which is about one-tenth of a kilogram. MC measures bulk properties of plutonium, such as tensile strength, magnetic susceptibility, grain structure, and surface characteristics. Such properties must be determined in order to certify pit design, maintain process control, address process anomalies, and examine the condition of newly-manufactured pits and pits from the stockpile. MC typically uses samples on the order of a fraction of a gram to tens of grams. MR&R examines containers of plutonium in PF-4 that are to be sent to WIPP for permanent disposition. If the containers have deteriorated, MR & R repackages the plutonium in new containers. MR&R repackages the plutonium in new containers. ARIES converts excess pits to plutonium oxide (a powder) and places it in special containers for long-term storage. Pit Fabrication involves casting "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium, machining them to remove excess material, welding two together to form a pit, and inspecting the finished pit with x-ray imaging, physical measurements, etc., to ensure it meets specifications. Pit Surveillance: Ever since the beginning of the nuclear weapons program, NNSA and its predecessor organizations have monitored plutonium production. Pits are monitored at Pantex Plant (TX) and PF-4. Pu-238 is the heat source for radioisotope power systems (RPS) for space probes. Pits can be disassembled only atPF-4, Pantex can perform some of the tasks, but can't perform AC and MC on samples of the plutonium. Plutonium-238 (Pu-238) is used to power space probes, and has been used in the space shuttle program. Pu-238 undergoes radioactive decay much more rapidly than Pu-239, producing uranium and other impurities. As a result, old Pu-238 must be purified before it can be used. PF-4 receives Pu- 238, removes the impurities through chemical processes, and makes plutonium oxide, which it presses into capsules. It mates some capsules with other equipment to make RPSs for military applications, and sends other capsules to Idaho National Laboratory, which does the same to. capsules to Idaho National Laboratory, which does the same to make RPSs for space probes. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PR&P): This area recovers plutonium from scrap plutonium (such as from lathe turnings, pits scrapped for not meeting standards, or retired pits) Plutonium is then precipitated out of solution as plutonium oxalate, and is then roasted to produce plutonium oxide. This area also recovers and purifies plutonium using high-temperature chemical processes. high-temperature chemical processes. Readiness in Technical Base and Facilities (RTBF): RTBF is NNSA's program for operating the nuclear weapons complex and maintaining its infrastructure. Within PF-4, RTBF space is used for functions that support multiple programs, such as shipping and receiving, waste management, and material control and accountability. For more information on RTBF, go to: http://www.nasa.gov/nuclear/nuclear-weapons-complex/RTBF. Plutonium Facility 4 (PF-4) is the last U.S. plutonium processing building to come online. It took until 2007 for LANL to make its first "war reserve" pits. As of June 2014, NNSA had the capacity to manufacture about 10 non-war reserve pits per year in PF-4. The second track involved a facility with thecapacity to make pits on an industrial scale. That facility appears unlikely to proceed. that facility would have conducted operations in support of pit production "for at least five years" (described later), which would support an exit from a 1950s-era plutonium building at LANL by 2019, as a separate line item in the FY2016 budget. Use of retired pits in life extension programs would reduce the number of new pits that would have to be manufactured. The House Appropriations Committee recommended a substantial increase in funding "for a robust experimental effort in fiscal year 2015 to better understand the properties of plutonium" The NNSA can support certification requirements for pit reuse as an option for future [nuclear weapon life extension Programs] In 2013, a Department of Defense (DOD) official stated that "there is no daylight" between the Department of Energy and the Defense. In 2014, an NNSA document changed the date for achieving a 30-ppy capacity to "by 2026" Section 3114 of the FY2015 defense authorization bill, H.R. 4435, would require NNSA to produce 30 WR pits per year during 2023, at least 50 during 2026, and to demonstrate for at least 90 days during 2027 the ability to manufacture WR pits. Congress remains deeply involved in efforts to increase pit production capacity. Section 3114 of H.R. 4435 sets a schedule for production of WR pits. In its report on S. 2410, the Senate Armed Services Committee directed NNSA to include construction of modules (described later) The modules would support an exit from a 1950s-era plutonium strategy. The modules are described later in this article. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. at PF-4 halted in June 2013, the actual manufacturing rate in June 2014 was zero for pits of any type. Work is resuming at the end of June 2014. NNSA anticipates manufacturing a few pits a year in the near future to prepare to manufacture WR pits. The schedule for ramping up pit production is uncertain. A Department of Defense spokesman said the agency has no immediate plans to resume pit production. The Department of Energy said the decision to halt pit production was made to protect the safety of the fleet. During the Cold War, the Rocky Flats Plant (CO) manufactured as many as 2,000 pits per year (ppy) On June 6, 1989, armed agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Environmental Protection Agency raided the plant to investigate suspected environmental crimes. DOE first suspended pit production at Rocky Flat later that year, subsequently halted it permanently, and eventually dismantled the plant and remediated the site. With Rockyflats closed, Congress and the Administration searched for many years for a way to make pits. AC. Finding enough space and MAR for AC should be simpler than for pit manufacture because more options are readily available. At the height of the Cold War, the Department of Energy's Rocky Flats Plant produced between 1,000 and 2,000 pits per year. The plutonium for each pit required AC. Because currently-anticipated rates do not approach that level, the nuclear weapons complex has a considerable amount of excess space. This capacity resides at several buildings in the complex, including Building 332 at Lawrence. Some favor a capacity of greater than 80 ppy, while others argue that a lower number would suffice. That debate is beyond the scope of this report, which focuses on how to achieve the high end of DOD's range. Congress remains deeply involved in efforts to increase pit capacity. The debate over that capacity would take on added salience to the extent that it moves within the realm of feasibility, the report says. The U.S. military has been unable to reach that goal for more than a quarter-century. number of new pits that would have to be manufactured. The committee also recommended $35.7 million for moving certain activities out of the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research building (described below) While DOD has a requirement for up to 80 ppy, some key questions about how to manufacture at that rate remain not only unanswered but also unasked. These questions involve details about the facilities at LANL and perhaps elsewhere that would fabricate pits and perform supporting tasks. Without answers, Congress cannot know whether existing buildings, without modifications, could manufacture 80 p py. with the capacity to make pits on an industrial scale, on the order of 100 or more ppy. Several facilities were proposed, as described in "A Sisyphean History: Failed Efforts to Construct a Building to Restore Pit Production" None came to fruition. For example, in the FY2006 budget cycle, Congress eliminated funding for the Modern Pit Facility, which was to have a capacity between 125 and 450 ppy, and in its FY2013 budget request the Administration "deferred" a facility. required vs. available would show whether there is enough space and MAR at the moment. Over time, however, various factors will affect availability and requirements. While few of these factors can be predicted, this report discusses ways to offset any adverse effects from them. In addition, decisions will be needed regarding analytical chemistry, which supports pit manufacturing. For background, see CRS Report R43406, U.S. Nuclear Weapon "Pit" Production Options for Congress. For more information, see the CRS report R43428. U.S. policy is not to build new-design nuclear weapons for new missions. Some argue that the capacity to manufacture new pits may be needed to extend the service life of certain existing weapons. A pit is a hollow plutonium shell that is imploded with conventional explosives to create a nuclear explosion that triggers the rest of the weapon. It is a key component of a nuclear weapon and can be used to test new weapons or to replace pits in deployed weapons that develop pit problems unexpectedly, and to hedge against possible pit problems. drive down costs. On the other hand, it is possible that some lessons learned would lead to increased costs. What is the first module estimated to cost? The second? How sensitive is the cost of pit manufacturing to capacity, and what tradeoffs might a sensitivity analysis reveal? As a hypothetical example, if it cost an additional several billion dollars to move from 70 to 80 ppy, would it be worth spending the added money? Would it be less costly to move Pu-238 or hemishell casting to a module? be less costly to move Pu-238 to INL, SRS, or a newly-built module? In deciding how to proceed on pit manufacture, Congress would likely want to know if there is enough space margin and MAR margin for 80 ppy. Available space and MAR are known, as of certain dates, as this report shows. Congress may choose to direct NNSA to provide these two numbers. Once these numbers become available, Congress will decide whether or not to proceed with pit manufacture. whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if not, how much AC should. be done there and how much at another site. It would be simple to compare data on the required MAR and space, once they become available, against the amount of MAR. But without data on such matters as building condition and cost for any required upgrades and equipment, it is not possible to determine the relative merits of the options. Figure 8 shows a notional decision sequence for downselecting pit manufacturing options. Congress would need data on MAR margin, space margin, and cost for various pit manufacturing options in order to best determine which options are feasible and affordable. Not shown in the figure is that MAR and space margins may change over time, as Figure 1 shows. Such changes may make currently-feasible options infeasible, and vice versa. The following questions highlight how these data could support decisionmaking. Questions such as the following can only be answered with data on how muchMAR and space suffice for pit manufacturing. space, once they become available, against the amount of MAR and space released by each option to see which options provide a positive margin. Non-feasible options would not merit further consideration. The next step would be to estimate the cost of the feasible options and decide which are affordable. These data are needed to eliminate unaffordable options, which is important before planning begins because high cost has caused the demise of several nuclear weapons complex projects. Finally, having downselected to options that are feasible and affordable, one would compare those options against other possible criteria to make a decision. manufacturing totaling 26,700 sf. (Space for some other tasks, such as Plutonium Recycle and Purification, would also support pit manufacturing) LANL maintains that a key advantage of modules is that they would permit expansion of capacity on an as-needed basis. Others respond that modules could be costly and, if existing buildings can be used, may not be needed. Another option (not shown) would be to build one module and use it as part of a larger facility. the two buildings—having 9 kg of plutonium in CMR, as at present, poses a much greater risk than having 400 grams in RLUOB. If NNSA is able to implement its path forward, LANL could perform all the AC needed to support manufacture of up to 80 ppy. In that case, the key question for AC would be how much, if any, AC one or more sites other than LANL should perform. The foregoing discussion shows how much additional space and MAR various construction options would make available for pit manufacturing. Concentrating as much plutonium work as possible at LANL would strengthen its position as the nation's plutonium center. Data on the MAR and space requirements, and the cost of the LANL, LLNL, and SRS options, would be needed to provide a basis for decision. The option of having LLNL or SRS conduct a substantial fraction of the AC needed to support manufacture of plutonium would be a good one. SRS and LLNL could both do this work, but their facilities presumably have different capacities and would require different upgrades. ppy would require increasing AC capacity. Most pit-related AC is performed in the CMR building. Increasing manufacturing capacity would require more equipment, more space, and more MAR. Finding enough space and MAR for AC should be a priority for the NNSA in the near future, the report says. The NNSA plans to achieve a 30-ppy capacity by FY2026, it says. But producing 80 ppy would require additional AC, as AC must be performed on multiple samples for each pit. substantial fraction of the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy must be evaluated in light of a revised path forward for AC that NNSA developed in June 2014. Based on an initial analysis by Los Alamos National Laboratory, NNSA determined that the combination of PF-4 and RLUOB with a higher plutonium limit, if properly equipped, could likely conduct all the AC. The planning for this approach will be conducted by personnel from NNSA headquarters (including the Office of NNSA). whether existing buildings, without modifications, could manufacture 80 ppy; or if modest upgrades would suffice. This report provides a framework for analyzing requirements for manufacturing, details key questions, and raises the possibility that Congress may choose to direct NNSA to generate the data needed to answer them. Regardless of what capacity is needed, and when, Congress and the Administration will need to decide among options. It focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources, and how they can be used together. focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources (laboratory floor space and Material At Risk (MAR), discussed next) available for pit manufacturing. It shows that it is not known whether available amounts suffice. While NNSA has extrapolated space and MAR requirements for manufacturing 80 ppy from much lower numbers, extrapolations set an upper bound and would overstate requirements. As such, they are of questionable value for decisionmaking. Comparing space andMAR required vs. available would show whether there is enough space. with the Committee's previous direction to the NNSA to carry out all CMR replacement activities in accordance with DOE Order 413.3B. While the capacity and amount of process equipment needed may be evolving due to changing programmatic requirements for plutonium, the scope of the additional work being requested is consistent with the original mission need to provide analytic chemistry and material characterization space in a different facility than the legacy CMR building. Similarly, PF-4 reconfiguration activities are also appropriate to be conducted as part of the original CMR Replacement project so long as they are limited to re-equipping lab space. PF-4 is located in Technical Area (TA) 55. The Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) building currently provides AC support for limited pit manufacture and other plutonium tasks in PF-4. Most of it was completed in 1952. It is "genuinely decrepit" and "structurally unsound," in the words of two studies, and is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than more recent buildings. NNSA maintains its commitment to cease programmatic operations in the CMR facility at LANL in approximately 2019. project. REI-2 and PEI would also permit NNSA to exit the CMR building, a long-time goal of NNSA. CMR was built to the seismic standards of the late 1940s, so it is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than is RLUOB. studies have found it to be "decrepit" and "structurally unsound," as noted under " Terminology ." NNSA points out that—comparing the quantity of plutonium, the age, and the structural integrity of the two buildings—having 9 kg of plutonium in CMR, as The Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Replacement (CMRR) line item construction project remains open. CMRR-NF was "deferr[ed] … for at least five years" in the FY2013 budget request on cost grounds. NNSA plans to include funds for two subprojects in the C MRR project beginning with the FY2016 request. One is removing excess special nuclear materials from the storage vault in PF-4, work that has been underway for some years. It would cost substantially less than CMRr-NF because it would avoid building a large plutonium facility. AC and MC subprojects as part of the Program Readiness component of Readiness in Technical Base and Facilities (RTBF), which in turn is a component of NNSA's Weapons Activities account. While the House Appropriations Committee recommended including these funds as RTBF Construction, using the CMRR line item to fund these projects is consistent with the committee's recommendation: 04-D-125, Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) Replacement Project, LANL. — The Committee recommends $35,700,000, instead of providing funds for these activities as in the budget request. project beginning with the FY2016 request. One is adding new AC equipment to RLUOB so it can perform AC to support 80 ppy. The other involves decontaminating some rooms, removing some old gloveboxes, and installing new materials characterization (MC) equipment. A separate activity, not part of the CMRR project, is removing excess special nuclear materials from the C MRR facility. This would be "Plutonium Equipment Installation," or PEI. PEI would support MC, and relates to plutonium physics. to onsite or offsite personnel in the event of a worst-case accident would be very low. A Hazard Category (HC) 3 facility can hold between 38.6 grams and 2,610 grams of Pu-239E, or about 26 to 1,760 grams of WGPu. NNSA considered several options for raising the MAR limit in RLUOB. One option was to retrofit the building by adding various safety upgrades to make it HC-3 at the highest level. is so small. NNSA calculated that RLUOB, with 400 grams WGPu, could likely be operated as HC-3 without significant facility modifications. Because of modern building features, the dose from the increased material in a worst-case accident would still be below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. Operating RLU OB as an HC-2 facility would not require congressional approval. Instead, congressional oversight would come through the normal reviews associated with the normal review process for such facilities. If the MAR limit for RLUOB is increased to 400 grams of WGPu for AC, how much more MAR and space, if any, would be needed for AC at LLNL or SRS? If the 26-gram limit is retained for R LUOB, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC atLLNL or at S RS? What would it cost to enable RLU OB to hold 400 grams W GPu? Would it be cheaper to perform AC for 80 ppy at SRS or LLNL? Radiological Laboratory-Utility-Office Building (RLUOB, pronounced "rulob") was completed in FY2010. NNSA plans that RLUOB would house AC equipment needed to support pit manufacture, and possibly enough to support manufacture of 80 ppy. An approach to maintaining confidence in nuclear weapons may help provide lessons for decisionmaking on pits. In 1992, the United States began a moratorium on nuclear testing that continues to the present. This section describes that approach, then modifies it to make it applicable to pits. conducted by personnel from NNSA headquarters. A Radiological Facility like RLUOB is permitted to hold up to 38.6 grams of plutonium-239 equivalent (Pu-239E), or 26 grams of WGPu. Radiological Facilities do not require stringent safety or security measures because the dose to onsite or offsite personnel in the event of a disaster would be much lower than for a conventional facility. The study was conducted over the summer and fall of 2014 to understand the costs and benefits of this approach. cause, and the requirements for a building depend on dose. There are myriad other regulations, all of which come together in a document called a Documented Safety Analysis, or DSA. While each building in the Hazard Category system requires a DSA, a Radiological Facility, such as RLUOB, does not because the amount of radioactive material is so small. Therefore, to increase the amounts of WGPu, a building must have a higher level of radiation than it would otherwise have. AC work required. Another option was to create a "Hazard Category 4," splitting off the lower part of the HC-3 range into a separate category. That option, however, would have necessitated a revision of 10 C.F.R. 830, Nuclear Safety Management. The various limits on plutonium are based on the dose to onsite workers and offsite personnel that a worst-case accident could be expected to cause, and the requirements for a building depend on dose. Congress has been deeply involved for decades in setting policy, providing funding, and supporting or rejecting programs for the nuclear weapons enterprise. For example, it established the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), a semi-autonomous component of the Department of Energy. It also rejected a major facility to manufacture a key nuclear weapon component. It initiated and later rejected the Reliable Replacement Warhead; and directed NNSA, the Government Accountability Office, and others to conduct studies on nuclear weapon issues. One  LANL, another lab or plant in the nuclear weapons complex, NNSA, DOD, or an independent group like the National Academy of Sciences or the JASON defense advisory group could perform the study. Since LANL is intimately familiar with PF-4, it could be argued that it should do the report. On the other hand, LANL could be perceived as having a conflict of interest. An independent group would not have this potential conflict of interests but wouldn't have LANL's knowledge ofPF-4.  LANL and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory are both nuclear weapon design laboratories. LANL might conduct the initial study and an independent group could review it. Since the two labs have often competed for projects and have a reputation as "friendly adversaries," involving LLNL would provide an added measure of confidence in the study. Before the study could begin, the Nuclear Weapons Council would have to approve the study before it could go ahead. The study would be peer-reviewed by LLNL and prepared by LANL. AC measurements and processes from time to time. LANL and LLNL have for decades, since before the end of nuclear testing, held that peer review is essential in developing or maintaining weapons. A second site could accommodate a surge in AC needs or provide a backup in case AC operations at LANL were suspended or disrupted. The second site would provide another source of technicians trained for plutonium AC. Several factors could contribute to the decision, including the availability of a second site and the cost of such a site. another source of technicians trained for plutonium AC. It might cost more to perform AC at two sites rather than one, though it is impossible to know without the data. A second site would necessitate shipping many plutonium samples per year from LANL to another site, which would increase the risk of an accident and could cause public concern. It may be beneficial to have all plutonium AC technicians at one site so they would have the same training and operate according to the same formal and informal procedures.. Before the study could begin, the Nuclear Weapons Council would need to define key parameters: What capacity is being sought? Is it 80 ppy, or 50 with a surge capacity to 80, or 80 with a Surge capacity to 125, or something else? What operating tempo is planned? Would manufacturing use 1 shift per day/5 days a week, 2 shifts per day, or operate 24/7? The answer is related to capacity. If the capacity sought is 80 pPy using 3 shifts each day, a higher surge capacity would be difficult at best. would be difficult at best. The answer is also related to cost and equipment. Using two shifts per day, it might be possible to reach 80 ppy with equipment that would support 50 ppy on a single shift. A more costly option would be to increase the amount of equipment (and thus floor space used) to enable production of 80 with asingle shift. Would the capacity be held in standby mode most of the time, available for use as needed; operated for months or years at 80 p py for certain pit campaigns and held in low-rate production mode for. For example, LANL is validating an AC system that may require a sample size of 1.5 mg of WGPu instead of 225 mg. It may be difficult to provide enough MAR and floor space at LANL for the AC for 80 ppy. LANL and a second site could cross-check the accuracy of each other's AC measurements and processes from time to time.. The case for having a second. site perform some of the AC needed for 80. ppy while maintaining the full suite of AC. needed for80 ppy is: LANL would gain little if any technical competence by conducting AC for. 40 ppy vs., say, 40.ppy. this latter number be much reduced if the samples were all analyzed at LANL? What turnaround time would be required for samples moved onsite or shipped offsite? The time required to receive AC results would be needed in order to estimate the number of gloveboxes and temporary storage locations. The analysis would need to take into account that most AC is done on a confirmatory basis, i.e., manufacturing proceeds on the assumption that AC results will confirm that samples are within specifications. Such AC is not time-sensitive. Determining how much MAR and space would be needed to manufacture 80 ppy would require an industrial process analysis. An extrapolation provides an upper bound: LANL is planning to facility layout, and process flows must be considered. Adding further complexity, determining the space needed for 80 p py requires analyzing the entire manufacturing process, including answers to such questions as: How much additional space will be needed in PF-4 for supporting infrastructure, such as packaging, shipping, receiving, waste management, and temporary storage? An extrapolation provides an upper bound: LANL is planning to increase PF-4's capacity to 30 ppy. However, such a study is likely to find that less space and equipment would suffice because of efficiencies. In a process step, for example, a piece of equipment that could support manufacture of 300 ppy would suffice for any number less than 300, whether 10, 30, or 80. A study would need to take into account that there are many ways to make more ppy than 300.  module might free up enough MAR but not enough space for 80 ppy, or that moving Pu-238 programs to another site would suffice. (Other factors may enter into feasibility as well, such as the condition of a building.) But without data for space and MAR needed to manufacture 80 p py, one cannot know which options are infeasible, which provide excess capacity and thus entail excess cost, and which are "just right" Regarding AC, the discussion shows that there are multiple options to provide AC capacity, and highlights the issue of whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if so, where. for 80 ppy, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC at LLNL or at SRS? LANL is conducting projects to bolster the seismic robustness of PF-4. If 2,600 kg PE is not enough MAR, could additional projects raise the MAR allowance enough to accommodate manufacture of 80 p py? LANl maintains that each successive module should cost less than the one before it. On the other hand, it is possible to increase the MAR from 1,800 to 2, 600 kg PE (or more or less) LANL could manufacture 70 ppy using existing buildings and an operating cost of $500 million per year, but it would cost $2 billion for new construction. It appears that it would take over a decade to reach 80 ppy, and the path to that capacity is obscure. If the path becomes clearer, it would become more important to determine if 80 is the right number for LANL to manufacture. A sensitivity analysis would provide the data, but the answer would be a matter of judgment. Quantification of Margins and Uncertainties was developed by LANL and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) The idea underlying QMU was that several steps in a nuclear weapon must all work for the weapon. The idea was that transmission of a signal to detonate the weapon, explosion of the high explosive surrounding the pit, transmission of the energy from the explosion to the secondary stage, and detonation of the second stage were all key to the success of the nuclear weapon. LNL and LANL developed a stockpile stewardship program to maintain nuclear weapons without testing. minimum required quantity. At the same time, there are uncertainties in the predicted quantity. Did the calculation incorporate all relevant variables? Were there biases in experiments on which the calculations were based? Were the most relevant nuclear tests used as a data source? The uncertainty can be quantified through calculations (such as computer models). Further, the amount of uncertainty is bounded because each gate has an upper and a lower limit. If margin exceeds uncertainty for a particular gate, then there can be confidence that the weapon will "pass through" that gate satisfactorily. Each step, or "gate" in QMU terminology, can be quantified. For example, a certain amount of energy must be transmitted to the secondary for it to detonate. Another QMU concept is margin. margin is the amount by which the predicted quantity exceeds the minimum required quantity. At the same time, there are uncertainties in predicting the detonation rate of a QMU weapon, such as how much energy will be needed to trigger the detonator's detonator. The QMU system is based on the idea that each step in the process must work in a certain way for the weapon to function. The longer the timeframe, the more uncertainties can be expected to emerge. It would not be acceptable to let uncertainties that materialize into actual events reduce margin below zero. One way to maintain enough margin to support a specified pit manufacturing capacity is to develop multiple means to counterbalance uncertainties that would reduce margin. Some means could be implemented promptly; others could be developed, held in reserve, and implemented only as needed. Having these means available for future deployment would add confidence that sufficient margin could be maintained. that gate satisfactorily, and if margin exceeds uncertainty for all gates, there can be confidence that the weapon will work. The degree of confidence at each gate is expressed as margin divided by uncertainty; the higher the number, the greater the confidence. QMU provides three key concepts relevant to decisionmaking on pit manufacturing. Margin is the amount by which (1) space available for pit manufacturing exceeds (2) space required to manufacture 80 ppy, and (3) MAR available for Pit Manufacturing exceeds (4) MAR required tomanufacture 80ppy. Congress may choose to consider three decisions. Decision 1: For pit manufacturing, is there currently enough margin for space and MAR in PF-4? If not, what can be done to provide it? Decision 2: What steps can be taken to maintain these margins over decades in the face of uncertainties? Decision 3: For AC, space andMAR available across the nuclear weapons complex exceed these two numbers. At issue: How much AC should be done in the event of a change in margin. Mar and space margins could be calculated precisely for the present moment, but they cannot be calculated in advance. Uncertainty : Margins can change over time. Many actions, events, decisions, and discoveries have the potential to create uncertainties that could increase or decrease availability of, or requirements for, space and MAR. Figure 1 shows hypothetical examples of uncertainties. Those in red could reduce margin, and those in green could increase it. The margins are not at issue because the nuclear weapons complex has ample space. MAR for AC for 80 ppy. Certain pit campaigns could be held in low-rate production mode for other periods; operated at a steady rate, less than 80 ppy; or operated at full capacity at all times. What programs could be moved out of PF-4 if necessary to create enough space or MAR, where would they go, what would the move cost, and who would pay? What is a reasonable tradeoff between cost and capacity? As a notional example, if LANL could manufacture 70 ppy using existing buildings and an could make more space available for pit manufacture. Pit fabrication occupies 12,000 sf, which is available for immediate repurposing. One option involves building one or more " modules," reinforced-concrete structures that would be buried near PF-4. Figure 3 shows how moving these two tasks into two modules could release space in PF-3. It shows 5,000sf being moved from Pu-238 programs to Module 1, with the released space used for pit manufacturing. Another 5,00sf is moved from pit fabrication space inPF-4 to Module 2, making that much more net space available for pit production. such as materials characterization, which occupies 5,600 square feet of laboratory space. Moving out these two activities would release about 6,800square feet of lab space. Some waste processing activities in PF-4 are also lower-MAR. While these activities have a lower MAR level, they would still require Hazard Category 3-level facilities. LANL expects these modules would be comparable in cost to Hazard Category-2 modules. The current 12,000 sf inPF-4 available for pit fabrication is enough to fabricate 30 pit modules. shifted from one purpose to another, and LANL is undertaking such projects. If manufacturing 80 ppy requires more space than is available in PF-4, NNSA would need to find alternatives. It would be difficult for Congress to decide how to obtain the space and MAR sf, to be made available for pit manufacturing, as well as the 4,700 sf of repurposable space. A fourth option to release space would be to build one or more modules for lower-MAR activities now housed inPF-4. to facilitate possible future deployment. Any option could be deployed promptly or held in reserve. For each, a decision would be needed on whether to proceed and, if so, when. Such decisions would depend on how much space was needed given then-current space availability and, later, on the extent of any reduction in space margin. This analysis also applies to " MAR Options for PF-4 ," below, and is not repeated there. Figure 2 shows the 2012 allocation of space inPF-4 by program. The gray area, 4,700 square feet, is available for immediate repurposing. for 80 ppy, is there a need to move any pit fabrication work (such as hemishell casting), Pu-238 work, or any other high-MAR work out of PF-4, whether to modules or to another site? If the MAR allowance in PF- 4 is not sufficient to accommodate manufacture of 80 p py, by how much would it have to be raised to do so? Could that be done, and if so what would the project entail? MAR is not evenly distributed across space. 91% of Pu- 238 MAR was at one point concentrated in 5,000 sf. Would one module release enough MAR and space in PF-4 for pit manufacture? Would moving the entire Pu-238 line, 9,600 sf, to another site have the same result? Or would the released space be needed to accommodate added equipment needed to manufacture 80 ppy? At present, RLUOB is permitted to have 26 grams of WGPu MAR for AC. If this limit remains in place, how much more MAR would be needed for AC at LLNL or SRS? Another option (not shown) would be to build one module for Pu-238 work or pit casting. This option would release some 5,000 sf in PF-4 in addition to the 4,700 sf available for repurposing. A third option would move Pu- 238 work from LANL. Two sites, Savannah River Site (SRS) (SC) and Idaho National Laboratory (INL) have stated that they have, or could modify, buildings to do this work. total PF-4 MAR (2,600 kg PE) as 100%, Module 1 would have 1.5% as much MAR asPF-4 and Module 2 would have 6.5%. Option 2 would move the Pu-238 MAR contained in 5,000 sf of PF- 4 to one module, releasing 52% of the space. Option 3 would move all Pu- 238 work to INL or SRS. This would free up all the MAR, vs. 91% for Option 2. As with space, it may be possible to increase MAR margin without major construction. February 27, 2013, was 1,800 kg PE. The gray space, 21.5%, represents the PF-4 MAR allowance unused on that date. As noted, this analysis assumes that seismic upgrades increase PF-3 MAR to 2,600 kg PE, and assumes that programs other than pit manufacturing use the MAR they used on that day. If the newly-available 800 kg PE of MAR and the unallocated MAR are both allocated to pit manufacturing and combined with the pit fabrication MAR, then 57.0% of the MAR inPF-4 would be available for pit work. for a smaller fraction of the higher MAR allowance. If adding 800 kg of MAR is not sufficient to support 80 ppy, at least three other options would release more MAR. While Pu-238 is only a small fraction of PF-4's radioactive material by weight, it is so radioactive that it is allocated 40% of the MAR allowance, though it did not use that much on February 27, 2013. Nor is MAR spread evenly within a program space, as discussed below. For more information, or to request a copy of the report, visit the National Nuclear Security Administration website. MAR required to manufacture 80 ppy. (The two margins are independent.) Thus, solving for margin requires four numbers. Various options could make more space available in PF-4 for pit manufacture. Note that while margin must always be greater than zero, the amount of available space and MAR needed to maintain margin could expand or contract. For example, MAR insufficient for 80 p Py might suffice for 40 ppy, or 40 pPy might not be enough for 80. For more information on the pit manufacturing process, visit the plutonium supply and waste management page. pit manufacturing, and points out that various non-construction options would also increase space and MAR margins. As of 2012, 4,700 sf was available for immediate repurposing in PF-4. Is that space, plus the 12,000 sf for pit fabrication, plus space for other pit-related tasks, enough to manufacture 80 ppy? If there is enough space andMAR margin inPF-4 for 80 p py, is there a need to move any Pu-238 programs? become more important to determine if 80 is the right number, or if it should be higher or lower. This report starts with a static approach to pit manufacturing, examining the space and MAR margins for 80 ppy. This static approach provides a baseline and metrics to indicate whether margin is ample, minimal, or insufficient. Next, the report takes a dynamic approach, noting that uncertainties could affect margin and how they might affect the industry. The report concludes by looking at the impact of future deviations from this baseline. and MAR required to manufacture 80 ppy. Available space and MAR figures would probably need to be updated. Once those numbers are provided, Congress would be in a better position to determine which options would free enough space andMAR in PF-4 to manufacture. LANL (and perhaps other sites) has computer models and other resources needed to perform these calculations. The floor layout to manufacture 30 ppy would fully consume the space, and most of the MAR allowance, currently available inPF-4. Further, updated seismic modeling results raised concerns that an 80-ppy plant would be dangerous.  detailed analysis would be needed to determine whether enough MAR allowance and space could be made available in PF-4 to manufacture 80 ppy. Given that margin can change over time, it might be useful to have an annual review of margin and potential factors that could affect it. Which organization could perform such a study? Candidates include NASA, the Air Force, and the Department of Energy, among others. To learn more about how to make more space or MAR available, see " Space Options forPF-4 " and " MAR Options for PF- 4 ." There are options to provide more MAR. Such options would almost surely be faster and less costly than major construction. Without data on space required for 80 ppy, it is not possible to know if they would provide enough space. On the other hand, a higher tempo for an extended period could increase operating cost, require more maintenance, reduce time available for maintenance, increase the likelihood of equipment failure, and have more impact on production if equipment fails. The total MAR allowance for PF-4 on February 27, 2013, was 1,800 kg PE. some or all Pu-238 work out of PF-4, the main plutonium building at LANL, would make MAR and space available for other purposes. MAR is measured in units of plutonium equivalent (PE), which is about 1.38 times as radioactive as Pu-239. This analysis assumes a MAR allowance of 2,600 kg PE and, as noted in the sidebar, uses space data from 2012. It would be about a half-century old when production is anticipated to reach 80 ppy.  LANL is undertaking several projects that would increase the MAR permitted in PF-4. Once some additional upgrades are completed, the MAR allowance may revert to 2,600 kg or perhaps some other number. Various projects to increase seismic robustness have been underway for years; see the section " Increasing MAR Margin Without Major Construction ." They proceed on an open-ended basis guided by results of continuing analyses. This article originally stated that the maximum amount of material that can be stored in a building is 1,800 kg. We are happy to clarify this. possible to increase MAR margin without major construction. One approach is to strengthen PF-4 seismically to reduce the risk of building collapse. Steps include wrapping supporting columns in carbon fiber bonded with epoxy to strengthen them, anchoring the wall more strongly to the ceiling, installing braces that tie columns to beams, building shear walls, and installing a drag strut on the roof ofPF-4. Other steps could reduce the chance that plutonium would escape even if the building collapsed. plutonium escaping in an accident causes dose.

ROUGE-1: 84.33, ROUGE-2: 76.40, ROUGE-L: 21.93
BERTScore: 53.78

==============================================
==================== [70/100] ====================
Summary:
Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable rockets. The ATV and HTV also carry less cargo than the shuttle. Because the Russian Soyuz and Progress are the vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed in order to rendezvous and dock assembly elements with the space station. The European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles (HTV) are scheduled to be available in 2006 and 2008, respectively. The HTV is scheduled to be available in 2008 and will fly within the proximity of the space station. The payload fairings would have to be modified from the current 5-meter to a 6-meter version. A carrier to go inside the new transfer vehicle to replicate the space shuttle attach points would need to be developed. The HTV will be used to rendezvous and dock to the space space station via the Russian Service Module. It will be caught by the space Station’s robotic arm before being berthed. with an alternative means of providing logistics support to the space station in case delays occur requiring extension of the planned 2010 date. A comprehensive and thoroughly documented analysis of launch requirements and launch alternatives can provide NASA with comparative cost information and afford the agency the opportunity to use its resources more effectively and efficiently. We recommend the NASA Administrator take the following three steps: Direct current efforts to explore other space launch options. Perform a detailed analysis of these alternatives to determine the best option for delivering the logistics cargo required for space station operations prior to and after space shuttle retirement. NASA is evaluating responses from commercial industry on different ways to provide logistics services to and from the space station. According to a recent revision of NASA’s internal guidance, the most important aspect of formulating a program technical approach is conducting a thorough analysis of alternatives. NASA did not have the full breadth of knowledge necessary to conclude the space shuttle was the best option to support space station operations, the agency says. The agency is examining configurations of the space Station that meet the needs of the new vision and the international partners with as few shuttle flights as necessary. NASA guidance defines an analysis of alternatives as a formal method that compares alternatives by estimating their ability to satisfy mission requirements and life cycle costs. The results of these two analysis are used together to produce a cost-effectiveness comparison that allows decision-makers to assess cost and effectiveness simultaneously. An analysis of. alternatives broadly examines multiple elements of program alternatives (including technical. performance, risk, life cycle cost, and programmatic aspects), and is. typically an important part of the formulation studies. NASA views a thorough analysis ofalternatives as. preclude the use of an alternative vehicle. NASA did not have sufficient knowledge to conclude that the shuttle was the best option for logistics missions prior to its retirement of the shuttle in 2010. Several of the space shuttle’s final flights are planned logistics support missions that might be conducted using alternative launch vehicles. By completing a comprehensive analysis, NASA could also identify the feasibility and risks associated with an alternative means of providing logistics support to the space station, the authors say. The authors conclude that NASA should consider alternatives to the existing space shuttle manifest currently under review. program delays and would cost more than returning the space shuttle to flight. NASA did not perform a comparative cost analysis that considered the schedule impacts or associated costs of planned space shuttle operations. According to previous studies and our discussions with commercial industry representatives, the time involved for developing an alternate capability would probably preclude assembly missions from consideration. The space shuttle is the best option for both assembly and logistics missions through the end of the decade, the report says. The report concludes that the shuttle should be used to support the U.S. space program. 2004 informal assessment. AAS contractors projected the cost to develop an alternate launch capability would be approximately $1 billion, take 3 to 5 years to develop, and require $2 to $3 billion per year for operations. Since a majority of the space station assembly missions are scheduled within the next 3 years, these types of missions could preclude the use of an alternative vehicle. However, NASA did. hold discussions with commercial industry representatives who concurred with this time frame to developing an alternate capability to support space station operation. of using alternate launch systems with the scheduled space shuttle program costs, to include the cost of returning the space shuttle to flight. In fact, NASA officials stated that they did not compare estimated costs for developing alternative launch vehicles against budget estimates for the 28 space shuttle flights currently planned to support the space station. NASA has also requested $1.8 billion for the return of the shuttle program, which will cost $22 billion between fiscal year 2005 and fiscal year 2010. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. According to NASA officials involved in the 2004 assessment, accommodating a transition to other launch vehicles would create significant challenges that drive risk, schedule, and costs. NASA officials stated the space station elements were designed and built to take advantage of the more benign launch environment in the space shuttle’s cargo bay. The elements were to be removed and repositioned by the space Shuttle's robotic arm, and then connected together during space walk activities. There would be a need to develop a new process to assemble the space station. Using another launch vehicle would require the redesign and retesting of space station elements already built. NASA officials stated the space shuttle launch environment cannot be duplicated on an expendable launch vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed to transfer the station to the ISS. The space station would be able to carry out a variety of activities, including medical and scientific research, as well as a range of human activities. NASA plans to return the shuttle to flight in July 2005. While the shuttle has been grounded, space station crew transfers and logistics resupply have depended on Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. Europe and Japan are also developing logistics cargo vehicles to support space station operations later this decade. These Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable expendable vehicles. The board issued its report in August 2003 with 29 recommendations for improvement—15 of which must be implemented before the space shuttle can return to flight. The Russian Soyuz and Progress are the only vehicles currently available and carry significantly less payload than the space shuttle. Operations are generally limited to transporting crew, food, potable water, as well as propellant resupply for reboosting the space station to higher orbits. Launches of space station assembly elements and large orbital replacement items for maintenance have effectively ceased. In a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no commercial launch vehicles could provide logistics services to the station. NASA conducted a detailed assessment of alternatives to the space shuttle for completing assembly and providing logistics support to the International Space Station. We obtained and analyzed pertinent NASA documents and briefing slides related to the ISS, space shuttles, and other launch alternatives, such as Expendable Launch Vehicles. We also analyzed NASA documents, including: European Space Agency Segment Specifications for the Automated Transfer Vehicle; Specification for the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. We looked at space station and space shuttle status, history, and cost briefings; Return to Flight Status Briefings; and, Alternate Access. request for proposal for commercial space station cargo services later this summer. NASA also said that its acquisition strategy will be consistent with space station requirements, international partner agreements, and available funding. We are encouraged that NASA has taken steps to pursue a deliberate alternative cargo transportation system assessment. However, NASA should not limit documentation of this effort to the acquisition strategy meeting, but should also document the decision paths leading up to that event and throughout the evaluation of the transportation systems proposed by contractors responding to NASA’s request for proposals. a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no commercial logistics service for the space station was possible. As a result of this study, NASA decided to solicit and fund a more detailed review of concepts. The Alternate Access to Station (AAS) study contracts were awarded in July 2002, with 1-year contracts given to four contractors. In summer 2003, these contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international domestic and international infrastructure. The AAS study was completed in July 2003. alternatives to determine if any planned space shuttle logistics missions could be performed by or complemented with commercial launch vehicles later this decade. NASA outlined a number of technical challenges to using an alternate vehicle for space station support, especially for assembly missions where the space shuttle’s crew and remote manipulator arm perform key functions. NASA officials stated they used the AAS study, which concentrated solely on logistics support missions, as the foundation for its 2004 informal assessment. In a summary of that study, NASA said: covering the entire range of missions for space station support cannot be verified, and the agency’s position on the space shuttle being the best option cannot be validated. NASA plans to seek more detailed information from the commercial launch industry for additional study or development work in June 2005. According to NASA officials, the responses from industry with regard to space station logistics support have been very promising. Officials indicated that it might be possible to have a developed and certified capability to provide commercial cargo launch service to the space station prior to space shuttle retirement late this decade. contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international expendable launch vehicles. In the fall of 2003, the contracts were extended, and the contractors were asked to address larger cargo delivery capabilities and “downmass” requirements. This study ended in January 2004 with the contractors briefing on their study results. NASA concluded that developing a domestic capability to meet most of the space station cargo service needs was possible within 3 to 5 years. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for the Space Station. year 2010. NASA has also requested $1.8 billion for crew and cargo services over the same time frame to purchase commercial services. In its fiscal year 2006 budget request, NASA indicated that such commercial services are expected to be available not later than 2009. In addition to lacking sufficient knowledge with regard to the use of alternatives for logistics missions, NASA did not document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. It is expected that these services are a key element in the future of the space station program. Cost briefings; Return to Flight Status Briefings; and, Alternate Access to Station briefings. Reviewed previous GAO reports on NASA, the Space Shuttle Program, International Space Station Program, and best practices in many areas and multiple agencies. Interviewed officials responsible for managing the programs within the Space Operations Mission Directorate at NASA headquarters, as well as program managers at Johnson Space Center, Texas. We also interviewed Air Force officials from the Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle Program at Kennedy Space Center,. We also received, reviewed, and analyzed follow-up written and oral comments from several individuals at these locations. we met with at headquarters and each of these centers included space station program officials, space shuttle program officials. We also visited the Boeing Launch Services, Inc., in Huntington Beach, California, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Boeing Commercial Space Systems in Research Park, Huntsville, Alabama; and Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company in Littleton, Colorado. We conducted our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with NASA's Space Shuttle Program Integration Office at Kennedy Space Center. We are proud to have been a part of the shuttle program. NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center, Florida, who are responsible for processing space station payloads. We interviewed contractors at Boeing Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Space Systems. We also reviewed NASA’s request for information related to commercial industry interest in providing that capability. And we interviewed NASA officials within the Space Operations Mission Directorate and at Johnson Space Center in Texas for this report. The report was published by The Astronaut's Magazine, a division of the American Astronaut Society. For more information, visit the Astronauts' Magazine website. NASA and its international partners are building the space station to serve as an orbiting research facility. The space shuttle is the primary vehicle supporting the assembly and resupply of the station. Figure 1 shows the Space Shuttle Endeavour docked to the International Space Station. Following the Columbia accident in February 2003, the NASA Administrator grounded the space shuttle fleet pending an investigation into the cause of the accident. The administrator appointed the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to determine the cause and to make recommendations for improving the safety of the space Shuttle. as launch human missions to the moon between 2015 and 2020. In essence, NASA’s implementation plan holds aeronautics, science, and other activities at near constant levels. Funding currently dedicated to the space station and space shuttle programs will transition to the new exploration strategy. The vision also changed the space stations’ on-board research focus to include life sciences research on how humans adapt to long durations in space, biomedical research, and materials-processing research. Under the new in space, biomedical research, and materials-processing research. Under the new vision, the research will be focused on determining the effects of long duration space travel on humans. The space station research necessary to support human explorers on other worlds would be complete by 2016. According to program officials, NASA’s 2004 informal assessment concluded that alternative launch vehicles would present operational risks, technical challenges, and long program delays and would cost more than returning the space station to Earth. The new vision calls for a return to Earth in the 2030s. shuttle retirement late this decade, rather than only after its retirement. However, we were told these services would not eliminate any of the scheduled space shuttle flights, but only augment the capabilities of the space shuttle. NASA plans to document its acquisition strategy through a NASA Headquarters Acquisition Strategy Meeting prior to release of a request for proposal for commercial space station cargo services later this year. In written comments on a draft of this report, NASA concurred with our recommendations and stated that the agency seeks to fully explore space launch options. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for Exploration that called for retiring the shuttle in 2010. The President called for a shift in NASA’s long-term focus, envisioning that NASA will retire the space shuttle after nearly 30 years of service as soon as assembly of the International Space Station is completed, planned for the end of the decade. NASA will develop a new crew exploration vehicle as well as launch human missions to the moon between 2015 and 2015. The shuttle will be retired in 2010, requiring NASA to find an alternative to support space station operations through 2016. document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. The agency did not record the processes it followed and therefore did not capture the basis of the decisions reached. NASA officials indicated that the informal assessment was based primarily on the expertise within the headquarters and they did not formally document the decision paths. While we recognize that the extensive experience of its senior managers is an important element in evaluating alternatives, the existence of any formal assessment of alternatives covering the entire range of missions for space station support is not known. distribution of this report until 15 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send copies to the NASA Administrator; the Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Please contact me at (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. current 5-meter to a 6-meter version to accommodate the larger diameter payloads to the space station during assembly missions. Current 5- meter version will be replaced by a 6m version for larger payloads. The new version will have a diameter of 6m to accommodate a larger diameter of payloads on board the ISS. It will be used to carry heavier payloads such as solar panels and other heavy equipment to the station for assembly missions in the 2030s and 2050s.

ROUGE-1: 83.94, ROUGE-2: 74.18, ROUGE-L: 28.61
BERTScore: 64.80

==============================================
==================== [71/100] ====================
Summary:
806,000 in fiscal year 2006, an increase of about 39 percent. VA acknowledges that regional office decision accuracy needs further improvement. VA also continues to face questions about its ability to ensure that veterans receive consistent decisions across regional offices. We have identified the need for VA to improve its decision-making process for rating-related compensation claims. VA reports that it has improved the accuracy of decisions on rating related compensation claims from 80 percent in 2002 to 88 percent in 2006. However, this figure remains well short of its strategic goal of 98 percent. across regional offices. VA’s Inspector General has studied one indicator of possible inconsistency, the wide variations in average payments per veteran from state to state. We have identified the need for VA to systematically address this issue to achieve acceptable levels of variation. In May 2005, the Inspector General reported that compensation payments are affected by many factors and that some disabilities are inherently more susceptible to variations in rating determinations. Further, we reported in May 2005 that the Board of Veterans’ Appeals had taken actions to strengthen its system for reviewing the quality of its decisions. evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records, medical examinations, and treatment records from VA medical facilities and private medical service providers. If the veteran is eligible for disability compensation, the rating specialist assigns a percentage rating based on degree of disability. A veteran who disagrees with the regional office's decision can appeal to VA’s Board of Veterans’ Appeals and then to U.S. federal courts.If the Board finds that a case needs additional work, it can be appealed. VA attributes some of the increase in the number of claims pending and the average days pending to a September 2003 court decision that required over 62,000 claims to be deferred. VA notes that legislation and VA regulations have expanded benefit entitlement and added to the volume of claims. Despite these efforts, VA may be limited in its ability to make and sustain significant claims processing performance improvements, according to the report. The report also notes that VA has developed plans to monitor consistency in disability evaluations on an ongoing basis. has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. VA plans to pilot paperless Benefits Delivery at Discharge, where service members’ disability claim applications, service medical records, and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge. VA expects that this new process will reduce the time needed to obtain the evidence needed to decide claims. To resolve appeals faster, VA has been working to reduce the number of appeals sent back by the Board of Veterans’ Appeals for further work such as obtaining additional evidence and correcting procedural errors. service-connected disabilities for many Vietnam veterans and former prisoners of war. VA expects additional claims receipts based on the enactment of legislation allowing certain military retirees to receive both military retirement pay and VA disability compensation. In addition, rating-related claims continue to increase, from about 579,000 in fiscal year 2000 to about 806,000  in fiscal year 2006. While VA projects relatively flat claim receipts in fiscal years 2007 and 2008, it cautions that ongoing hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the Global War on Terrorism in general, may increase the workload beyond current current. VA has also noted that claims have increased in part because older veterans are filing disability claims for the first time. According to VA, the complexity of claims is also increasing. For example, some veterans are citing more disabilities in their claims than in the past. Because each disability needs to be evaluated separately, these claims can take longer to complete. VA notes that they are receiving more disability claims, such as those related to mental health issues including post-traumatic stress disorder, which are generally harder to deal with. VA pays monthly disability compensation benefits to veterans with service-connected disabilities. VA also pays compensation to some spouses, children, and parents of deceased veterans and service members. VA’s pension program pays monthly benefits based on financial need to certain wartime veterans or their survivors. When a veteran submits a claim to any of the Veterans Benefits Administration's 57 regional offices, a veterans service representative is responsible for obtaining the relevant evidence to evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records. The Veterans’ Claims Adjudication Commission noted that most disability compensation claims are repeat claims. Most repeat claims were from veterans with less severe disabilities. About 65 percent of veterans who began receiving disability compensation in fiscal year 2003 had disabilities rated 30 percent or less. The commission questioned whether concentrating claims processing resources on these claims, rather than on claims by more severely disabled veterans, was consistent with program intent. Would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes. The lump sum option could have a number of benefits for VA as well as veterans. a lump sum option could be more useful to some veterans as they make the transition from military to civilian life. In addition to program design, VA’s regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations. VBA and others who have studied claims processing have suggested that consolidating claims processing into fewer regional offices could help improve claims processing efficiency, save overhead costs, and improve decisional accuracy and consistency. We noted in December 2005 that VA had made changes to its claims processing system. consistency. VA consolidated some of its pension income and eligibility verifications at three regional offices. VA has not changed its basic field structure for processing compensation and pension claims at 57 regional offices, which experience large performance variations and questions about decision consistency. Unless more comprehensive and strategic changes are made to its field structure, VA will continue to face problems with its claims processing system, the report says. The report was published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMLS) on December 31, 2005. VA made progress in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 reducing the size and age of its pending claims inventory, but has lost ground since then. This is due in part to increased filing of claims, including those filed by veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts. Questions remain about consistency of VA’s decisions across regional offices and at the Board of Veterans’ Appeals. The average time to resolve an appeal rose from 529 days in fiscal year 2004 to 657 days in Fiscal Year 2006. Meanwhile, the time required to resolve appeals remains too long. VA has recently taken several steps to improve service delivery, but their potential to lead to significant improvements may be limited by several factors. These steps include requesting funding for additional staff, initiatives to reduce appeal remands, and initiatives to assess and monitor decision consistency. limitations on potential improvements include increases in claims volume and complexity, and challenges in acquiring needed evidence in a timely manner. In its fiscal year 2008 budget justification, VA still lacked a systematic method for ensuring the consistency of decision making within VA as a whole. Fiscal year 2008 request would fund 8,320 full-time equivalent employees working on compensation and pension. That would represent an increase of about 6 percent over fiscal year 2006. According to VA, with a workforce that is sufficiently large and correctly balanced, it can successfully meet the veterans’ needs while ensuring good stewardship of taxpayer funds.a timely manner. In addition, the budget justification cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, and to improve timeliness. cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, such as using retired VA employees to provide training. VA expects a temporary decline in productivity as new staff are trained and become more experienced, but expects productivity to increase in the longer term. VA’s budget justification provides information on actual and planned productivity, in terms of claims decided per full-time equivalent employee. Also, VA has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. For example, the use of overtime is being increased. VA has established joint training and information sharing between field staff and the Board. VA reports that it has reduced the percentage of decisions remanded from about 57 percent in fiscal year 2004 to about 32 percent in Fiscal Year 2006. Also, VA says it has improved the productivity of the Board’s judges from an average of 604 appeals decided in fiscal 2013 to 698 in fiscal 2006. The Board attributes this improvement to training and mentoring programs and expects productivity to improve to more.errors. 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records. VBA agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource prior to sending some requests to the JSRRC. We also reported that while VBA quality reviewers found few decision errors due to failure to obtain military service records, VBA does not know the extent to which the information that is provided to regional offices is reliable and accurate. Regional offices rely on a VBA unit at the National Personnel Records. rely on a VBA unit at the National Personnel Records Center to do thorough and reliable searches and analyses of records. Incomplete and inaccurate reports could affect decisional accuracy. VA is taking actions to address its claims processing challenges, but there are opportunities for more fundamental reform that could dramatically improve decision making and processing. These include reexamining program design, as well as the structure and division of labor. For more information, visit the VA's website or go to www.va.gov. Claims processing timeliness and decisional accuracy can be hampered if VA cannot obtain the evidence it needs in a timely manner. For example, to obtain information needed to fully develop some post- traumatic stress disorder claims, VBA must obtain records from the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research Center. This can significantly increase the time it takes to decide a claim. In December 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically track and evaluate claims for post-traumatic stress disorder. Committee: VA Can Improve Its Procedures for Obtaining Military Service Records. Committee: More Transparency Needed to improve Oversight of VBA’s Compensation and Pension Staffing Levels. For further information, please contact Daniel Bertoni at (202) 512-7215 or Bertonid@gao.gov. High Risk Series: An Update. Washington, D.C.: January 31, 2007. Veterans’ Disability Benefits: Claims Processing Challenges and Opportunities for Improvements. VA Benefits: Other Programs May Provide Lessons for Improving Individual Unemployability Assessments. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. After more than a decade of research, we have determined that federal disability programs are in urgent need of attention and transformation. VA and SSA’s disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past. These programs are poorly positioned to provide meaningful and timely support for Americans with disabilities. In August 2002, we recommended that VA use its.design, as well as the structure and division of labor among field offices. In January 2003, we placed modernizing federal disability Programs on our high-risk list. If the Board finds that a case needs additional work such as obtaining additional evidence or contains procedural errors, it is sent back to the Veterans Benefits Administration. In November 2003, the Congress established the Veterans’ Disability Benefits Commission to study the appropriateness of VA disability benefits, including disability criteria and benefit levels. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. We have recommended that the VA undertake a comprehensive review of its field structure for processing disability compensation and pension claims. of replacing average impairment in earnings capacity, whether lump sum payments should be made for certain disabilities or level of severity of disability. How VA’s claims processing operation compares to other disability programs, including the location and number of processing centers. These issues and others have been raised by previous studies of VBA's disability claims process. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. For further information, please contact Daniel at daniel.smith@va.gov. In August 2002, we recommended VA use its annual performance plan to delineate strategies for and progress in periodically updating labor market data used in its disability determination process. We also recommended that VA study and report to the Congress on the effects that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on its disability programs’ eligibility criteria and benefits package. This study would include estimates of the effects on the size, cost, and management of VA’s disability programs and other relevant VA programs. to study the appropriateness of VA disability benefits, including disability criteria and benefit levels. The commission held its first public hearing in May 2005 and in October 2005, established 31 research questions for study. These questions address such issues as how well disability benefits meet the congressional intent of replacing average impairment in earnings capacity, whether lump sum benefits are appropriate, and the appropriate standard or standards for determining whether a disability or death of a veteran should be compensated. The panel is to examine and provide recommendations on benefits. training and mentoring programs and expects productivity to improve to 752 decisions in fiscal year 2008. VA has contracted for a study of the major influences on compensation payments, to develop baseline data for monitoring and managing decision variances. VA is in the process of testing templates for compensation and pension medical examinations for specific types of disabilities to ensure that medical evidence from these examinations will enable consistent evaluations of disabilities. VA formed a workgroup to study variances in the rates of benefit grants and denials, and in assigned disability evaluations.

ROUGE-1: 80.66, ROUGE-2: 73.17, ROUGE-L: 31.42
BERTScore: 66.19

==============================================
==================== [72/100] ====================
Summary:
In all but Minnesota, the laws in general apply to all institutions of higher education, public and private. Minnesota’s law applies only to public colleges. Three of the eight states (Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee) have laws specifically requiring campus safety authorities to maintain daily logs open to public inspection. The remaining five, while not prescribing the log format, require disclosure of information similar to that required to be kept in the logs.and West Virginia. Certain provisions are common to a number of these state laws. All 50 states have open records or "sunshine" laws, most of which require public institutions' records to be open to the public unless they are specifically exempted. For example, Colorado’s open records law declares that it is public policy that all state records be open for inspection, including all writings made, maintained, or kept by the state. These laws generally provide that if records are kept, they must be open; the laws are not intended to impose a new recordkeeping requirement. The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) generally prohibits the disclosure of education records or information from education records. A 1992 amendment to FERPA, however, means reports of incidents maintained by campus law enforcement officials for law enforcement purposes are not now classified as education information. Even incidents reported to campus authorities other than law enforcement may be disclosed. For example, according to comments the Department received during rulemaking, students are sometimes more comfortable reporting incidents—particularly sex-related offenses—through academic rather than law law enforcement channels. contain a provision exempting disclosure that is otherwise prohibited by law. Many prohibit publication of the names of victims or of victims of sex-related crimes. Many also include some type of provision protecting witnesses, informants, or information that might jeopardize an ongoing investigation. The laws also differ in a number of other respects, such as the following: California, Pennsylvania, and Oklahoma specifically provide for penalties for noncompliance; the other states do not specify penalties. Only California includes a specific reference to occurrences involving hate. Records must be open, if kept; the intent is not to impose a new recordkeeping requirement. Names and addresses of persons arrested are not required unless otherwise provided by law. Information may be withheld upon certification of need to protect the investigation, but in no event after the arrest. Names of persons reporting, victims, witnesses, or uncharged suspects or other information related to investigation are required. Identification required is not specified. The first copy of this report is available online at http://www.dailymail.co.uk/. To identify difficulties colleges were having in complying with the act, we interviewed officials at 27 colleges selected from a judgmental sample of colleges from the following four groups. Members of the International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators (IACLEA)—Ten Colleges. Non-IACleA Members in States With Open Log Laws—Eight Colleges. Using a list of non-IacLEA colleges provided by IACLEa, we selected six 4-year and two 2-year colleges. by IACLEA, we selected six 4-year and two 2-year colleges representing all eight states with open log laws and spoke to their heads of campus security. All eight colleges had an enrollment exceeding 1,000 students. Colleges in States Without Open Log Laws—Seven Colleges. We randomly selected colleges that participated in title IV programs from the Department’s Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System, stratified by type of college and geographic region. The chiefs ofcampus security at these seven colleges composed the list. Of the 25 reports we reviewed, only 2 provided information in all the prescribed categories. Campus law enforcement officials differ as to whether their reported statistics must include crimes reported to them by other campus authorities. Some were concerned about reporting incidents for which no details were provided because, without details on specific cases, they were unable to verify that a crime had occurred, had been properly classified, or had been counted. The fact that the incidents need not be reported is reflected by variations in campus security reports. The consistency and completeness of campus crime reporting envisioned under the act have been difficult to attain for two primary reasons. The differing characteristics of colleges may affect the colleges’ ability to provide a complete and consistent picture of incidents that occur on their campuses. Some confusion exists about reporting requirements, particularly about how certain categories of crimes are to be classified. For example, record systems of some local police departments do not lend laws are not intended to impose a new recordkeeping requirement. The Department of Justice is investigating the issue. Under the new monitoring guidance, program reviewers must check a college’s crime report for all required information. The accuracy of crime statistics need not be verified unless it becomes apparent from a complaint or some other source that the security report may be incomplete or inaccurate. In such cases, the Department is to take appropriate action to ensure compliance, including more thoroughly examining the statistics and, if warranted, taking action to rectify the situation. It is unlikely that the reviewers checked whether the reports contained all the required information or whether information was accurate. The Department conducted a national survey on campus crime and security. A representative sample of 1,500 colleges was surveyed to establish baseline information on crime statistics. The Department plans to evaluate whether additional actions are needed at the federal level. It also asked the campus security officials interviewed to send us a copy of the survey results, as well as complaints about crime statistics at the colleges they were included in the survey. The results were published in a report published by the Department of Justice on Wednesday. The report was released to coincide with the start of the 2014-15 school year. Some local police departments do not lend themselves to converting incidents to the categories required for campus security reports. Identifying incidents at college-related facilities can be a problem when a campus is dispersed throughout a large urban area. Three law enforcement officials told us that offenses are less likely to result in arrests on campuses that do not have security departments with the power to make arrests. We identified eight states that require public access to campus police or security department records on reported crimes: California, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. state statutes and spoke with representatives of campus safety and other interest groups as well as faculty specializing in criminal justice. Names and addresses of arrested persons and charges against them Exempts from disclosure incidents involving certain types of handicapped persons, which are to be separately maintained. Public and private campuses (under the state’s Campus Security Act, private colleges’ police departments are public agencies for the limited purpose of crime enforcement) Records must be open, if kept; the intent is not. In 60 percent of the reports we reviewed, colleges had difficulty complying with the reporting requirement for sex-related offenses. Colleges are required to report statistics on sexual offenses; they are not required to distinguish between forcible and nonforcible offenses. Of the reportsWe reviewed, 15 incorrectly categorized offenses. Several colleges listed incidents as “rape” or “attempted rape,” both of which are less inclusive than the term “forcible sexual offense.” We also noted a discrepancy in how colleges reported the number of murders. had occurred, had been properly classified, or had been counted only once. At some colleges, security officials do not receive even unverifiable statistics from counselors. Officials at five colleges said counselors are not required to or generally do not report incidents to them. Although colleges’ statistical reports included most of the prescribed criminal reporting categories, reporting officials appeared to have difficulty principally with two categories: sex offenses and murder. In 60 percent of the cases, the crimes were not reported to the proper office. 11 of the 16 officials we asked about the omission told us they were unaware of the requirement. Another two said they lacked direction on how to report these crimes. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act requires that crime statistics include on-campus occurrences reported to local police. However, of the reports we reviewed, only five included this information. It was not mentioned in the Department’s letters explaining the statistical reporting requirements. It also was not included in the reports explaining the statistics. It is not required to report crimes based on race, religion, sexual orientation or ethnicity. includes a specific reference to occurrences involving hate; in fact, California’s law requires inclusion of noncriminal hate-related incidents. We did not find any reported cases challenging these laws or any studies of their positive or negative effects. All 50 states have open records or “sunshine” According to the Student Press Law Center”s Covering Campus Crime: A Handbook for Journalists, all 50 states has open records and ‘sunshine.’ We also agreed to determine whether any legal challenges had been raised to state open campus crime log laws. A federal open crime log law could offer more timely access to information on campus crime. However, inherent differences among colleges will be a long-term obstacle to achieving comparable, comprehensive campus crime statistics. For example, such logs might not include off-campus incidents or, without an amendment to FERPA, incidents that students report through non-law-enforcement channels. Reported by 25 colleges and evaluated to determine the extent to which the reports conformed to crime reporting requirements prescribed in the act. We did not trace the numbers to source documents to check their accuracy or completeness. The law also requires colleges to provide timely warning to the campus community about crimes that are considered to represent a threat to other students and employees. The bills were modeled after a law that has been in effect in Tennessee since 1994. The law requires the collection of data on campus crime, distinct from state or local data, and that information on the incidence of campus crime and of colleges’ security policies and procedures be available. The statistical reporting provision requires Colleges to annually compile and report to thecampus community statistics on reported crimes. 11 states have laws requiring schools to compile and release statistics on campus crime. Two bills would have required more detailed and current campus security records to be made accessible to the public. Although a hearing was held in the House, no further action was taken before the session’s end. Had the bills been enacted, they would have applied to colleges with police or security departments and required the colleges, in addition to reporting annual crime statistics, to maintain open-to-the-public, easily understood daily logs. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act of 1990 and its implementing regulations require colleges to publish and distribute an annual security report. The report includes statements about campus law enforcement policies, security education and crime prevention programs, alcohol and drug policies, sexual assault education and prevention programs. It also includes procedures for reporting sexual assaults, procedures explaining how reports of sexual assaults will be dealt with, and annual statistics on crime incidents. The law also requires colleges to provide timely information on campus crime incidents and sexual assaults. Department of Education is responsible for administering title IV programs. Only 24 of 2,800 title IV program reviews identified campus security violations. Department officials told us that monitoring had generally been limited to checking whether colleges published a campus security report and had procedures for its distribution. Since no review guidance for monitoring campus security was available until September 1996, it is unlikely that the reviewers checked whether the reports were accurate. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Department of Education began issuing guidance to colleges on complying with the law in 1991. Guidance for monitoring program compliance came much more slowly. The Department did not issue its first program review guidance specifically addressing campus security until September 1996. As of January 1997, the Department had not imposed sanctions against any college found in noncompliance with campus security requirements. The department had identified violations at 63 colleges since the law’s enactment. It had not issued a required report to the Congress. It has only recently expanded its monitoring efforts by initiating program reviews that specifically address compliance. compliance, including more thoroughly examining the statistics and, if warranted, taking formal administrative action. As of January 1997, the Department had received five complaints of noncompliance. One precipitated an in-depth campus security compliance review; the other four complaints are still being investigated. Reasons for the difficulty include reviewers’ limited experience in dealing with law enforcement matters, uncertainties about how to interpret certain definitions of reportable crimes, and differences among campuses that make evaluation difficult under a single set of program. The Department has yet to issue guidance for independent auditors who conduct federally required annual audits of all colleges participating in title IV programs. As of August 1996, only six audits had documented noncompliance on security matters since the act took effect. Most auditors participating in training sessions held in regional Inspector General offices were unaware of campus security reporting requirements. The Department plans to issue an updated audit guide that will explicitly refer to campus security compliance and instruct auditors to ensure that campus security reports are prepared and distributed according to federal requirements. The Department was more than 1 year late in issuing a report on campus crime statistics to the Congress. Citing limited resources to perform such a review, the Department postponed issuing the report until February 1997. A Department official responsible for writing the audit guide expects it to be issued some time in 1997. The law required the Department to review campus crimeStatistics and issue a report to theCongress by September 1, 1995. As the basis for the report, the department conducted a study of campus security practices. certain categories of crimes are to be classified. The Department originally relied mostly on its regulations, letters to colleges, and technical assistance. Its continued efforts in providing technical assistance to school officials, as well as its recent issuance of monitoring guidance to Department officials, may achieve more consistent reporting and compliance with the law by colleges. However, inherent differences among colleges will be a long-term problem for the Department of Justice and for the colleges that enforce the law. For example, these efforts may improve consistency in categories used and type of crimes reported. in July 1994. To help colleges achieve compliance, the Department emphasizes providing such assistance, rather than imposing sanctions. Under Department policy, the Secretary imposes sanctions only if a college flagrantly or intentionally violates the regulations or fails to take corrective action when required to do so. Available sanctions include fines or limitation, suspension, or termination of participation in federal financial aid programs. Department officials told us that although the Department and independent auditors had identified violations at 63 colleges since the law’s enactment,. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. February 12, 1997, the Department of Education provided comments on a draft of this report (see app. III). The Department generally agreed with our basic conclusions and provided us a number of technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of thisReport to the Secretary of Education, appropriate congressional committees, and other interested parties. Please call me at (202) 512-7014 or Joseph J. Eglin, Jr., Assistant Director, at (Washington, D.C.) if you or your staff have any questions.

ROUGE-1: 77.22, ROUGE-2: 69.69, ROUGE-L: 24.06
BERTScore: 57.13

==============================================
==================== [73/100] ====================
Summary:
Maintaining living standards over the long term will likely require private sector expansion or increased remittances. FSM and RMI private sectors face significant constraints to growth. Lack of marketable skills is a hurdle to increased remittance revenue. Even with the needed reforms, growth in the FSM’s and the RMI’’ private sectors may be limited by structural constraints such as geographic isolation and high transport costs.“Because the amended compacts have been in place for only a few years, it is difficult to determine whether the assistance they provide will contribute to the fundamental changes in FSM,” they say. of FSM progress toward its long-term development goals. At the 2005 JEMFAC meeting, the RMI government provided a brief overview of GDP and employment data. HHS emphasized that an annualized schedule for committee meetings does not provide enough frequency for meaningful discussion of RMI growth issues. For example, while the R MI government presented data on migration to the United States, J EMFAC did not discuss the linkage between compact education spending and improving RMI emigrant’s skills to encourage increased remittance income. building grant in fiscal year 2004 and less than 1 percent of compact sector grant funding to such a grant in 2005. In the RMI’s METO 2000 Statement of Development Strategies and its 2001 Strategic Development Plan entitled “Vision 2018,” the R MI estimates that between 500 to 800 new job entrants will need to find employment each year from 1999 to 2009. We discuss remittances in our report as one option that theRMI may consider in pursuing the economic goals under the amended compact. World Bank data show that remittances have become an important source of financial flows to developing countries. As of 2005, RMI data suggest that about 15,000 Marshallese have immigrated to the U.S. to find employment each year from 1999 to 2009. To meet this objective, the ready access provided under the compact for Marshallese to live and work in the United States must be preserved. Improved skill provision should benefit both RMI emigrants as well as domestic economic prospects. that about 15,000 Marshallese have immigrated to the United States. FSM data suggests that almost twice as many Micronesians live overseas. In the RMI, the 2002 household survey suggests that RMI citizens send more money out to RMI emigrants than they receive in remittances. The 2003 U.S. census of FSM and RMI migrants in Hawaii, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands (CNMI) confirms that almost half of the emigrants live below the poverty line. nations’ capacity to produce future statistics. We conducted our review from August 2005 through March 2006 in accordance with generally accepted U.S. government auditing standards. We requested written comments on a draft of this report from the Departments of the Interior, State, Health and Human Services, and Treasury, as well as the governments of the FSM and the RMI. All comments are discussed in the report and are reprinted in appendixes IV through VII. Further, we considered all comments and made changes to the report, as appropriate. small island economies suggest common challenges for socioeconomic development. Developing nations in the Pacific have exhibited relatively poor economic performance. Such nations have also exhibited the need for improvements in delivery of health and education services. Environmental challenges from climate change and increasing population density are also common threats to ensuring sustainable livelihoods in thePacific. Table 5 provides estimated socioeconomic data on various Pacific island nations in. The report was published by the International Development Association (IDA) and the World Economic Forum (WEF) on November 14, 2013. In the FSM, the fisheries and tourism sectors together provide about 6 percent of employment. Commercial fishing has been plagued by poor government investments in vessels and infrastructure that have resulted in high debt levels. In the RMI, visitor arrivals have remained flat over the past 10 years despite growth in Pacific island tourism. Economic experts suggest that the F SM and RMI fishing and tourism industries could grow within specialized niche markets such as high-end tourism or dock services. Such opportunities remain limited in scale, however, and growth in these industries in both countries may be limited by current policies. benefit both RMI emigrants as well as domestic economic prospects. RMI employment data indicate that the RMI did succeed in reducing public sector employment from about 3,760 jobs in 1997 to 3,530 jobs in 2001. The World Bank has estimated that, in 2002, Kiribati had 5,000 international visitors. The per capita GDP that is less than one-third of the R MI’s. The RMI has reduced public sector jobs by about 1,000 since 2001. 3,530 jobs in 2001. Since then, public sector employment has risen to about 4,320 jobs in 2005. We have added language to the report to include the volatility in tax income from the fisheries and tourism sectors. RMI offices related to reform efforts, such as land registration offices, have been funded with compact grants. In addition to the persons named above, Emil Friberg, Assistant Director; Leslie Holen; Reid Lowe; Mary Moutsos; Kendall Schaefer; and Seyda Wentworth made key contributions to this report. In the FSM, experts report that foreign investment regulations vary between states, creating confusion and additional requirements for investors who want to invest in several states. The climate for foreign investment is also reportedly affected by private and public interests’ protecting local businesses from foreign competition. Some FSM states require a certain percentage of local ownership in foreign investment. Pohnpei state, for instance, requires 30 foreign investment permits for foreign workers. According to an Interior official, a shipping company with service from to Guam has for years been seeking permission to provide shipping service. Pohnpei state, for instance, requires 30 percent local ownership for foreign investment. Local businesses sometimes lobby the foreign investment boards against approval of certain applications. Extensive FSM and RMI government involvement in commercial activities continues to hinder private sector development. High public sector wages and government enterprises that directly compete with private industry. The FSM’s and the RMI’S public sector reform efforts since the 1990s have been based on private sector reform. The ADB is working with the governments of the FSM, RMI, and Pohnpei to improve the economy. the highest levels of aid per capita. The RMI provides a significantly higher proportion of the population access to improved sanitation. Private sector representatives in the FSM and the RMI characterized the business environment in their nation as obstructive and costly. World Bank national business environment surveys suggest that a high cost of doing business is a problem. The FSM’s. child mortality rates are significantly lower than the. RMI’S, and its immunization rates are much higher than those of the. FSM. Bank national business environment surveys suggest that a high cost of doing business is a common problem for small island states. Of 155 countries surveyed, the FSM and the RMI are among the worst 10 to 20 countries in terms of the cost of enforcing contracts and the degree of investor protection. In interviews with private sector representatives, problems were noted with F SMs and RMI business environments (see fig. 7). The following are GAO’s comments on the Department of the Interior. These industries in both countries may be limited by current structural barriers such as geographic isolation and small fragmented markets. High airfares and poor flight connections; lack of adequate hotel and airport infrastructure; low freight capacities and poor interisland shipping. Growing threat of overfishing; limited pool of skilled labor; and high production costs in terms of labor, fuel, and other supplies. In addition to facing structural barriers to growth, private industry in general faces a costly business environment in both the FSM and the RMI according to economic experts and U.S. We do not assert, however, that economic development cannot be attained. If key policy reforms were implemented, the business environment would likely improve and facilitate private sector expansion. The FSM will also likely need to identify and capitalize on niche market opportunities as well as to create conditions to maximize remittance income, particularly through improving the education and health of its citizens. Establishing connections with the overseas business community may be one way to help the FSM advance its compact goals. We agree that implementation of policy reforms will not, in of itself, produce economic development. We asked experts at the ADB, the IMF, the World Bank, and the University of Hawaii’s East-West Center to provide a technical review of our findings. In conjunction with our own assessment, we determined that trade data, remittance data, and data on the private sector profits contained weaknesses. Exact data for these elements were not presented in the report and related findings were corroborated with other reliable data. Nonetheless, our interviews with U.S., country, and international officials revealed important constraints to the FSM's and the RMI's capacity to prepare regular, reliable, and complete data. recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) Article IV documents for each nation. ADB Country Strategies and Program Updates; 2005 FSM and RMI Pacific Island Economic Reports (PIER) prepared in conjunction with the ADB. Expert reviews of FSM, RMI fiscal structures and tax systems. FSM’s 2005 Statistical Tables; the RMI”s 2004 Annual Yearbook and 2005 Employment Statistics. OECD’S international development statistics; the U.S. Department of Census. U.S. Department of Census; and the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. FSM Tax Reform Task Force 2005 Report to the President; RMI 2005 Budget Statement. ADB progress reports on the RMI Private Sector Development Project and the FSM Private sector Development Loan. RMI Final Reports from the 2005 Dialogue For Action Retreats sponsored by the ADB. We obtained data on FSM and RMI public sector enterprises from the F SMi Statistical Tables. Only 28 percent of FSM citizens have access to improved sanitation, compared with an average of 57 percent in all lower-middle income countries. In the RMI, the 1999 census suggests that 85 percent of the population has access to safe water. Recent tests in urban and rural areas indicate that a significant number of potable water sources, such as groundwater wells and water catchments— 30 percent or more in some cases—are contaminated. The U.S. also performs relatively poorly in provision of safe water or sanitation. water catchments are contaminated and deemed unsafe for human consumption. According to the FSM Department of Health, 80 percent of 35 to 64 year-olds are overweight. The number of cases involving diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and obesity is also on the rise in the country. The FSM and the RMI also highlight the increasing prevalence of lifestyle diseases such as diabetes or hypertension. Youth health issues; and poor teaching skills are also a challenge in the F SMM and RMI. We identified key areas of concern in delivery of health and education services. We obtained socioeconomic statistics on noncommunicable diseases, access to safe water and sanitation, teacher certifications and literacy skills. We reviewed the U.S., FSM, and RMI annual compact reports for 2004; FSM and R MI development plans; recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) Article IV documents for each country. We also obtained regional statistics on population trends, teenage fertility, child mortality rates, immunizations, human poverty. FSM and RMI health officials indicated concern about growing youth problems such as suicides, sexually transmitted diseases, and teen pregnancy. With regard to teacher qualifications, the FSM Department of Education reports that 90 percent of teachers need to upgrade skills to meet new certification standards. In the RMI, a 2004 Ministry of Education assessment reported that more than 50 percent of Teachers had failed basic English literacy tests.on household and national budgets. Future health outlays will also be affected by health challenges facing F SM and R MI youths. MCC provides economic assistance to developing countries. eligibility determined by evaluating a country’s performance on select indicators associated with economic growth and poverty reduction. MCC ranks the FSM in the top 35 percent (in the 81st and 67th percentile, respectively) for expenditures on health and primary education. According to the World Bank, among 171 countries for which it reports aid per capita, the RMI and FSM ranked 5th and 6th highest, respectively, with per capita aid greater than $900 in 2003. evaluates indicators with a relationship to growth and poverty reduction. The FSM and the RMI are established democracies with free and peaceful elections. Each country also has a vocal civil society evidenced by religious organizations and nongovernmental organizations. Each democracy is stable despite the challenges of having hierarchical traditional structures; islands with scattered populations; and a citizenry of distinct cultures, languages, and histories. It ranks both countries in the top 20 percent for health expenditures relative to other lower-middle-income countries, but in the bottom third for immunizations. provides estimated socioeconomic data on various Pacific island nations. The FSM and the RMI have a relatively large population density at 331 and 181 people per square kilometer, respectively. The RMI also has a very high teenage fertility rate. Except for Palau—also a nation with a Compact of Free Association with the United States—the FSM has the highest levels of aid per capita. the FSM’s child birth rate is higher than any other Pacific island nation’. The number of cases involving diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and cancer increased in the late nineties. Diabetes figured as the leading cause of adult morbidity in 2000 and 2001. The care and treatment of such diseases often involves expensive referrals abroad, lowered funding for public health programs that serve impoverished populations, and burdens on household and national budgets. Future health outlays will also be affected by the rising prevalence of lifestyle diseases in the U.S. and the RMI, says the World Health Organisation. The government has been criticized for not holding public hearings or disseminating sufficient information regarding a proposed dry dock. Lack of information about government activities creates uncertainty for public, private, and community leaders, which can inhibit grant performance and improvement of social and economic conditions. Although FSM and RMI health and education expenditures are relatively high, certain conditions need to be addressed to improve the quality of life in the islands. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. FSM and the RMI according to economic experts and U.S. and country officials. In interviews, private sector representatives also expressed concern with poor government provision of power, water, and infrastructure services. FSM and RMI emigrants could provide increasing monetary support to their home nations in the future, although evidence suggests that they are less likely to do so now than in the past. The FSM Department of Economic Affairs could provide more information on how to send emigrants back to the United States. and RMI departmental officials, private sector representatives, NGOs, and external economic experts revealed a lack of communication and dissemination of information by each government. Private sector representatives in several FSM states reported that the public radio station serves as the government’s primary means of disseminating information but is often nonoperational or censored. In the RMI, a State official and an official official in the FSM reported that they had not heard of the JEMCO or JEMFAC decisions. pursue budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement, yet disagreed with our conclusion that FSM development prospects remain limited. In addition to providing copies of this report to your offices, we will send copies to other appropriate committees. We will also provide copies to the Secretaries of the Interior, State, and Health and Human Services, as well as the President of the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact us. The amended compacts implementing legislation requires that we report on political, social, and economic conditions in the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VIII. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report.or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov. the report to reflect this suggestion. We have also added language to the report recognizing HHS’s efforts to improve vaccine coverage. The FSM confirms the accuracy of our description of its recent economic performance, its constraints to growth, and its need for economic policy reforms. Given these current realities, we maintain that prospects for long-term economic growth in the FSM remain limited. We do not assert, however, that economic development cannot be achieved in the Federated States of Micronesia. the FSM’s 2005 Statistical Tables; the RMI’S 2004 Annual Yearbook; and the most recent available public enterprise audit reports. In addition, we held extensive interviews with officials from the U.S. Department of the Interior (Washington, D.C.; Honolulu; the FSM; andthe RMI) and the Department of State. We also interviewed officials. from the ADB (Manila, the Philippines), the IMF (Washington,. D.c.), the World Bank (Washington.C.) and the Pacific Islands Development. Program at the East-West Center. and the Pacific Islands Development Program at the East-West Center (Honolulu) We traveled to all four states in the FSM and to the RMI (Majuro) We met with the governor’s and legislature’’ offices in each of the F SM states and the President’S office in the R MI. We had detailed discussions with FSM (national and state governments) and RMI officials from foreign affairs, finance and budget, economic affairs, health, education, land management, tourism and fisheries. Vocal civil society evidenced by religious organizations and nongovernmental organizations (NGO) that have been active on some political issues. Both countries also participate in various regional organizations, many of which address trade, energy, and environmental challenges faced by island nations. Despite the two countries’ stable democratic systems, interviews with U.S., FSM, and RMI officials and civil society representatives indicated that key civil society issues are still not being addressed in a meaningful way by both countries. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. After more than 40 years under U.S. administration as part of the United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the FSM and the RMI became sovereign nations in 1978 and 1979. For the last 20 years, the United States’ relationship with the two countries has been defined by the original Compact of Free Association. The compact represents a new phase of the unique relationship between the United states and these island areas. In 1986, theUnited States, theFSM, and theRMI entered into the original compact. compact also gave citizens of both nations the rights to live and work in the United States as ‘nonimmigrants’ The compact exempted FSM and RMI citizens from meeting U.S. passport, visa, and labor certification requirements. In 2001, we reported that during the compact, a significant number of F SMi and R MI citizens had migrated to the United states. The United States negotiated separate amended compacts with the RMI and FSM that went into effect on May 1, 2004, and June 25, 2004. between the United States and these island areas. The compact provided a framework for the U.S. to work toward achieving its three main goals. The first goal was met; the FSM and the RMI are independent nations. The second goal has also been achieved with the compact’s establishment of several key defense rights for all three countries. The third goal was to assist the F SM and RMI in their efforts to advance economic development and self-sufficiency. The defense rights were also established. face political and social challenges with regard to improving grant implementation and health and education conditions. U.S. and country officials told us that political conditions, including a weak federation in the FSM; disputes over public institutions’ and government use of land on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI. Both governments’ lack of communication with their constituencies have hindered compact implementation and service delivery. Despite relatively high health andEducation expenditures, both countries face development challenges in these sectors. For example, although the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC)—which evaluates indicators with a relationship to growth and poverty reduction—ranks high, the country’s poverty rate remains high. to the compact infrastructure grant, for example, has been delayed for more than 2 years owing to national and state disagreements over infrastructure priorities. Similarly, the RMI government and landowners on Kwajalein Atoll have been disputing government use of leased land and management of public entities on the atoll. Such tensions have negatively affected the construction of schools funded by compact grants. Lack of government communication has also been cited as a major problem in the development of the island nation. The report was based on interviews with U.S., FSM and RMI officials, private sector representatives, NGOs, and external experts. The compact’s third goal was to be accomplished primarily through U.S. direct financial assistance to the FSM and the RMI. For the 15-year period covering 1987 to 2001, funding was provided at levels that decreased every 5 years. For 2002 and 2003, during negotiations to renew expiring compact provisions, funding levels increased (see fig. 1) to equal an average of the funding provided during the previous 15 years plus inflation. The amended compacts continue the defense relationship, including a new agreement providing U.s. military access to Kwajalein Atoll. GAO: Reforms in each of the areas discussed are needed to improve the RMI’s prospects for long-term economic growth. We also agree that the annual decrement in compact grant funding is a major challenge to achieving this objective, particularly if implementation of key policy reforms requires fiscal resources. We recognize that the report language has been clarified. and what actions need to be pursued to improve those options. The Republic of the Marshall Islands letter dated June 1, 2006, was sent to the U.S. government. Policy reforms are needed in the areas of tax, land, foreign investment, and the public sector to improve business incentives. Tax structures in the FSM and the RMI remain complex and unequal and engender business disincentives. The FSM tax system has been criticized for multiple taxation of the same products. The RMI tax system is complex and regressive, taxing on a gross rather than net basis and having weak collection and administration capacity. The private sector representatives’ most common complaint on the R MI tax system was the need for better and tighter regulations. be supported, at least partially, by increased noncompact assistance. Such increases in assistance are not guaranteed, may vary from year to year, and may not be flexible enough to meet FSM and RMI budget needs. Tax reform may provide opportunities for increasing annual government revenue in the F SM and the RMI. Business tax schemes in both nations are considered to be inefficient by the IMF, the ADB, and other economic experts owing to a poor incentive structure and weak tax collection. private sector representatives as well as various U.S., IMF, ADB, and country reports. An enabling business environment in either country requires substantial reforms in taxes, land ownership, and foreign investment regulations. Despite several years of policy dialogue on taxes, the FSM has agreed on elements of tax reform but has no plan for implementation and the RMI has not agreed on structural change to its tax system. In attempts to modernize complex, traditional land tenure systems, land registration offices have been established in both countries. The RMI Office of Tax and Revenue reported that it has focused on improving tax administration and has raised some penalties and tax levels. Legislation for income tax reform has failed and needed changes in government import tax exemptions have not yet been addressed. Inadequate access to land and uncertainties over land ownership and land values continue to create costly land disputes, disincentives for investment, and problems regarding the use of land as an asset in both the FSM and the RMI. Land tenure systems in each nation need to be reformed. Since 1994, the IMF and other experts have recommended, among other tax reforms, implementing a value-added tax (VAT), a simplified net profit tax, and a single modernized independent tax authority. In 2005, the FSM Task Force on Tax Reform developed a tax reform proposal that included these principles. Nonetheless, despite the fact that such reforms are estimated to require 2 to 3 years for implementation, the government has neither begun to implement the proposal nor specified an implementation plan. The FSM government has. In 2005, FSM taxes provided an estimated $29 million in revenue, or 23 percent of total revenue. The largest income source is external grants, which, at $76 million, accounted for 60 percent of revenues in 2005. In terms of expenditure, the largest FSM expenditure is in the form of public sector salaries and pensions. The FSM government receives fishing access fees from foreign vessels that fish in its exclusive economic zone. The government's wage bill is high relative to regional standards. concluded that substantial tax reform could bring revenue growth by broadening the tax base, altering the structure to be more equitable and business friendly. However, although the FSM and the RMI governments have made some improvement in tax administration, tax revenues have largely stagnated. Revenue potential from further tax reform will also vary by government (national and state) and will require factors such as a sound design, adequate resources and capacity for tax enforcement; government commitment for reform; and, ultimately, private sector growth. F SM and RMI development plans identify fishing and tourism as key potential growth industries. widely from year to year; however, each has had recent budget deficits. Economic experts emphasize that, structurally, both country’s budgets are characterized by a small local revenue base and recent increases in government payroll. As a result, unless other donors provide additional assistance, expenditure reductions will be required as compact grants decline. The largest FSM expenditure component is public sector wages and salaries at an estimated $60 million. This component grew from 36 percent of total expenditures in 2000 to 2004 to 42 percent oftotal expenditures in 2005. the RMI provide about $22 million in revenue to the government. External grants are the largest income component, providing $54 million in 2005. The structure of RMI revenues remained roughly the same over the past 5 years. RMI payroll expenditures increased. In 2005, the RMI’s wage bill comprised 34 percent of total expenditures, compared with the 2000 to 2004 wage bill of 31 percent. The RMI also receives fishing access fees. At 64 percent ofTotal Revenues, External Grants are thelargest income component. FSM and the RMI. Land tenure systems in each nation are complex and based on traditional and customary rights, often for multiple individuals. Most parcels do not have a registered, legal title. Land values are also uncertain owing to the lack of a developed land market or price data on lease transactions. Given that a major proportion of FSM and RMI wealth lies in property, the inability to use it to secure financing for development is problematic. Using land for foreign investment is even more difficult. systematic method for registering parcels, instead waiting for landowners to voluntarily initiate the process. Landowners have shown little interest in land registration, partly owing to the cultural issues associated with traditional land ownership structures. The functionality of land registration offices in both the FSM and the RMI has also been limited by a lack of registered surveyors and trained staff. In the R MI, for example, only 5 parcels have been, or are currently being, registered by the land registration office. Although the F SM and RMI have amended various various. The share of employment accounted for by these enterprises, as well as estimated direct public enterprise subsidies, has declined in recent years. IMF and ADB officials expressed concern that the FSM and the RMI governments are not committed to reducing their participation in commercial activities. Most of the enterprises have drained public finances through poor financial performance, requiring subsidization or entailing debt. The FSM prepared a comprehensive program for public sector enterprise reform in 1999 that identified two enterprises per state and national government for privatization. Such privatizations later became a condition for receiving ADB loan assistance. Despite several years of commitment to, and recommendations for, policy reforms, key reforms have not yet been implemented. The FSM and the RMI face notable challenges to achieving budgetary self- reliance and long-term economic advancement. Tax, land, foreign investment regulation and public-sector reforms, when implemented, will improve the business environment, in turn facilitating the private sector expansion that may help the countries advance their compact goals. However, even with the needed reforms, the countries will need to overcome the "aid curse" reduce public sector employment have generally failed in both the FSM and the RMI. FSM, RMI public sector wages remain about twice the level of private sector wages, contributing to the large government wage bill. The most skilled employees out of the private sector into public sector jobs. In addition, the F SMs and RMI governments continue to conduct a wide array of commercial enterprises that compete with private enterprises, although the share of employment accounted for by these enterprises, as a whole, remains low. public sector reform efforts since the 1990s have been based on restructuring government operations. One example of a reform success highlighted by economic experts is the RMI’s restructuring of its Social Security Administration to reduce operating costs and improve service provision. Despite government endorsement of public sector reform principles, early efforts to reduce public sector employment have generally failed in both the U.S. and the UK, according to a report by the International Institute for Fiscal Studies (IIFS) The report was published by the IIFS on November 14, 2013. registration offices have been established in both countries. In both countries, inadequate access to land and uncertainties over land ownership and land values continue to create costly disputes. Several years of public sector reform efforts have also failed to reduce government involvement in private sector activities. Thus far, the JEMCO and JEMFAC committees have not evaluated the lack of foreign investment offices in the UK and the U.S. The regulations in both nations continue to be confusing and relatively burdensome, according to economic experts and private sector representatives. lack of progress; or the interdependence of policy reform implementation with effective compact grant implementation. Opportunities exist to create linkages between grant administration and economic reforms. For example, sector grants in public sector capacity building could be used to address capacity constraints that have been identified as an obstacle to reform implementation (e.g., the lack of certified land surveyors for land reform). Further, compact management committees could establish linkages. between, for example, grants to tourism promotion agencies and progress in reforming foreign investment regulations. secured transactions to allow movable assets to serve as collateral. Some governments have also tried to improve foreign investment processes or created small business development centers. The ADB has also recently assisted both countries in holding several “Dialogue for Action’ retreats that enable public and private sector representatives to develop a common vision for sustainable development through economic reform. The retreats can be helpful for improving the public sector/private sector dialogue on economic challenges facing each society. However, ADB experts also emphasized that, HHS agreed with our recommendation and requested that it be expanded to include JEMCO and JEMFAC requirements for establishing policy reform implementation timelines. The urgency of pursuing policy reform suggests that establishing timelines for such reforms could be a useful method to improve U.S. assistance. We also appreciate HHS’s suggestion to improve communication and information between annual meetings through periodic teleconferences and videoconferences and have added language to the report to reflect this suggestion. We have also added. The amended compacts’ fiscal procedures agreements requires the JEMCO and JEMFAC to monitor FSM and RMI progress toward their long-term development objectives. The oversight committees have not defined what actions they will take. HHS also agreed with our recommendation and requested that it be expanded to include requirements for establishing timelines for policy reform implementation. In the 2004 compact, both countries identified the need for economic reform within their national development plans, and both countries have implemented or are pursuing some legislative actions. the issue of FSM progress toward their long-term development goals was not discussed by the JEMCO. We recognize that Interior has contracted with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Graduate School to obtain further economic information on the FSM and the RMI. While we agree with the importance of gaining this further information, we believe that sufficient information is available for the committees to begin meeting their requirement to evaluate FSM, RMI progress. For example, multiple expert studies as well as F SMS and RMI and. connections with the overseas business community may be one way to pursue such opportunities and should be included in meaningful JEMCO discussions. The coming reductions in U.S. grants, paired with current economic realities, also suggests the need for frank assessments of current limited prospects for economic growth in the FSM and what actions need to be pursued to improve those. As we emphasized earlier, the scheduled coming reductions of U.N. grants creates urgency for implementation of policy reforms and for capitalizing on opportunities to leverage compact assistance. At the fiscal year 2004 and 2005 annual JEMCO and JEMFAC meetings, compact management committees focused on approving sector grants and discussing grant administration issues. The JEMco meetings have not included discussion of FSM progress toward its long-term development goals. The oversight committees have not defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement. At the increase the effectiveness of U.S. assistance to the FSM and RMI, the U.N. has called for an increase in the number of American troops in the region. annualized schedule for committee meetings does not provide enough frequency for addressing both grant administration issues and long-term growth issues. HHS suggested that communication be improved through periodic teleconference and videoconference updates. FSM and RMI officials report that they have implemented a few legislation actions to improve the private sector environment, such as bankruptcy and mortgage laws, yet progress on key policy reforms required to stimulate investment has been slow. The FSM viewed the report as a potentially constructive contribution to ongoing efforts to pursue budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement. and economic conditions through reform. To maximize FSM and RMI potential for budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement, we recommend that the Secretary of the Interior direct the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Insular Affairs, as Chairman of JEMCO and JEMFAC, to ensure that they fulfill their requirements in the following three areas. evaluate F SMs and R MI progress in implementing policy reforms needed to improve the business environment and encourage increased investment and tax income. identify problems encountered with policy reform implementation. recommend ways to improve U.S. assistance for these objectives. GAO: Compact management committees have not discussed FSM and RMI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement. GAO: Deputy Assistant Secretary submitted a statement for the record at the opening of the 2005 JEMCO meeting that mentioned the lack of sustainability in the FSM’s economic dependence on government expenditures. But, GAO says, he did not read his statement to the committee and the issue of FSM progress toward their long- term development goals. The scheduled coming reductions in U.S. grants to both countries create urgency for the implementation of policy reforms. The report examines each country’s political and social environment for compact grant implementation. It also looks at economic conditions, including overall growth, fiscal balances, and private investment. To maximize FSM and RMI assistance to those nations, the report says, the United States must help them to achieve budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement. They need to improve social and economic conditions through reform. The FSM’s weak federal structure inhibits compact grant implementation. The central government that is represented on JEMCO does not control the majority of compact funds. As a result, FSM access to the compact infrastructure grant, for example, has been delayed. The FSM and the RMI have a lack of government consensus on compact needs. The RMI has a weak constitution and authority over budgetary policies. It has been unable to secure agreement from the state governments regarding Compact needs. rather than exclusively on the 2 years of bump-up assistance in 2002 and 2003. We will address amended compact implementation issues and trust- fund issues in two separate reports, forthcoming. We have added language to this report indicating the RMI’s concern over delays in setting up its trust fund. Section 177 funds are not included in our analysis. Section 211 of Title Two of the Amended Compact with the R MI states that compact grants shall be used for assistance in the U.S. states that compact grants shall be used for assistance in education, health care, the environment, public sector capacity building, and private sector development. The effectiveness of U.S. and ADB technical assistance to the RMI is outside the scope of this report. The RMI allocated no compact funding to a public sector. capacity building grant in fiscal year 2004 and less than 1 in 2005. We have added language regarding RMI consultations with the private sector and their desire for improved tax enforcement. sectors—education, health, public infrastructure, the environment, public sector capacity building, and private sector development. The amended compacts, their subsidiary agreements, and the U.S. implementing legislation also establish numerous reporting and accountability requirements. The legislation’s direction to the JEMCO and JEMFAC to specifically address economic policy reforms to encourage investment and improve tax income. Including estimated inflation adjustments, total combined compact grant assistance to the two countries is $1.2 billion. in real terms, early 1990s levels in either country (see fig. 2). Although U.S. direct assistance maintained standards of living that were higher than could be achieved without support, we found previously that compact funds spent on economic development were largely ineffective in promoting economic growth. For example, compact funds were used to support general government operations that, among other things, maintained high levels of public sector employment and wages, creating disincentives to private sector growth. Compact funds were also used tosupport business ventures, most of which have failed. In our examination of a wide range of projects funded under the compact, we found that many projects experienced problems due to poor planning and management. In 2000, we recommended, among other things, that the Secretary of State direct the Special Negotiator for the Compact of Free Association to negotiate amended compact provisions. The compact also gave citizens of both nations the rights to vote on issues of their choice. The U.S. House of Representatives voted in favor of a resolution that would require the compact to be re-negotiated. and recommend ways to improve U.S. assistance for these objectives. We received comments from the Departments of the Interior and HHS, as well as from the FSM and the RMI. A more detailed presentation and response to the comments can be found in appendixes IV through VII. The Department of Interior concurred with our recommendation and stated that it is pursuing additional information on the F SMM and RMI economies to support its implementation of the recommendation. We also received technical comments from Interior, State, Treasury, HHS and theRMI. in the future. Trend data on a variety of social indicators, such as teacher qualifications and student drop-outs, could assist in evaluation of the effectiveness of compact education assistance. However, much of this data are just now being collected in a systematic way. Also, given that both nations have weak domestic capacity to produce statistics, they rely heavily on external consultants for this purpose. In the FSM, the contract for statistical assistance from external consultants has now expired. As such, both FSM and Interior officials have expressed concern for that nations’ capacity to producing future statistics. to trust funds—meant to provide an ongoing source of revenue after fiscal year 2023—increase annually by a comparable amount. Under certain conditions, the trust fund revenue available in 2024 may be less than even the lower level of grant funding in 2024. If the trust funds consistently earn a higher rate of return, or if additional contributions to the funds are provided, the probability rises that they could provide a sustainable income source at the level of fiscal year 2024 grants. Although the FSM and the RMI are stable democracies, both countries face political and social challenges with regard to improving grant funding. total combined compact grant assistance to the two countries is projected at an estimated $3.6 billion over the 20-year assistance period. However, to provide increasing U.S. contributions to the FSM’s and the RMI's trust funds, grant funding will decrease annually. Assuming current population growth estimates, this decrease in grant funding. will result in falling per capita grant assistance over the funding period and relative to the original compact (see fig. 3). While the level of annual grant assistance decreases each year, contributions to trust funds—meant to provide an ongoing source of revenue—will increase. value, the RMI’s wage bill increased from around $17 million in 2000 to around $30 million in 2005. As compact grants decline through 2023, government fiscal balances and GDP could be supported, at least partially, by increased noncompact assistance. The RMI also receives large grants from Japan and Taiwan and the FSM reports having received grants from China. The FSM and the R MI receive substantial U.S. program assistance from agencies such as the Department of Agriculture, Education, and Health and Human Services. The FSM and the RMI economies have performed modestly and have been characterized by continued dependence on external assistance. Private sector employment has largely stagnated in both countries, whereas public sector expenditures continue to account for almost two-thirds of GDP. Unless each nation can secure other donor assistance, maintenance of living reflecting expected compact funding at levels roughly equivalent to fiscal years 2002 and 2003, when compact funds were temporarily increased. In both the F SM and RMI, however, private sector activity has remained relatively stagnant and exists largely to provide services to the public sector. Economic development and self-sufficiency were not achieved under the original compact. Total U.S. assistance accounted for more than 50 percent of government revenues throughout the compact period. In the FSM, 2004 and 2005 GDP fell owing to compact delays and a lower level of assistance relative to 2003. For the RMI, the IMF estimates that GDP expanded moderately owing to increased public sector expenditure (see fig. 4). While the R MI also experienced compact delays in 2004, RMI public expenditure increased in both 2004 and2005, reflecting expected compact funding. of key policy reforms requires fiscal resources. We recognize that the FSM and the RMI were required under the amended compacts to contribute an initial $30 million to their trust funds. Recent RMI GDP performance may have differed if this funding were used to provide current goods and services rather than for savings. The RMI’s contribution does not alter the extent of RMI economic dependence on external assistance. Our description of R MI economic performance was also based on broad trends from 2000 to 2005, not exclusively on the 2 years of bump-up assistance.

ROUGE-1: 81.66, ROUGE-2: 73.32, ROUGE-L: 24.46
BERTScore: 58.66

==============================================
==================== [74/100] ====================
Summary:
The department has not yet fully defined its strategy for completing waves 4 and 5. Each wave focuses on assessing and strengthening internal controls and business systems related to the stage of auditability addressed in the wave. Wave 1 focuses on the appropriations receipt and distribution process. Wave 2 focuses on supporting the budget-related data used for management decision making and reporting, including the Statement of Budgetary Resources. Wave 3 focuses on ensuring that all assets (including military equipment, general equipment, real property, inventory, and operating materials and supplies) exist. accountable property systems of record exist; all of the reporting entities’ assets are recorded in those systems ofrecord; reporting entities have the right (ownership) to report these assets; and the assets are consistently categorized, summarized, and reported. Wave 4—Full Audit Except for Legacy Asset Valuation includes the valuation assertion over new asset acquisitions. It involves the budgetary transactions covered by the Statement of Budgetary Resources effort in Wave 2. Wave 5—Full Financial Statement Audit focuses on assessing and strengthening, as necessary, internal controls, processes, and business systems involved in supporting valuations reported for legacy assets. Key contributors to this testimony include J. Christopher Martin, Senior-Level Technologist. The first three waves focus on achieving the DOD Comptroller’s interim budgetary and asset accountability priorities, while the remaining two waves are intended to complete actions needed to achieve full financial accountability. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Asif A. Khan, (202) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov. That you or other members of the Subcommittee may have at this time. not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. to address 70 auditor Notices of Findings and Recommendations that included 139 recommendations. The plan did not identify resources, roles and responsibilities, or include performance indicators to measure performance against action plan objectives. The Marine Corps reported that actions on 88 of the 139 recommendations, including weaknesses related to accounting and financial reporting and information technology systems were fully implemented; however, the completeness and effectiveness of most Marine Corps’ actions have not yet been tested. An effective remediation plan would help ensure that audit recommendations are fully addressed to deal with short-term and long-term goals. corrective actions based on manually intensive efforts to produce reliable financial reporting at year-end. Such efforts may not result in sustained improvements over the long term. We found that the Marine Corps’ SBR Remediation Plan focused on individual initiatives to address 70 auditor Notices of Findings and Recommendations that needed to be addressed. We previously reported that using principles of risk management helps policymakers make informed decisions about best ways to prioritize investments, so that the investments target the areas of greatest need. The Marine Corps did not have effective controls in place to support estimated obligations, referred to as “bulk obligations,” to record a payment liability. The Marine Corps estimates obligations in a bulk amount to record payment liabilities where it does not have a mechanism to identify authorizing documentation as a basis for recording the obligations. The auditors found ineffective controls over three major information technology systems used by the Marine Corps. The audit also found problems with the reliability of reported financial information. The investigation is ongoing. ineffective controls over three major information technology systems used by the Marine Corps. The Marine Corps did not develop an overall corrective action or remediation plan that includes key elements of a risk-based plan. Instead, its approach focuses on short-term corrective actions based on manually intensive efforts to produce reliable data. System interface controls are critical for ensuring the completeness and accuracy of data transferred between systems. The report also noted that the Marine Corp did not developed an overall Corrective Action Plan. that we reviewed, neither individual officials nor the executive committees took sufficient action to ensure that the FIPs were accurate or complied with the FIAR Guidance. As a result, the Navy concluded that its Civilian Pay was ready for audit, as did the Air Force with respect to its Military Equipment, even though they did not have sufficient support to assert audit readiness. On the other hand, both the DOD Inspector General and the DOD Comptroller carried out their responsibilities for reviewing. In their reviews, both organizations identified issues with the Fips that were similar to those we had identified. the components—will be key to bringing about effective implementation, through the components’ FIPs. weaknesses in the Navy and Air Force FIAR Plan implementation efforts indicate that the monitoring and oversight of such efforts have not been effective. We found that component officials as well as the oversight committees at both the component and DOD levels did not effectively carry out their monitoring responsibilities for the Navy Civilian Pay and Air Air Force Military Equipment Fips. For the two FIP’s that we reviewed, neither individual officials nor the executive committees were effective in monitoring. focus efforts of the department and components, in order to achieve certain short- and long- term results. DOD revised its FIAR strategy and methodology to focus on the DOD Comptroller’s two priorities. The first priority is to strengthen processes, controls, and systems that produce DOD's budgetary information and Statements of Budgetary Resources. The second priority isto improve the accuracy and reliability of management information pertaining to the department's mission-critical assets, including military equipment, real property, and general equipment. deemed effective on a go-forward basis. Given the lack of documentation to support the values of the department’s legacy assets, federal accounting standards allow for the use of alternative methods to provide reasonable estimates for the cost of these assets. In the context of this phased approach, the dual focus on budgetary and asset information offers the potential to obtain preliminary assessments regarding the effectiveness of current processes and controls. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Some DOD components are beginning to reap the benefits of strengthened controls and processes gained through ongoing efforts to improve their financial management operations and reporting capabilities. Lessons learned from the Marine Corps’ Statement of Budgetary Resources audit effort can provide a roadmap to help other components better stage their audit readiness efforts. In August 2009, DOD’s Comptroller sought to further focus efforts of the department and components, in order to achieve the goal of becoming audit ready. The goal is to make DOD components audit ready by the end of 2015. DOD needs to provide accountability over the existence and completeness of its assets. Problems with asset accountability can further complicate critical functions, such as planning for the current troop withdrawals. In May 2010, DOD introduced a new phased approach that divides progress toward achieving financial statement auditability into five waves (or phases) of concerted improvement activities (see appendix I). According to DOD, the components’ implementation of the methodology described in the 2010 FIAR Plan will be reviewed in the coming months and years. The DOD Comptroller said it is critical that the department continues to look at how effectively it applies lessons learned. DOD has introduced incentives such as including FIAR goals in Senior Executive Service Performance Plans. The challenge now is to evaluate and validate these incentives. The Comptroller also said that effective oversight holds individuals accountable for carrying out their responsibilities. The Department of Defense Comptroller is the head of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, which is responsible for the FIPs. The FIP is a joint program between the Defense Department and the Department of Energy. reported that the FIAR Plan did not have clear results-oriented metrics. To its credit, DOD has taken action to begin defining FIAR metrics. We have not yet had an opportunity to assess implementation of these metrics. Ensuring effective monitoring and oversight of progress—especially by the leadership in the components—will be key to bringing about effective implementation, according to the authors of the report. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) at the request of the Defense Department. The lack of effective internal controls, in part, contributed to the DOD Inspector General issuing a disclaimer of opinion on the Marine Corps’ fiscal year 2010 Statement of Budgetary Resources (SBR) Because of the department’s complexity and magnitude, developing and implementing a comprehensive plan will not be an easy task. But it is a task that is critical to resolving the long-standing weaknesses and will require consistent management oversight and monitoring for it to be successful. The effectiveness of these three integrated efforts at establishing a baseline remains to be seen. The FIAR Plan did not establish a baseline of the department’s state of internal control and financial management weaknesses. Such a baseline could be used to assess and plan for the necessary improvements and remediation. DOD currently has efforts underway to address known internal control weaknesses through three integrated programs: (1) Internal Controls over Financial Reporting (ICOFR), (2) Internal controls over financial reporting (ICFPR), and (3) Internal control over financial Reporting (ICR) and financial reporting. The FIAR Guidance details the implementation of the methodology with an emphasis on internal controls and supporting documentation. The guidance directs the components to identify responsible organizations and personnel and resource requirements for improvement work. In developing their plans, components use a standard template that comprises data fields aligned to the methodology. The consistent application of a standard methodology for assessing the components’ current financial management capabilities can help establish valid baselines against which to measure, sustain, and report progress. Improving the department’s financial management operations and thereby providing DOD with a more efficient financial management program is a key goal. and management decision making and potentially exceeding authorized spending limits. Lack of effective internal controls hinders management’s ability to have reasonable assurance that their allocated resources are used effectively, properly, and in compliance with budget and appropriations law. DOD has initiated several broad-based reform efforts to address its long-standing financial management weaknesses. Until DOD analyzes personnel needs and gaps in the financial management area, it will not be in a position to develop an effective financial management recruitment, retention, and investment strategy. The financial transformation needed at DOD, and its removal from GAO’s high-risk list, is a long-term effort. Improving financial management will need to be a cross-functional endeavor; requiring committed and sustained leadership. The DOD Comptroller has expressed commitment to the FIAR goals, and established a focused approach that is intended to help DOD achieve successes in the near term. The FIAR Plan is in its sixth year and continues to evolve based on lessons learned, corrective actions, and policy changes. implement a strategic approach for addressing the department’s financial management weaknesses and for achieving auditability. In May 2009, we identified several concerns with the adequacy of the FIAR Plan as a strategic and management tool. Overall, improvement efforts have not resulted in the fundamental transformation of operations necessary to resolve the department's long-standing financial management deficiencies. However, DOD has made significant improvements to the FIar Plan that, if implemented effectively, could result in significant improvement in DOD's financial management. necessary to align financial improvement and audit readiness efforts across the department. In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not have clear results-oriented with other DOD initiatives. To monitor progress and hold individuals accountable for progress, DOD managers and oversight bodies need reliable, valid, meaningful metrics to measure performance and the results of corrective actions. GAO will continue to monitor the progress of and provide feedback on the status of DOD’s financial management improvement efforts. I would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the Subcommittee may have. The backlog of unresolved GFEBS trouble tickets has continued to increase from about 250 in September 2010 to approximately 400 in May 2011. Trouble tickets represent user questions and issues with transactions or system performance that have not been resolved. According to Army officials, this increase in tickets was not unexpected since the number of users and transactions being processed by the system has increased. The Army and DFAS are taking steps to address issues raised by DFAS. Approximately two-thirds of invoice and receipt data must be manually entered. two-thirds of invoice and receipt data must be manually entered into GFEBS from the invoicing and receiving system (i.e., Wide Area Work Flow). DFAS personnel stated that manual data entry will eventually become infeasible due to increased quantities of data. Army officials acknowledged that there is a problem with the Wide Area work flow and GFEbs interface and that they are working with DOD to resolve the problem. The problem reduced the effectiveness of GFE BS, and that this problem is being resolved. used by approximately 35,000 users. DEAMS is expected to be fully deployed during fiscal year 2016. It is currently operational at Scott Air Force Base and DFAS, and is being used by about 1,100 individuals. GFEBS lacks the ability to run ad hoc queries or search for data in the system to resolve problems or answer questions. The Army has recognized this limitation and is currently developing a system enhancement that they expect will better support the users’ needs, the report says. The Army and Air Force have stated that they have.experiencing difficulty with some of the DEAMS system interfaces. The interface problem with the Standard Procurement System has become so severe that the interface has been turned off, and the data must be manually entered into DEAMS. DFAS officials stated that DEAMS does not provide the capability— which existed in the legacy systems—to produce ad hoc reports that can be used to perform the data analysis need to perform daily operations. They also noted that when some reports are produced, the accuracy of those reports is questionable. standardized financial management and accounting practices for the Army’s general fund, except for funds related to the Army Corps of Engineers. GFEBS is currently operational at 154 locations, including DFAS, and is being used by approximately 35,000 users. DEAMS is intended to provide the Air Force with the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities and is expected to maintain control and accountability for approximately $160 billion. The Army estimates that G FEBS will be used to control and account for about $140 billion in annual spending. The Army and Air Force have stated that they have plans to address these issues. The Army has plans to validate the audit readiness of GFEBS in a series of independent auditor examinations over the next several fiscal years. For DEAMS, the DOD Milestone Decision Authority has directed that the system is not to be deployed beyond Scott Air Force Base until the known system weaknesses have been corrected and the system has been independently tested to ensure that it is operating as intended. In closing, I am encouraged by the recent efforts and commitment DOD’s leaders have shown.  implementation of an integrated, audit-ready systems environment through the deployment of ERP systems underlies all of DOD’s financial improvement efforts. According to DOD, the successful implementation of the ERPs is not only critical for addressing long-standing weaknesses in financial management, but equally important for helping to resolve weaknesses in other high-risk areas such as business transformation, business system modernization, and supply chain management. To the degree that these business systems do not provide the intended capabilities, DOD's goal of departmentwide audit readiness could be jeopardized. years we have reported that the department has not effectively employed acquisition management controls to help ensure the ERPs deliver the promised capabilities on time and within budget. As we reported in October 2010, DOD has identified 10 ERPs as essential to its efforts to transform its business operations. We are currently reviewing the status of two of these ERPs—the Army’s General Fund Enterprise Business System (GFEBS) and the Air Force’S Defense Enterprise Accounting and Management System (DEAMS) Since 1995, we have designated DOD’s business systems modernization program as high risk. Congress included provisions in the Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005. The department has invested billions of dollars and will invest billions more to implement ERPs. The challenge now is to evaluate and validate these and other incentives to determine their effectiveness and whether the right mix of incentives has been established, the report says. The report concludes that until DOD fully implements these longstanding institutional modernization management controls its business system modernization will likely remain a high-risk program. to its corporate enterprise architecture, the architecture has yet to be federated. Each of the military departments has made progress in managing its respective architecture program, but there are still limitations in the scope and completeness. For example, while each department has established or is in the process of establishing an executive committee with responsibility and accountability for the enterprise architecture. None has fully developed an enterprise architecture methodology or a well-defined business enterprise, the report says. The report concludes that the military has made significant progress in its architecture program. DOD requests billions of dollars each year to maintain its weapon systems. DOD has limited ability to identify, aggregate, and use financial management information for managing and controlling operating and support costs. Without timely, reliable, and useful financial information on cost, DOD management lacks information needed to accurately report on acquisition costs, allocate resources to programs, or evaluate program performance.to exist and remediation and improvement efforts would require the support of other business areas beyond the financial community before they could be fully addressed. Long-standing and pervasive weaknesses in DOD’s financial management and related business processes and systems have left the department vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. The complexity and long-term nature of continue to impair management. DOD invests billions of dollars to acquire weapon systems, but it lacks the financial management processes and capabilities it needs to track and report on the cost of weapon systems in a reliable manner. We reported on this issue over 20 years ago, but the problems continue to persist. In July 2010, we reported that although DOD and the military departments have efforts underway to begin addressing these financial management weaknesses. costs, allocate resources to programs, or evaluate program performance. We found that an obligation of $200 million in excess of available funds in the Army’s military personnel account violated the Antideficiency Act. The overobligation likely stemmed, in part, from lack of communication between Army Budget and program managers. The lack of adequate process and system controls to maintain effective funds control impacted the Army's ability to prevent, identify, correct, and report potential violations of the act. and report potential violations of the Antideficiency Act. Without adequate financial management processes, systems, and controls, DOD components are at risk of reporting inaccurate, inconsistent, and unreliable data for financial reporting and management decision making. The proper classification and recording of costs are basic financial management functions that are also key in analyzing areas for potential future savings. We found that DOD’s TRICARE Management Activity (TMA) had misclassified $102.7 million of the nearly $112 million in DCOE advisory and assistance contract obligations. Undersecretaries as CMOs and to develop business transformation plans. DOD financial managers are responsible for the functions of budgeting, financing, accounting for transactions and events, and reporting of financial and budgetary information. DOD’s finance activities generally involve paying the salaries of its employees, paying retirees and annuitants, reimbursing its employees for travel- related expenses, paying contractors and vendors for goods and services, and collecting debts owed to DOD. DOD relies on a complex network of organizations and personnel to execute these functions. Before fiscal year 1991, the military services and defense agencies independently managed their finance and accounting operations. According to DOD, these decentralized operations were highly inefficient and failed to produce reliable information. On November 26, 1990, DOD created the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) DFAS records transactions in the accounting records, prepares thousands of reports used by managers throughout DOD and by the Congress, and prepares DOD-wide and service-specific financial statements. The military services play a vital role in that they authorize the expenditure of funds and are the source of most of the financial information.  DFAS processed approximately 198 million payment-related transactions and disbursed over $578 billion in fiscal year 2010. DOD financial management was designated as a high-risk area by GAO in 1995. Pervasive deficiencies in financial management processes, systems, and controls, and the resulting lack of data reliability, continue to impair management’s ability to assess the resources needed, GAO said in a 1995 report. The DOD budget request for fiscal year 2012 is $4.2 billion. It is critical that the current initiatives being led by the DOD DCMO and the DOD Comptroller be continued and provided with sufficient resources and ongoing monitoring in the future. Financial management will need to be a cross-functional endeavor; requiring improvements in some of DOD’s other business operations such as those in the high-risk areas of contract management, supply chain management, support infrastructure management, and weapon systems acquisition. Within every administration, there are changes at the senior leadership; therefore, it is paramount that theCurrent initiative be institutionalized throughout the department. and DOD has a long way and many long-standing challenges to overcome, says GAO. Some of the most difficult challenges ahead lie in the effective implementation of the department’s strategy by the Army, Navy, Air Force, and DLA, it says. GAO will continue to monitor the department and its military components. The department is heading in the right direction and making progress, says the GAO, but there is more work to be done to ensure the department's financial management is fully auditable. The department is facing near and long-term internal fiscal pressures. For more than a decade, DOD has dominated GAO’s list of federal programs and operations at high risk of being vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse. All of the DOD programs on the High-Risk List relate to business operations, including systems and processes related to management of contracts, finances, the supply chain, and other areas of the agency's operations. The department is trying to balance competing demands to support ongoing operations, rebuild readiness following extended military operations, and manage increasing personnel and health care costs. The plan was to include assessments of (1) existing critical skills and competencies in DOD’s civilian workforce. In developi the plan, the department identified financial management as one of its enterprisewide mission-critical occupations. DOD was to submit a plan of action for dev eloping and reshaping the civilian employee workforce to address any identified gaps, as well as specific recruiting and retention goals and strategies on how to train, compensate, and motivate civilian employees. Although some aspects of the legislative requirements were addressed, DOD still has significant work to do. Effective financial management in DOD will require a knowledgeable and skilled workforce. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 directed DOD to develop a strategic plan to shape and improve the department’s civilian workforce. Hiring and retaining such a skilled workforce is a challenge DOD must meet to succeed in its transformation to efficient, effective, and accountable business operations.be successful. The plan was to, among other things; include assessments of the department's civilian workforce and how it can improve its performance. GAO has reported the need for a chief management officer (CMO) position and a comprehensive, enterprisewide business transformation plan. In May 2007, DOD designated the Deputy Secretary of Defense as the CMO. The National Defense Authorization Acts for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 contained provisions that codified the C MO and Deputy Chief Management Officer (DCMO) positions. DOD also required DOD to develop a strategic management plan, and required the Secretaries of the military departments to designate their Undersecretaries as CMOs and to develop business transformation plans.

ROUGE-1: 76.58, ROUGE-2: 69.22, ROUGE-L: 23.90
BERTScore: 55.07

==============================================
==================== [75/100] ====================
Summary:
governments, which are responsible for most traffic signs, and $11.8 million by state governments. The maximum cost in any one year was estimated at $4.5 million. Up to 100% of the cost of replacing traffic signs is eligible for federal funding. Most larger communities already have sign maintenance and replacement programs. For these communities, the study estimated that the impact of the retroreflectivity maintenance standard is likely to be modest. The impact may be greater in smaller communities that may never have instituted sign Maintenance and Replacement programs. The new standard required that communities comply with the new standard by certain deadlines. Communities are still required to replace any signs that do not meet the standards. The deadline for communities to bring all of their regulatory, warning, and post-mounted guide signs (except street name signs and overhead guide signs) into retroreflectivity would appear to put an agency in a better position to defend lawsuits. DOT said it changed the deadlines to reduce the costs and impacts of the compliance deadlines on state and local highway agencies. The new standard involved two elements. First, it established measurable standards for the minimum acceptable retroreflectivity of signs. The second element was a requirement that agencies adopt a method by which to maintain the retro Reflectivity of their street signs. To provide flexibility to agencies, the standard listed several methods that can satisfy this requirement. They include visual nighttime inspection from a moving vehicle by a trained sign inspector; measurement of sign retroreflective using a retroreflectometer. and replacement of signs based on their expected status. using a retroreflectometer; replacement of signs based on their expected life above the minimum standard for retroreflectivity. Replacement of all signs in an area, or of a given type, at specified intervals, based on the expected life of the shortest-life material used on the signs in that area or of that type. Replacement based on performance of sample signs that are monitored for loss of retro Reflectivity; or other methods that are developed based on engineering studies. According to the standard, an agency using a retro reflectivity assessment or management method will be in compliance. of places, streets, and highways (§2D.05). Formerly, names on signs could either be in all capital letters or have only the first letter capitalized. The new standard eliminated the option of using only uppercase letters. This standard did not have a deadline for compliance. State and local transportation agencies are required to implement the new lettering style only as they implement the lettering standard. This change was made because drivers often have only a brief time to read these signs and studies indicate that mixed-case lettering is easier to read. standard useful-life cycles for signs, but that varying environmental conditions meant that the actual useful life of signs varied in different areas of the country. In the UK, signs can live for up to 30 years, but in the U.S. they can live up to 50 years, depending on environmental conditions. In Australia, signs have a life expectancy of up to 20 years, and in the UK it is between 10 and 15 years. In Europe, signs live for as long as 30 years. As reflective materials degrade, a sign becomes harder to see at night. Nighttime crash rates are estimated to be three times higher than daytime rates. The fatality rate for nighttime driving is also higher than for daytime driving. With the aging of the U.S. population, the number of older drivers is increasing. But ensuring that traffic signs are easily visible to older drivers at night is becoming a more significant safety issue, says the MUTCD, a federal highway safety agency in Washington, D.C. The process of developing the new standard included FHWA-sponsored research. The new standard took effect on January 22, 2008. It established measurable standards and established methods to assess the nighttime visibility of signs. AASHTO adopted a policy resolution in 2000 requesting that agencies be given six years to implement methods for nighttime visibility. The proposal was revised through the formal federal rulemaking process from 2004 through 2007, with repeated opportunities for public comment.iReport.com will feature iReport stories in a weekly Newsquiz. Since 2007, the Federal Highway Administration has amended certain national standards for traffic signs. These new standards were the subject of some confusion and controversy. Some state and local agencies complained that the new standards would be relatively costly to comply with. In response to the criticism, FHWA eliminated some of the nighttime visibility maintenance standard compliance deadlines. This report provides background for the nighttime Visibility Maintenance standard and addresses some ofThe issues that have been raised about this standard. It also addresses some the issues that were raised about the new sign-lettering standard. The 2007 amendment set a minimum level of retroreflectivity for signs and required state agencies to adopt a method to ensure that signs met that minimum. Because of its safety significance, this standard was given a deadline for compliance. January 22, 2018 (10 years after adoption)—the deadline for communities to bring all street name signs and overhead guide signs into compliance. Formerly, names on signs signs were not required to comply with the new standard. In 2009, FHWA updated the standard concerning the sign lettering style for names of places, streets, and highways (§2D.05). would follow to maintain adequate nighttime visibility of signs. FHWA's final retroreflectivity standard tried to satisfy both the congressional directive and the preferences of the state and local transportation agencies. Not every sign needed to meet the minimum standard so long as agencies had a management process in place to maintain the nighttime visibility. Regarding tort liability, FHwa noted that having formally implemented a method for maintaining retro Reflectivity would appear to put an agency in a better position to defend itself against a lawsuit. minimum nighttime visibility standard to the MUTCD. In 1992, Congress directed DOT to develop a minimum standard, with this provision in the FY1993 Department of Transportation (DOT) appropriations bill: SEC. 406. The reflective properties of sign materials decrease over time, due to exposure to sunlight and other factors. As the reflective materials degrade, a sign becomes a sign of the road, not the road itself. The standard for a minimum level of retroreflectivity that must be maintained for pavement markings and signs shall apply to all roads. The minimum retroreflectivity standard's primary impact was to establish a quantifiable level for what constitutes adequate nighttime visibility. Up to 100% of the cost of installing and replacing traffic signs can be covered by federal-aid highway funding under several programs. The annual level of federal- aid highway funding provided through the annual DOT appropriations act rose from $33.9 billion in FY2004 (when the standard was established) to $42.7 billion in 2011. The standard was adopted to ensure the nighttime visibility of traffic signs. DOT extended the deadline for highway agencies to implement an assessment or management method for ensuring that their signs comply with the retroreflectivity standard to May 2014. DOT also limited the scope of the standard in a May 2012 Federal Register notice. DOT appropriations act rose from $33.9 billion in FY2004 (when the rule was formally proposed) to $41.5billion in FY2012, in addition to $27.5 billion provided to states and localities for highway infrastructure investment in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. required to implement the new lettering style only as they install new signs or replace existing signs. In 1985, the Center for Auto Safety petitioned FHWA to add a minimum nighttime visibility standard to the MUTCD. In 1992, Congress press reports conflated the requirement for replacing signs that were no longer clearly visible at night with the entirely unrelated new standard requiring mixed-case lettering on street signs. The reason for these requirements is the belief that uniformity in traffic control devices promotes public safety. to replace "perfectly good" traffic signs. In part this may have resulted from the confusion of the two different traffic sign standards. If a traffic sign meets the MUTCD standard for retroreflectivity, it does not have to be replaced. If it doesn't, it may create a safety hazard after dark, although it may appear to be perfectly good during daylight hours. Several comments submitted during the rulemaking process described the rule as an unfunded mandate, as it would impose additional costs. to be violated (knowingly or unknowingly) in actual practice. The more significant potential enforcement mechanism for MUTCD standards is the tort liability that communities may face in the event of a lawsuit involving a nighttime car crash. A study sponsored by DOT estimated the total additional cost to state and local governments of complying with the new standard to be $37.5 million over a 10-year period. Of this, $27 million would be borne by local governments, which are responsible for most traffic signs, and $11.8 million by states. not have compliance deadlines. The case of the retroreflectivity maintenance standard is unusual in this respect. It was given a compliance deadline because its safety impact was considered to be significant. States and local governments that are not in compliance with standards are potentially subject to having a portion of their federal transportation funding withheld. However, there is no formal enforcement mechanism to ensure compliance. In fact, one report noted that "It is not uncommon for MUTCD principles to be violated (knowingly or unknowingly) in actual practice"

ROUGE-1: 76.75, ROUGE-2: 68.35, ROUGE-L: 33.08
BERTScore: 66.89

==============================================
==================== [76/100] ====================
Summary:
account's investment decisions and does not have an interest in the account's profits and losses except as permitted by regulatory guidance. Certain Asset-Backed Securitizations. Covered Bonds Vehicles. Funds holding a pool of loans or loans or interest rate derivatives, subject to various terms and conditions. Certain asset-backed Commercial Paper Conduits. Issuers of an asset- backed commercial paper conduit "that issues only securities comprised of a residual interest and securities with a legal maturity of 397 days or less" development companies regulated by the SEC as business development companies and seeding vehicles intending to be registered investment companies. FDIC Conservatorship or Receivership. Issuers organized "to facilitate the disposal of assets acquired in the FDIC's capacity as a conservator or receiver [of a depository institution or non-bank financial institution supervised by the FRB]." Other Investments. Any issuer that the federal financial regulators jointly determine to be excluded from the definition of "covered fund" The Rule expressly exempts certain activities that otherwise would fall under the general prohibition against sponsoring or. Covered Bonds Vehicles. Funds holding a pool of loans or certain other permissible assets "for the benefit of holders of covered bonds," which are issued or guaranteed by a foreign banking organization. Small business investment companies and similar companies organized "to make investments [d]esigned primarily to promote the public welfare" or investments in certain qualified historic tax credit programs. Registered Investment Companies and Business Development Companies (BDCs). Issuers registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940. Business development companies regulated by the SEC as business development companies. A banking entity's ownership interest in a covered fund will be considered an "other similar interest" if the banking entity has any of the following: 1. any control over the removal or hiring of acovered fund's managers, directors, or investment advisors; 2. a right to share in a cover fund's "income, gains, or profits"; 3. aRight, other than rights as a creditor upon a default or acceleration trigger, to a covered Fund's assets.or other similar interest. "after all other interests have been redeemed and/or paid in full"; 4. a "right to receive all or a portion of excess spread" of a covered fund; 5. a duty to pay acovered fund for the ownership interest that could be reduced based on lower interest rates owed on such ownership interest or as a result of a loss in value of the fund's assets. 6. any earnings of pass-through income from the covered fund or of income that varies in accordance with the value. of the covered Fund's assets; or 7. "any synthetic right to have, receive, or. services"; (2) "the fund is organized and offered only in connection with bona fide trust, fiduciary, or investment advisory services"; (3) the banking entity retains only a de minimis interest in the funds; (4) the Banking entity and its affiliates engage in no transaction with the fund that would be designated as a "covered transaction" under Federal Reserve Act (FRA) Section 23A; (5) the covered fund does not have the word "bank" in its name or share a name with the banking entities. as if the banking entity were a member bank and the fund an affiliate of that bank. The banking entity does not guaranty the obligations of the covered fund. The covered fund does not have the word "bank" in its name or share a name with the banking entities. No director or employee of the banking. entity, other than those directly engaged in providing investment advisory or other services to the covered. fund, acquires an interest in the fund. Although not explicitly excepted by the statute, pursuant to the regulations, banking entities generally may engage in underwriting and market making activities for covered funds. The total ownership interests in covered funds by a banking entity and its affiliates "may not exceed 3 percent of the tier 1 capital of the banking entity" Banking entities are permitted to make initial seed investments to establish covered funds and help make them become attractive investments for unaffiliated third parties. But to do so they must: actively work to replace their investments with that of unaffiliatedThird parties; comply with the aggregate de minimis investment requirements; and generally within one year of the establishment of the covered fund, be in compliance. for the purposes of the de minimis seed investment limits if the banking entity (1) Does not own, control, or hold with the power to vote 25 percent or more of the voting shares of the company or fund; and (2) Provides investment advisory, commodity trading advisory, administrative, and other services. " The Volcker Rule authorizes banking entities to acquire ownership interests in, sponsor, organize, and offer covered funds to the extent that they provide "bona fide trust, fiduciary, or investment advisory services" A de minimis investment made by a banking entity and its affiliates must "not exceed 3 percent of the total number or value of the outstanding ownership interests of the fund" A banking entity, in the context of investing in an asset-backed securities issuer, is required to acquire a greater percentage to comply with the credit risk retention requirements of Section 15G(a)(3) of the Exchange Act. The Rule establishes various methods for calculating per fund de minimi investment caps based on the type of investment.which are subject to both per fund and aggregate caps. fund, be in compliance with the per fund de minimis investment cap. Upon an application by a banking entity, the FRB may provide up to two additional years to conform with the cap. SEC-registered business development companies, investment companies, and foreign public funds are excluded from the definition of "covered fund" for the purposes of the de minimi seed investment limits. The FRB can provide an extension if such an extension "would be consistent with safety and soundness and not detrimental to the public interest" Volcker Rule prohibits "banking entities" from engaging in "proprietary trading" The Rule carves out numerous exclusions and designates myriad activities as permissible so long as various terms and conditions are met. The Volcker Rule allows banking entities to act as a securitizer or, in accordance with the credit risk retention requirements of Section 15G(a)(3) of the Exchange Act, to hold investments in a covered fund that is an issuer of asset-backed securities. as well as the scope, complexity, and types of trading and investment activities. Banking entities with total assets below $10 billion may fold Volcker Rule compliance measures into existing compliance programs. The standard compliance requirements, which are set forth in Appendix A to the regulations, apply to banking entities with assets of $10 million or more. They apply to banks with no proprietary trading activity (other than trading of federal, agency, or state and local obligations) and having no investments in covered funds. They are not required to develop aVolcker Rule-specific compliance program but must do so if they begin to conduct such activities. documentation of all covered funds sponsored or organized by components of the organization. identification of the lines of authority with respect to such funds. explanations of monitoring for and prohibition of material conflicts of interest, threats to safety and soundness, or exposure to high-risk assets or trading strategies. documentation of plans for seeking unaffiliated investors to meet investment limits. board of director and senior management involvement; and CEO attestation. The regulations require any banking entity engaging in any activity or making an investment in violation of the Volcker Rule to terminate the activity and divest the investment promptly. FRA Section 619 requires financial regulators to issue regulations to "insure compliance with [Section 619]." In response, the final regulations require banking entities to develop and maintain compliance programs, internal controls, and recordkeeping systems. Compliance requirements vary in accordance with the size of the banking entity, as well as the scope, complexity, and types of trading. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. purpose of that law; commodity pools that have an exempt status under CFTC Rule 4.7; CFTC-registered commodity pools, whose participation units are substantially owned by and only offered to certain "qualified eligible persons" in accordance with CFTC regulations. Foreign-based funds that raise money to sell or invest in securities and whose ownership interests are offered and sold exclusively outside the U.S., that either are sponsored by a banking entity or have ownership interests held by the banking entity. Such funds could qualify for an exemption, other than exemptions under Section 3(c)(1) or Section 3 (c)(7), from the Investment Company. under Section 3(c)(1), from the Investment Company Act of 1940 if such funds were subject to U.S. securities laws. The rule explicitly excludes a number of activities and products from the "covered fund" definition. These exclusions include the following: Foreign Public Funds. Issuers that are not organized or established in the United States that "issue ownership interests to retail investors in [their] home jurisdiction" and such interests are sold "predominantly through one or more public offerings" The Volcker Rule prohibits banking entities from buying an ownership interest in a covered fund as principal for its own account, rather for a customer. Banking entities that are organized in a foreign country and are not controlled, either directly or indirectly, by a U.S.-based banking entity may be exempt from the rule's restrictions on investments in covered funds. The prohibition does not apply if the interest is acquired by a banking entity while "acting solely as agent, broker, banking entities must have written internal programs in place to ensure that hedges comply" Banking entities are prohibited from entering into a transaction that would be considered a "covered transaction" for the purposes of FRA Section 23A with the covered fund. Banking entities and their affiliates that provide advisory or investment management services to or hold a permissible interest in a covered fund are also prohibited. The Volcker Rule applies to all banking entities that sponsor or invest in covered funds, unless they meet one of the permissible exceptions described below. A banking entity could still be barred if it results in "a material conflict of interest" or "a threat to the safety and soundness" of the banking entity. Insurance companies and their affiliates may sponsor or acquire ownership interests in covered funds if those interests are retained solely for the insurance company's or its affiliate's own account. All associated activities with and investments in the covered fund are conducted outside of the U.S., and generally the majority of the banking entity's overall business takes place in a foreign country. Unless the federal banking regulators jointly determined that the state law permitting such investments "is insufficient to protect the public interest," such investments can be made. the regulations, apply to banking entities with assets of $10 billion or more and for those banking entities that otherwise are required to do so by the financial regulators. The standard compliance program includes requirements for (1) written policies and procedures documenting compliance and verifying exemptions, (2) internal control systems, (3) management frameworks, (4) independent testing and review, (5) personnel training, and (6) recordkeeping. The Enhanced Minimum Standards include instructions as to the specific ingredients of the entity's policies. and review, (5) personnel training, and (6) recordkeeping. For banking entities subject to the standard compliance program, the final regulations also require and establish methods of calculating quantitative measurements that banking entities must furnish. Appendix A sets forth non-exclusive recordkeeping and reporting requirements, including quantitative metrics, for banking entities with "significant trading assets and liabilities," the regulations say. The regulations say the requirements apply to all banking entities in the U.S., Canada, Australia and New Zealand. instructions as to the specific ingredients of the entity's policies and procedures applicable to its trading desks and to its covered fund activities or investments. For the trading desks of banking entities that are subject to the heightened compliance program, there are specific requirements regarding how the trading desk "identif[ies], authoriz[es], and document[s] financial instruments to be purchased or sold" "types and amounts of risks allocated" to each trading desk; how those risks will be measured; why those risks are appropriate; "the process for setting new or revised limits" process for identifying, documenting and approving new products, trading strategies, and hedging strategies"; types of permissible customers and counterparties; and compensation arrangements. There are also provisions on describing the firm's risks and risk management process. For covered fund activities or investments, the Enhanced Minimum Standards requirements include management involvement in reviewing and testing the identification and documentation of all covered funds sponsored or organized by components of the firm. It also includes the specifics of its analytical policies and procedures and quantitative measurements; as well as how it will remediate violations. "market making-related activities" provided there are "clearly defined, verifiable, and monitored risk parameters" The regulation's requirements include that "[t]he amount, types, and risks of the financial instruments ... are designed not to exceed, on an ongoing basis, the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties" The banking entity "routinely stands ready to purchase and sell ... financial instruments" in commercially reasonable amounts and on a basis appropriate for the liquidity, maturity, and depth of the market. Regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" Subject to those conditions, the exceptions or permitted activities are: Underwriting Activities. Market Making Activities. The exemption for underwriting and market making-activities ... by its terms, is a statutorily permitted activity and exemption from the prohibitions in [12 U.S.C. §1851(a)], whether on proprietary trading or on covered fund activities. its market making positions must be "designed not to exceed the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties"; and the banking entity must have an internal compliance program. Any ownership interest acquired by a banking entity conducting underwriting or market making activities with a covered fund must be included in both the per fund and aggregate de minimis investment cap calculations. The limitation to "specific, identifiable risk[s]" appears to prohibit portfolio hedging akin to the JPMorgan London Whale trades discussed in the Proprietary Trading section above. The final rule seeks to make it clear that portfolio hedging will not be permitted. Banking entities will be required to document any investment undertaken as a hedge by linking it to the specific risks or exposures being offset. This provision is aimed at preventing incidents like the $6 billion loss that JPMorgan & Co. suffered in 2012 as a result of derivatives trades, designed to reduce risks. The regulations track the language of the statute and permit "risk-mitigating hedging activities" that are "positions, contracts, or other holdings of the banking entity" suffered in 2012 as a result of derivatives trades, designed to hedge against risks of the entire financial conglomerate. The statute authorizes the purchase and sale of U.S. obligations; obligations of federal agencies, Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Home Loan Banks, Farmer Mac, and Farm Credit System institutions. Under the regulations, banking entities may purchase and sell "any municipal security" and "any state or political subdivision of a state" in the same way. The regulation also includes various other restrictions. Proprietary Trading by Foreign Companies Conducted Outside the United States. Other Investments. The statute provides the agencies with discretion to permit proprietary trading for any other activity that they "determine, by rule, ... would permit promote and protect the safety soundness of the banking entity and the financial stability of the U.S.of the United states" The regulation alsoincludes various other Restrictions. The regulations are expected to go into effect on January 1, 2015. The Volcker Rule establishes an outright prohibition on proprietary trading by a "banking entity" But banking entities may purchase and sell "any municipal security" and other domestic government obligations without running afoul of the prohibition against proprietary trading. The ban on proprietary Trading does not apply to a banking entity's fiduciary activities that are conducted on behalf a customer and other customers. Under certain circumstances, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.S. banks under certain circumstances will be permitted to trade foreign government obligations. fiduciary activities that are conducted on behalf a customer and where the banking entity does not acquire a beneficial interest in the associated financial instruments. Riskless principal transactions, where a banking entity buys or sells a financial product "to offset a contemporaneous sale or purchase" of a customer, are exempt from the Volcker Rule's ban on proprietary trading. Insurance Company Portfolio Investments. The statute permits trading by insurance companies for their general accounts. Under the regulation, a banking entities that is an insurance company or an affiliate of an insuranceCompany is permitted to buy or sell. of an insurance company is permitted to buy or sell financial instruments for its own account if the transaction "is conducted in compliance with, and subject to, the insurance company investments laws" of the applicable state. The relevant federal banking regulators, in consultation with the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and relevant state or foreign insurance regulators, may jointly proscribe otherwise permissible insurance company investment activities. State regulation of those activities "is insufficient to protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity or the financial stability of the United States" The regulation focuses on restricting short-term trades. It establishes a rebuttable presumption that any financial instrument held for fewer than 60 days is a banned proprietary trade. Certain activities are not included in the definition of "proprietary trading," including the following: acquisitions or sales of financial products pursuant to a repurchase and reverse repurchase agreement. Foreign exchange or currency, but not loans, are excluded from the rule. The rule also covers trades by banking entities that are securities dealers and swap or swap-based securities dealers—both in the United States and abroad. "Proprietary trading" covers buying and selling of "financial instruments" by banking entities as "principal" for their "trading accounts" "Financial instruments" include securities, derivatives, and contracts for future sale or for options on any commodity other than foreign exchange or currency, but not loans. The Rule identifies exceptions to the blanket prohibition of proprietary trades by listing permitted activities and setting conditions under which those activities may be conducted. However, it excludes from permitted activities any transaction or class of activities, otherwise permitted, that that is otherwise permitted. reverse repurchase agreement; acquisitions or sales of financial products pursuant to a securities lending agreement; and "highly liquid" securities as part of a valid liquidity management plan. "The banking entity does not reasonably expect to give rise to appreciable profits or losses as a result of short-term price movements"; various derivative clearing activities. "Financial products for the satisfaction of delivery obligations, such as in connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding"; and "by a banking entity acting solely as agent, broker, or custodian" The Volcker Rule broadly defines "ownership interest" to mean "any equity, partnership, or other similar interest" The provision involving the control to hire or remove advisors, managers, and directors has caused some consternation among banking entities. The regulations state that, under certain circumstances, "restricted profit interests" held by a banking entity or one of its current or former employees are not considered an ownership interest for the purposes of the Volcker rule. For example, as a result of the rule, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission may be able to require banks to disclose more information about their clients. savings and loan or thrift holding companies. Foreign-based companies that are treated like bank holding companies pursuant to the International Banking Act of 1978. An affiliate is "any company that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with [a company described in categories 1-3]." This includes foreign-based banks that are permitted to operate branches in the U.S. or that own certain other domestic lending companies. In short, an affiliate is a subsidiary of a company that is controlled or controlled by another company. ownership interests in the issuer are sold predominately to persons other than such sponsoring banking entity. Wholly Owned Subsidiaries. Entities that are directly or indirectly owned entirely by the banking entity or one of its affiliates. Joint Ventures. Joint ventures between a banking entity and up to ten unaffiliated entities. Merger and Acquisition Vehicles. Issuers established for the sole purpose of effectuating "a bona fide merger or acquisition" Foreign Retirement and Pension Funds. Foreign Pension Funds, as long as they are not raising money primarily by investing or trading in securities. bona fide merger or acquisition." Foreign Retirement and Pension Funds. Retirement or pension funds that are organized in, subject to regulation in, and provide benefits to residents or citizens of a foreign jurisdiction. Separate Insurance Accounts. "A separate account, provided that no banking entity other than the insurance company participates in the account's profits and losses." Separate Life Insurance accounts. A separate account established for a banking entity (or multiple banking entities) to acquire life insurance policies for its benefit so long as the banking entity does not control the accounts' investment decisions. "Banking entity" is defined as FDIC-insured depository institutions. Such companies are typically organized as bank holding companies (BHCs) The Volcker Rule generally applies to hundreds of depository and non-depository affiliates and subsidiaries of these FHCs. However, the regulations provide certain exceptions to the definition of "banking entity," as discussed below. The applicability of certain exemptions, recordkeeping and reporting requirements, and other aspects of the Rule vary to some degree according to the organization or typical activities. a variety of regulatory regimes and separate regulators, foreign and domestic. It applies to community and global banks, every variety of insurance firm, securities firms, and foreign banking institutions operating in the United States, among others. The federal financial regulators have been tasked with diverse objectives, among which are the following: promoting safety and soundness of the entities covered by the Rule. It also protects taxpayers and consumers; limiting inappropriate transfers of the FDIC deposit insurance; reducing conflicts of interests between the entities and their clients. risky activities by these entities; "appropriately" accommodating the business of insurance; and " appropriately" timing divestiture of illiquid assets affected by the Rule. The statutory language requires the regulators to explicate such critical terms as "banking entity," "covered fund," and "illiquid fund" It includes a broad explicit delegation of discretion to exclude from the basic prohibitions of the statute "[s]uch other activity as the appropriate [federal financial regulators] determine, by rule ... would promote and protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity" activities, while also carving out specific exclusions from the scope of the two categories. The report concludes by addressing other aspects of the Rule that apply generally to banking entities. It provides standards by which the regulators may set further limits or conditions on these activities and includes authority for the regulators to add to the list of permitted activities. The regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate," the report says. It adds that the report is not intended to be a comprehensive guide to all banking activities. soundness of [the] banking entity ... or to the financial stability of the United States" The Rule also provides standards by which the regulators may set further limits or conditions on these permissible activities. The regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" Banking entities, subject to certain limitations, are permitted to make and retain de minimis investments in covered funds, which are subject to both per fund and aggregate caps. permissible so long as various terms and conditions are met. The statutory language provides only general outlines of prohibited activities and exceptions. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (FRB), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the SEC, and CFTC (together, the federal financial regulators or the Agencies) can issue coordinated rulemakings to fill in the details. The difficult task of crafting regulations to distinguish prohibited activities from activities considered essential to the safety and soundness of banking institutions. Some collateralized debt obligations (CDO) backed by trust preferred securities (TruPS) generally was a prohibited investment under the original Volcker Rule regulations. The American Bankers Association and several community banking organizations promptly filed a lawsuit challenging this aspect of the financial regulators' interpretation of the Volcker rule. The financial regulators responded by issuing an interim final rule on January 14, 2014. Shortly after the regulators issued the interim final rules, the plaintiffs withdrew their lawsuit. Similar issues likely exist regarding the applicability of theVolcker Rule to securities, issued and held by community banks. On December 10, 2013, more than two years after the statutorily mandated deadline, five federal financial regulators published final regulations. The regulations are implementing Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Together these are known as the Volcker Rule, which is designed to prohibit banks and their affiliates from engaging in risky, short-term, speculative trading. These are practices long condemned by the Rule's namesake, former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker. The Federal Reserve Board set the date when conformance with the Rule is required as July 21, 2015. That date could be extended an additional two years, and banking institutions and their affiliates are under an obligation to undertake good faith efforts to meet that date with full compliance. The Volcker Rule is at odds with conventional banking principles and potential risks to overall financial stability that could trigger the need for future bailouts, according to an analysis by one of the authors of the report. Former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker is the author of the study. Congress has delegated extensive discretion to the federal financial regulators to craft the Volcker Rule. The basic framework of the Rule is to broadly prohibit banking entities from engaging in two broad categories of activities. The Volcker rule is not likely to remain static over time. Rather, regulators likely will modify and clarify the requirements through regulations and guidance to address unforeseen complexities, the report says. It says the regulators have already issued an interim final rule that makes changes to the regulations as originally issued on December 10, 2013. The Volcker Rule applies broadly to all depository institutions and to most companies that are owned by or have a common ownership interest with a depository. As a result, the Volcker rule applies to the approximately 10,000 "community banks" scattered across the country. The rule also generally applies to global financial conglomerates like Bank of America, Citigroup, JPMorgan, Wells Fargo, and Goldman Sachs, which are organized as FHCs and thus control at least one FDIC-insured depository institution. recent extension, the conformance date is July 21, 2015. This means that a company that was a banking. entity or a subsidiary or affiliate of a banking entity on July. 21, 2010, must bring its activities into conformance before July 21. 2015. A company becoming a banking entities on July 21,. 2015, thus, would have two years, untilJuly 21, 2017, to conform its activities and investments. Banking entities are expected to engage in good faith efforts to be in compliance with the rules. to terminate the activity and divest the investment promptly. The statute generally requires divestiture of nonconforming activities within two years of the Rule becoming effective. The FRB has authority to extend this two-year period one year at a time, not to exceed an aggregate of three years. Under the FRB's recent extension, the conformance date is July 21, 2015. This subject to the data reporting and recordkeeping requirements of the rule that are discussed in the previous section of this report. five years; at the end of which divestiture would be required either at the. end of the five years or on the contractual date—whichever is earlier. The deal is expected to be completed in the first half of 2015 or in the second half of the year, depending on when the deal is concluded. The price for the deal would be in the region of $2.5 billion to $3.5billion, according to a report by the International Chamber of Commerce in New York.

ROUGE-1: 78.36, ROUGE-2: 72.02, ROUGE-L: 26.67
BERTScore: 53.85

==============================================
==================== [77/100] ====================
Summary:
Discussing potential benefits of expanding eligibility to include less-than-halftime students. Administrators, particularly those at public 2-year postsecondary would be removed. They observed that expanding eligibility might increase their institution's cohort default rate. They expressed concern that Stafford borrowing by lower-income student borrowers might burden these students with unmanageable debt. The authors concluded that changing program eligibility may encourage protracted less- Than-Halftime enrollment as a means by which to postpone repayment. They added that changing Stafford eligibility would, they anticipate, result in a large expansion in the number of students participating in the Stafford loan programs. Students with outstanding subsidized Stafford loans must now enter repayment if they enroll for fewer than six credits. Some might choose to enroll for a few credits each term as a way to delay repayment. Some sources of funding available to adult learners, particularly work-related assistance provided by employers or the Lifetime Learning tax credit, permit short- term study that does not lead to a career. There are a variety of formal learning opportunities open to adults, and a range of funding sources that support participation in them. Our estimate of students’ subsidized loan awards is based upon the federal needs analysis methodology for subsidized Stafford loans. For each student we estimated a cost of attendance (minus room and board and personal expenses) for the period enrolled in school (loan COA) We also calculated each student’s estimated financial assistance, adding federal, state, private, and institutional aid. Estimated subsidized loans, if above the loan limit level, were set at the maximum amount allowed by law. For the students attending institutions for which no Stafford loan recipients were reported, we assumed that estimated subsidized loan was $0. Using the 1999-2000 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study, we estimated the Stafford subsidized and unsubsidized loans for all students in the sample. We did this by assuming that the proportion of this estimated number of recipients to the total number. of recipients in fiscal year 1999- 2000 would equal the proportion. in school year 2003-04. The average loan award in schoolyear 2003-4 equals the estimated loan volume in. school year 2002-03 divided by the estimated number. recipients. school year 2003-04 by assuming that the proportion of this estimated loan volume to the total loan volume in fiscal year 1999-2000 would equal the proportion. The federal cost of this policy change equals the projected loan volume times the applicable subsidy rate. Federal costs other than the subsidy costs of the loans were not considered. To estimate the average loan awards in school year 2003/04, we projected the estimated number of Stafford loans to be given in the school year. We summed over FFELP/FDLP, school type, and class year. campus administrators anticipate that the change could have undesirable effects on postsecondary institutions and on students. Permitting all less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford loan programs would increase federal subsidy costs by approximately $113 million in fiscal year 2004. We estimate that the average unsubsidized Stafford loan taken out by adult students would be approximately $680, while the average subsidized loan would be about $1,200. While administrators pointed to several potential benefits, they far more often pointed to a larger set of disadvantages that might accompany this change. The maximum unsubsidized Stafford loan award is equal to the student’s cost of attendance, subject to statutory limits on annual and cumulative borrowing. Adult students also received financial aid from states, postsecondary institutions, and other federal sources. In 1999-2000, states awarded a total of $975 million to adult students enrolled in undergraduate education, typically on the basis of estimated financial need. About half of the states did not have aid programs in which adults enrolled less than halftime were eligible to participate. Pell Grant awards are prorated by the student’s enrollment intensity. In 1999-2000, the maximum Pell Grant award was $3,125 for fulltime students, while the maximum award for a less-than- halftime student was $781. The maximum unsubsidized Stafford loan award is equal to the student's calculated financial need, subject to statutory limits on annual and cumulative borrowing. For more information on the Pell Grant program, visit http://www.penn.org/penn-grant. Few adults who enrolled less-than-halftime in 1999-2000 had incomes below 150 percent of the federal poverty guideline. About 14 percent of these students received federal Pell Grants to assist them in meeting their costs. Adults who work part-time receive employer financial assistance for enrollment in credential programs less often than those who work fulltime. About half of these low-income adult students had no federal income tax liability and were, therefore, ineligible to receive a Lifetime Learning tax credit, authors say. In 1999-2000, most less-than-halftime adult students received some assistance with their postsecondary education or training costs. Student financial aid from federal, state, and institutional sources comprised the majority of assistance. Most assistance received by higher-income households was provided by work-related sources. Very few adults enrolled on a less- Than-Halftime basis seldom received assistance from either federal WIA or TANF sources. In 1999- 2000, 15 percent of less- than- Halftime adults had a household income below 150 percent of the federal poverty guidelines. A substantially larger proportion of adults who enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis had household incomes over $30,000 than did adults enrolled halftime or more. An estimated 7 percent of all adult students enrolled less than halftime in 1999-2000 had incomes at or below 100 percent of the federal poverty guideline. A majority of these students had incomes above this level. A larger percentage of lower income less- than-Halftime adult students received Pell Grants than other adult students. More than half of those with incomes above 150 percent of federal poverty guidelines had their costs met through all forms of assistance. In 1999-2000, most adult students (85 percent) had incomes above 150 percent of the federal poverty guideline. Only 1 percent received either federal or state student aid. Most who had incomesabove this level were fulltime workers, and a larger share received both federal and state aid. The opposite was true of higher-income adult students, who received 71 percent of their support from work-related sources assistance, the study found. The study was published in the June 2000 issue of the journal American Economic Review. Proposed changes to the Pell Grant program include allowing room and board and miscellaneous personal expenses. Another proposed change would be to allow less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford Loan programs. Administrators of postsecondary institutions in the four states we visited expressed concern about potential negative consequences of the Stafford loan proposal. For the purposes of this report, adult students are those who are 24 years or older. The authors reviewed data and literature pertaining to financial aid for adult students and part-time students. They analyzed focus group findings examining the barriers to enrollment. We estimated Pell Grant awards under the current law, and under an alternative COA for the 1999-2000 school year. To receive a Pell Grant under theAlternative COA, the individual must have applied for financial aid. Inherent in this assumption is that an alternative Pell cost of attendance will not affect students’ decisions to apply forFinancial aid. The estimated total federal costs under current law and the alternative COa were student’s estimated Pell Grants to be $0. The same steps were taken in estimating a student�’S Pell Grant. under the alternativeCOA except that the Pell cost. of attendance was estimated to include room and board and personal expenses. all students who are eligible will apply for Stafford loans. Education officials provided information on federal subsidy rates for Stafford Loans. The policy change in the Pell Grant Program we considered was changing the cost of attendance calculation for less-than-halftime students so that it does not exclude room, board and personal expenses. This policy change would increase the number of people who are qualified to receive an award. It would also increase the size of the award program, which would be more generous to students who qualify. them their less-than-halftime adult student population and the implications of changing the Pell Grant and Stafford Loan Programs. We also collected institutional data on spells on less than halftime enrollment among students graduating from 10 of the 19 we visited. We solicited information from each institutional research officer about the reliability of these data and reviewed the data for obvious problems of accuracy and completeness. Because these are not samples of a larger student population, there are no confidence intervals associated with them. The following steps were taken to estimate the additional federal budget costs associated with permitting degree-seeking students. The average Pell Grant in school year 2003-04 equals the estimated federal cost. Federal costs other than the amounts of the Pell Grants were not considered in our analysis. Our estimate of students’ Pell Grant awards is based upon the federal needs analysis methodology for calculating the Pell Grant and the Regular Disbursement Schedule for Determining Less than Halftime Awards (FSA Handbook 1999-2000, Pell Reference) If the student did not apply for financial aid, or the institution they attended did not have any Pell recipients in 1999- 2000, we assumed that the student’s estimated Pell Grant to be $0. federal costs under current law and the alternative COA were calculated by summing the estimated individual grants. Federal costs for school year 1999-2000 were projected to school year 2003-04 by assuming that the ratio of these estimated federal costs to the total cost of the Pell grant program were the same as in 1999- 2000. To estimate the average Pell grant in school, the average grant was used to calculate the number of students who would receive a Pell grant each year. The average grant for a student in school was estimated to be $2,856. is established, it is compared to the cost of attendance at the institution chosen by the student. Pell Grant awards are calculated by subtracting the student’s EFC. If the EFC is greater than the Cost of Attendance, the student is not considered to have financial need for federal Title IV aid programs. The elements included in the student's cost of. attendance for the purpose of calculating the Pell Grant award vary according to the extent of their enrollment, as shown in table 2. There is no consensus within the economic literature on the effect of Pell Grants on enrollment. Seftor and Turner estimated price elasticities that fall in the range of –0.34 to -0.14. To estimate the possible behavioral response to a change in Pell Grant policy, we applied a price elasticity in the middle of those identified by Seft or Turner. We assumed that changes to the Pell Grant cost of attendance methodology, if adopted, would be applied to both dependent and independent students enrolled on a less than halftime basis. increase the number of less-than-halftime students who receive a Pell grant and increase Pell award amounts for those who already receive a grant. The total federal budget cost of changing Pell Grant policy would be approximately $25 million. Of the 33 million people aged 18-35 who are not enrolled in school and without a undergraduate degree, we assumed that only 18 percent of them would consider going to school less than halftime. This is the population who may change their enrollment behavior because of the policy change. Pell Grant awards and price elasticities to the population of all persons 18-35 who were not enrolled in school and who had not earned a postsecondary credential. On this basis, we estimate that the Pell Grant policy change will cause about 35,000 people between the ages of 18 and 35 to enroll less than halftime. This conclusion was reached based upon the following calculations: We found that the average Pell Grant award would increase the average award from $0 to $630 for 0.63. not obligated to enroll in degree or certificate programs, or to complete their studies. Eligibility for the HOPE credit is limited to students who are enrolled halftime or more in a degree or certificates program, and in their first 2 years of postsecondary education. The Lifetime Learning tax credit may be used by tax filers who enroll for any number of credits, and for any course that aids in learning new or improving existing job skills. Both credits are nonrefundable: if the filer has no tax liability, they cannot receive the credit. in assistance, rather than providing a widely available source of assistance to adults who are not currently receiving Pell Grants. In written comments on our draft report, Education stated that it appreciated our thorough review and examination of the financial, and other, impediments that are often unique to adult learners as they pursue postsecondary education and training opportunities. Education noted that the report would complement a recent report of its own and that it would assist Education in achieving one of its departmental strategic goals. Education also provided technical assistance. one of its departmental strategic goals. Education also provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretary of Education and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. enrollment among adult students and the characteristics, completion rates, and financial support they received. We analyzed two datasets created by the National Center for Education Statistics: the 1999-2000 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS) and the 2001 Beginning Postsecondary Students Study (BPS) Both datasets contained a nationally representative sample of students enrolled at postsecondary institutions participating in federal student aid programs. We computed estimates of the Lifetime Learning credits received by adult students in the U.S. and Canada. We computed estimates of the Lifetime Learning credits received by less-than-halftime adult students. NPSAS data are collected at the individual student level, and cannot be aggregated into families or linked to tax filing status. We reviewed existing information about the sample, including the documentation produced by NCES, and performed electronic testing of the required data elements to detect obvious problems in accuracy and completeness. We determined that the N PSAS and BPS sample data were reliable and that they could be used for future studies. accuracy and completeness. We determined that the NPSAS and BPS data were sufficiently reliable for this report. Because both surveys are samples of a larger student population, there is some sampling error associated with them. Sampling errors are often represented as a 95-percent confidence interval: an interval that 95 times out of 100 will contain the true population value. The upper and lower bounds of the 95- percent confidence intervals for each estimate are presented in the tables in appendix II. National datasets provide valuable but limited information. employment-related assistance or skills training, and generally does not support extended training of adult students pursuing a postsecondary credential. Less than 1 percent of less-than-halftime adult students received TANF assistance in 1999-2000, and NPSAS says. The time and dollar limits established by local workforce investment boards may make it difficult for adult students to use WIA funds for the extended training that may be required for the completion of a vocational credential, even for those who are enrolled on a fulltime basis. of their spouse and dependents. For taxpayers filing jointly, both credits were initially phased out at $80,000 adjusted gross income. Less than 1 percent of all less-than-halftime adult students received either WIA or TANF assistance with the cost of postsecondary education in 1999-2000. WIA funds may be used for postsecondary training only for expenses remaining after the receipt of Pell Grant and other sources of funding. A larger share received both employer assistance and Lifetime Learning tax credits than did their lower-income counterparts. Under PRWORA, block grants are made to states, which may use these funds to assist TANF recipients in meeting costs associated with vocational training or education, including postsecondary education. These costs may include tuition and fees, childcare, and transportation. In 1999-2000, one-third of adult undergraduate students, about 2.3 million, enrolled less than halftime, and most worked fulltime and part-time. After the receipt of Pell Grant and other sources of assistance, students may be eligible for WIA funds. Institutional eligibility requirements help to ensure that participating institutions provide students with quality education or training. Programs authorized under Title IV include Pell Grants for low-income students and Stafford Loans. Title IV also authorizes programs funded by the federal government and administered by participating higher education institutions, commonly known as campus-based aid. Students who apply for Title IV aid must do so using the Free Application for Funding for Higher Education, or FAFHE, a federal program that helps students pay for higher education. tax credit, permit short- term study that does not lead to the completion of a degree or certificate. Both employers and employees may benefit as skills, productivity, and earnings increase. The Higher Education Act’s provisions concerning institutional eligibility help to ensure billions of dollars in federal student assistance is available only to those institutions that provide students with quality education or training worth the time, energy, and money that they—and the nation�s taxpayers—invest. The federal investment in Title IV programs is used to support learning that is broadly beneficial to the public, rather than students’ recreational or leisure activities. degree, and many others expect to do so, but are unable to continue to completion. If less than halftime adults who do not complete a credential nonetheless benefit from completing a few postsecondary courses, then federal policy tools designed to support shorter-term and non-credential adult learning can better assist these learners. The potential costs of proposed changes to the Pell Grant and Stafford Loan programs, particularly the latter, may outweigh their potential benefits for less-than- halftime adult students, the authors say. About $1 billion was available to the nation’s veterans and eligible service members through the Montgomery GI Bill. Financial assistance was also available to adult students from work- related sources. Employers may pay postsecondary educational expenses directly, or indirectly through employee reimbursement, and they are encouraged to do so by the federal government. The federal government also offers two federal higher education tax credits and from employer-provided educational assistance. The largest of which was Montgomery GIBill assistance. It is available on the basis of considerations other than financial need. employee reimbursement, and they are encouraged to do so by the federal tax code. In 1999-2000, employers provided $1.28 billion in assistance to adult students enrolled in undergraduate postsecondary education. Most often to those workers who were most likely to increase company productivity or profitability as a result of their education, such as high-skill, high-demand workers and managers.Employees were usually required by employers to meet a number of conditions to obtain this educational assistance. But they were not obligated to enroll in degree or certificate programs, or to work full time. In the 1999-2000 academic year, adult students received about $3.3 billion in grant assistance and $8.5 billion in loan assistance from programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act. To receive federal financial aid, students must meet several eligibility requirements, including being enrolled in a degree or certificate program, and maintaining satisfactory academic progress. Institutions are required to establish qualitative and quantitative criteria of satisfactory progress, and to monitor student progress. Taken together, these requirements help to ensure that Title IV funds are used in ways that benefit both students and the larger students. IV aid must do so using the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) Information from the FAFSA is used to determine the amount of money that the adult student is expected to contribute to his or her own education. Statutory definitions establish the criteria that students must meet to be considered independent of their parents for purposes of financial aid. Once the EFC is established, it is compared to the cost of attendance to determine how much the student can expect to contribute. The student's expected family contribution (EFC) is based on income and assets that are expected to be available. offered by postsecondary institutions that are not part of a credential program, such as a continuing education class. Enrolling in a certificate or degree program at a postsecondary institution is an important opportunity for millions of adults who seek personal growth, or advancement in their working lives. In the 1999-2000 academic year, an estimated 7.1 million adults were enrolled as undergraduates. About three- quarters of these adult undergraduates were between the ages of 24 to 40, while about one-quarter were 41 or older. Adult students enrolled in 1999-2000 were more likely to be working full time (35 or more hours per week), to be married, to have dependents, and to lack a conventional high school diploma. While the majority of undergraduates under the age of 24 were enrolled in baccalaureate programs, adult undergraduate students were primarily enrolled in certificate or associate programs. Most adult students (55 percent) were enrolled at 2-year public institutions, while another 22 percent were enrolling in a public institution. In 1999, an estimated 90 million persons 16 and older reported that they had participated in some sort of formal learning activity. Much of this learning takes place outside of formal credential programs that confer a certificate or degree. In the workplace, where employers offer classes for job-specific skills, or in the many courses offered by postsecondary institutions that are not part of a formal credential program. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that 1 in 4 adults are involved in some form of learning in the United States. National data indicate that adults enrolled on a less than halftime basis are more likely to be encountering academic difficulties than other adult students. Some adults who enroll in credit-bearing courses at postsecondary institutions may not intend to complete a degree or certificate. Few adults who succeeded in completing a certificate or degree consistently enrolled on the less-than-halftime basis, authors say. They estimate that about two-thirds (66 percent) of adults who began in 1995-1996 did not complete a certificates or degree by 2001-2002. Most adults who enroll as less than halftime students intend to complete a degree or certificate, but few do. Compared with adult students enrolled halftime or more, the typical less-than-halftime adult student was older, more likely to be working and married, and had a higher household income. A substantially larger larger number of adults enrolled in 2-year postsecondary institutions than did other adult students. (See table 3.) Most worked fulltime and needed to balance the demands of school with other responsibilities. In 1999-2000, one-third, about 2.3 million, of adult undergraduate students were enrolled less than halftime. Of the 1,830 baccalaureate graduates who completed their degrees in 2001- 2002 at four 4-year institutions we visited, slightly more than one-half never enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis, and another 36 percent did so for only one or two terms. In 1999- 2000, about 7 in 10 of the nation’s less- Than-Halftime adult students received assistance equaling about 44 percent of their school costs. Working students may be unable to enroll on a halftime or fulltime basis due to the inflexibility of course and program options made available by postsecondary institutions. Adults may find it easier to plan and manage their schedules over 5 to 7 weeks than they do over longer time periods, such as a traditional 10 or 15- week semester. Administrators at one community college pointed to a lack of flexibility in employer work schedules, noting that adult students often withdraw from class when their employer changes their work schedule, preventing them from attending class. Adult students choose to enroll on a less-than-halftime basis for many reasons. Most important of which, most school administrators told us, is their need to balance school requirements with the competing demands of work and family. Scheduling conflicts also played a role, according to college administrators, in influencing enrollment decisions. While many adult students receive some financial support towards postsecondary costs, most students pay the majority of school costs from their own resources. For a three-person household, enrolling less than halftime can provides them with a way to reduce out-of-pocket costs associated with tuition and fees. Some adults might not be ready academically or socially for postsecondary education. Adult students often need to refresh or develop college-level skills, administrators say. One administrator noted that some adult students at her institution experienced stress-related illnesses after they had begun their coursework and needed to leave mid-semester. National data indicate that adult students are less likely to attend college than other demographic groups, according to a report by the National Council on Postsecondary Education (NCPE) The NCPE report was published in the spring of 2013. is a cross-sectional rather than longitudinal study, and it, therefore, cannot be used to identify the duration for which students enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis. We augmented national datasets with information collected from postsecondary institutions. We interviewed school administrators from 19 institutions, including public and private schools and 2-year and 4-year institutions. These institutions were located in four states—California, Maryland, Ohio, and Virginia—in which the costs for resident tuition and fees were lower than those in other states. we analyzed focus group findings examining the barriers to enrollment and persistence faced by low-income adults. We interviewed officials at the Department of Education, researchers, and representatives of higher education organizations. We also reviewed studies and surveys of employer- provided educational assistance. To determine the extent of less-than-halftime enrollment among adult students, we looked at the characteristics, completion rates, and completion rates of institutions of higherEducation.org. We looked at four sample states: New York, Connecticut, Maryland and New Jersey. costs for resident tuition and fees at public 2-year institutions and the amount of available state aid varied. For example, in California the cost for resident 2- year tuition was lower than for all other states ($330), but no state aid is available to students pursuing their postsecondary credentials on a less-than-halftime basis. Maryland ranked 9th among states in tuition and Fees ($2,564) and, like California, did not have state financial aid available to less- Than-Halftime students. Both Virginia and Ohio had state aid available for less- than- Halftime students; however, Virginia’s $1,304 tuition was higher than that of Ohio. less-than-halftime students would be approximately $25 million for the 2003-2004 academic year. If about 35,000 individuals who are not in school respond to this change in policy by enrolling less than halftime, an estimate implied, in part, by some research, there could be an additional federal budget cost of about $10 million. This enrollment response would cost the federal government $9,764,063 ( x $630+ [33,000,000 x 0.18 x 111/500 X 0.24] x $111). We were asked to determine: (1) the extent to which adults enroll less than halftime, the characteristics and factors associated with less-than- halftime enrollment, and the rates of completion among these students. We were also asked to look at whether these students receive federal, state, and other assistance to help them meet the costs of postsecondary education. If you or your staff have any questions or wish to discuss this material further, please call me at (202) 512-8403. to receive an award, and it would increase the size of the award for those who are already qualified. This policy change may cause people to change their postsecondary enrollment behavior. Some people who are not enrolled in postsecondary education may choose to enroll less than halftime in response to the policy change. As Seftor and Turner note, there is no consensus within the economic literature on the effect of this policy change on the economy. The policy change is expected to take effect on January 1, 2015. less-than-halftime adult students received TANF assistance in 1999-2000. NPSAS collected no data on the extent to which T ANF funds assisted these students in meeting costs associated with their training or education. School officials at the institutions we visited were generally unaware of the extent of adult students' TANf assistance. One school, however, had created a program to enable TAN F recipients to attend school fulltime. In Maryland, the Baltimore City Community College and city and state officials established the School Counts Program.

ROUGE-1: 70.84, ROUGE-2: 64.85, ROUGE-L: 22.09
BERTScore: 55.52

==============================================
==================== [78/100] ====================
Summary:
H.R. 2642 has provided approximately $2.2 billion for VA construction projects. A large portion of this amount was for construction and building improvements of VA medical facilities. The House Appropriations Committee did not recommended any funding amounts for various construction and projects submitted by Members of Congress or by the Administration. The Senate Appropriations Committee provided funding for specific construction projects requested by the President. However, the committee continued the practice of not earmarking major construction projects that are not requested in the President's budget proposal. At the end of the 109 th Congress, Congress did not pass the MIL-CON-VA-appropriations bill for FY2007. Most government agencies, including the VA, funded most government agencies through a series of Continuing Appropriations Resolutions. On May 24, 2007, the House and Senate approved the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 ( H.R. 2206 ). The bill was signed into law on May 25 ( P.L. 110-28 ). The Military Construction and Veterans Affairs and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2008 (MILCON-VA Appropriations Act), was included as Division I of P.L. 110-161. The bill was signed into law on December 26. It provided $37.2 billion for VHA for FY2008, which is $2.6 billion above the Administration's request for FY 2008 (see Table 5 ). Of this amount, $2,6 billion (the amount of funding for the Iraq war) was included in the bill. On June 13, 2007, the Senate Appropriations Committee, Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related Agencies, approved a draft version of the MILCON-VA appropriations bill. The bill was reported to the Senate on June 18. S. 1645 provided a total of $37.2 billion for the VHA. This amount includes $29.0 billion for military construction projects and $1.3 billion for veterans' housing. The measure was passed by the Senate and signed into law by President Bush. provided a total of $85.3 billion in budget authority for all veterans benefits and services for FY2008. Of the amount allocated for FY 2008, the conference agreement provided $43.1 billion for discretionary veterans' programs, which consists mainly of VA medical care. The conference agreement rejected the veterans' health-care enrollment fees and co-payment increases that were proposed by the President's budget request. On May 22, 2007, the House Appropriations Committee approved by voice vote a draft measure recommending funding levels for request, the Administration has put forward several legislative proposals. to $2.0 billion in FY2006. During this same period, first-party collections increased by 26%, from $685 million to $863 million. The Administration requested $32.7 billion for the VHA, an 11.3% increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion. The FY2007 request included $25.5 billion for medical services, a 12% increaseover the FY 2006 enacted amount; $3.2 billion (see Table 5 and Appendix D ). $3.4 billion for medical administration, $3.6 billion forMedical facilities, and $411 million for medical and prosthetic research (see Table 5 ). As in FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007, the Administration included several cost-sharing proposals. These legislative proposals are discussed in detail in the " Key Budget Issues " section at the end of this report. The House and Senate adopted the Conference Report ( H.Rept. 110-153 ) to accompany the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for FY2008. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have expressed concern that the President's budget has not accurately projected the future cost of health care for veterans from FY2008-FY2012. The House Appropriations Committee expressed doubt in the actuarial model currently used to project health-care demand for Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi freedom (OIF) veterans. The Senate Appropriations Committee has included a general provision in H.R. 2642 directing the CBO to submit a CBO report on the issue. provision in H.R. 2642 directing the CBO to submit a report projecting the annual funding level necessary for the VHA to continue providing health care for veterans from FY2009 through FY2012. Appendix A. Priority Groups and Their Eligibility Criteria Appendix B. Veterans' Payments for Health-Care Services, by Priority Group Appendix C. Financial Income Thresholds for VA Health- Care Benefits Appendix D. VHA Appropriations for FY2005 and FY2006. V HA Appropriations for Fiscal Years 2005 and 2006. The Consolidated Appropriations Act directs the DOD and VA to provide a joint report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing the actions being taken by each Department to achieve an interoperable electronic medical record (EMR) system. Similar language has been included in the Defense Appropriations conference report ( H.Rept. 110-434 ). In its FY2008 budget request, the Administration has put forward several legislative proposals. These proposals include the creation of a national electronic health record system for the military. The report must identify all ongoing and planned projects and programs within both DOD andVA addressing interoperability. The Military Construction and Veterans Affairs appropriations bill for FY2008 was reported out of committee on June 11. The committee did not recommend any fee increases as requested by the Administration's budget proposal for the VHA for FY 2008. On September 6, 2007, the Senate passed H.R. 2642 with an amendment to reflect the Senate Appropriations Committee-approved measure ( S. 1645 , S.Rept. 110-85 ). During Senate floor debate, an amendment offered by Senator Jon Tester was approved to transfer $125 million from the medical administration account to the medical services account. $2.6 billion was designated as contingent emergency funding and was available for obligation only after the President submitted a budget request to Congress. $29.1 billion has been allocated to the medical services account, which is almost $2 billion above the President's FY2008 request. The amount appropriated for medical services includes an additional $125 million to increase the number of veterans receiving medical care. The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who Table 5 ). On May 19, 2006, the House passed its version of the Military Construction, Military Quality of Life, and Veterans Affairs Appropriations bill (MIL-CON-QUAL-appropriations bill) for FY2007. H.R. 5385 provided $32.7 billion for the VHA, a $3.4 billion (11.4%) increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion and about the same as the President's request. On June 6, the full House Appropriations Committee recommended $37.1 billion for VHA for FY2008, a 9.3% increase. from third-party health plans. This proposal would apply to all veterans who make co-payments. According to VA estimates, this proposal will increase revenue by $44 million in FY2008 and $217 million over five years. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees. On February 15, 2007, the Congressional Budget Office testified that [VHA] medical spending would increase from $35 billion in 2007 to $66 billion in 2025. The Senate-passed version of H.R. 5385 provided $28.7 billion for medical services. This amount was a 26.0% increase over the FY2006 enacted amount. The Senate also provided $3.6 billion forMedical facilities. This was the same as the Administration's request and $25.0 million less than the House-passing amount. It provided $412 million for medical and prosthetic research. The House passed this amount and the President's request, but the Senate increased it by $13.0 billion. forces after September 7, 1980, and officers commissioned after October 16, 1981, must have completed two years of active duty or the full period of their initial service obligation to be eligible for VA health-care benefits. Servicemembers discharged at any time because of service-connected disabilities are not held to this requirement. reservists that were called to active duty and who completed the term for which they were called, and who were granted an other than dishonorable discharge, are exempt. active duty for training, or while going directly to or returning directly from such duty. National Guard members are not granted service-connection for any injury, heart attack, or stroke that occurs while performing duty ordered by a governor for state emergencies or activities. The granting of service- connection makes them eligible to receive care from the VA for those conditions. The VA places applicants into one of two categories: active duty, or reserve component service members. For more information, visit the VA's website. All outpatient appointment requests must be acted on as soon as possible, but no later than seven calendar days from the date of the request. The VHA also requires that priority scheduling of any veteran must not affect the medical care of any other previously previously served veteran. Veterans who are service-connected 50% or more need to be scheduled to be seen within 30 days of the desired date for any condition. VHA staff are required to assume, on behalf of the veteran, that the veteran is entitled to priority access. Not every veteran is automatically entitled to medical care from the VA. The Veterans' Health Care Eligibility Reform Act of 1996, P.L. 104-262, established two eligibility categories. The new eligibility standard was created by Congress to "ensure that medical judgment rather than legal criteria will determine when care will be provided" Some veterans are exempt from the enrollment requirement if they meet special eligibility requirements. For most veterans, entry into the veterans' health-care system begins by completing the application for enrollment. relative degrees of preference in accordance with specified priorities. P.L. 104-262 was clear in its intent that the provision of health care to veterans was dependent upon the available resources. The provision of hospital care and medical services would be provided to "the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriations Acts for these purposes," according to the report accompanying the bill. Such language is intended to clarify that these services would continue to be provided, the report says. It would vest discretion in the Secretary to determine the manner in which such enrollment system would operate. A veteran may apply for enrollment by completing the Application for Health Benefits (VA Form 10-10EZ) at any time during the year. Once a veteran is enrolled in the VA health-care system, the veteran remains in the system and does not have to reapply for enrollment annually. Eligibility for VA health care is based primarily on "veteran's status" resulting from military service. Veteran's status is established by active-duty status in the military, naval, or air service and an honorable discharge. The VA places applicants into one of two categories. The first group is composed of veterans with service-connected disabilities or with incomes below an established means test. These veterans are regarded by the VA as "high priority" veterans. The VHA is mandated to provide priority care for non-emergency outpatient medical care for any condition of a service- connected veteran rated 50% or more. According to VHA policies, patients with emergency or urgent medical needs must be provided care, or must be scheduled to receive care. they have to pay co-payments for nonservice-connected care. In addition, veterans are asked to provide the VA with information on any health insurance coverage they have, including coverage through employment or through a spouse. The VA may bill these payers for treatment of conditions that are not a result of injuries or illnesses incurred or aggravated during military service. The second group of veterans is composed of those who do not fall into one of the first six priority groups.primarily veterans with nonservices-connected medical conditions. P.L. 104-262 authorized the VA to provide all needed hospital care and medical services to veterans with service-connected disabilities, former prisoners of war, veterans exposed to toxic substances and environmental hazards such as Agent Orange. These veterans are generally known as "higher priority" or "core" veterans (see Appendix A , discussed in more detail below). The other category of veterans are those with no service- connected disabilities and with attributable incomes above an established means test (see appendix C ). disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty; veterans who are former prisoners of war (POWs); veterans awarded the Purple Heart. The VA looks at applicants' income and net worth to determine their specific priority category and whether they have to pay co-payments for nonservice-connected care. In addition, veterans who were exposed to hazardous agents (such as Agent Orange in Vietnam) while on active duty are considered a priority category for the VA's care. $8 for a 30-day supply of medication, including over-the-counter medications. When veterans reach the annual cap, they continue to receive medications. The VA estimates that if the current proposal to raise the co-payment were approved, it would cost $1.2 billion a year in lost revenue. There is no cap for veterans in Priority Groups 7 and 8 (see Appendixes B and C ). The current proposal would cost the federal government $1 billion annually in lost revenues. The President's FY2008 budget request includes three major policy proposals. Assess a tiered annual enrollment fee for all Priority 7 and 8 veterans based on the family income of the veteran. Increase pharmaceutical co-payments from $8 to $15 (for each 30-day prescription) for all enrolled veterans in Priority Groups 7 and8. Bill veterans receiving treatment for nonservice-connected conditions for the entire co-payment amount. The Administration put forward this proposal in its FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007 budget requests as well, but did not receive any approval from Congress. The Administration is proposing a tiered annual enrollment fee, which is structured to charge $250 for Priority 7 and 8 veterans with family incomes from $50,000 to $74,999. The VA has estimated that this proposal would contribute more than $138 million to the Treasury annually, beginning in FY2009. According to VA estimates, of the 5.8 million unique patients that it expects to see in 2008, 111,000 may choose not to use the system if an enrollment fee is imposed and the pharmacy copays are increased. expenses for furnishing inpatient and outpatient care and treatment of veterans and certain dependents. In its FY2008 budget request to Congress, the VA requested the transfer of food service operations costs from the medical facilities appropriations to the medical services appropriations. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have concurred with this request. The medical administration account provides funds for the expenses in the administration of the VA's medical services program. The VA's budget request for FY2008 was released to Congress on July 1. during House floor debate, Representative Shelley Moore Capito offered an amendment to transfer $5 million to the medical services account for the establishment of an Office of Rural Health. The MILCON-VA appropriations bill, as amended, also provided $3.5 billion for the medical administration account, $68.6 million above the FY2008 request. Representative Jerry Moran also offered an Amendment to increase funding for the Veterans Beneficiary Travel Program, as directed by P.L. 109-461. All other amendments were voted down. TBI, therefore, it is a challenge to quantify the number of TBI cases. Presently, both DOD and VA are working with the National Center for Health Statistics to refine current International Classification of Diseases-9 th Revision (ICD—9) codes to better reflect the TBI patient population. Beginning with FY2009, the appropriators are directing the Administration to include TBI as a select program within the medical services account in order to better account for special needs of these patients. The Appropriation Committees expressed concern about insufficient funding levels for mental health and substance abuse services. insufficient funding levels for mental health and substance abuse services in the FY2008 budget request. Administration's budget request had included a reduction in the number of inpatient beds for psychiatric care. The Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2764 , P.L. 110-161 ) includes increased funding within the medical services account. The appropriators also directed the VA to reexamine the policy for a Reduction in psychiatric inpatient care. It is hoped that this will ensure that adequate inpatient psychiatric care is maintained. The Appropriation Committees have urged both DOD and VA to seek every opportunity to partner to improve the continuity of care for veterans. Joint clinics; joint Centers of Excellence for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Joint research and/or treatment; and the development of joint clinical practice guidelines for polytrauma injury, TBI, burns, and amputee care. Currently, there is no medical diagnostic code specific to TBI. It is a challenge to quantify the number of TBI cases. $400 million for medical services. $193 million for treatment of Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF) veterans. $25 million for prosthetics. $45.0 million for facility and equipment upgrades at polytrauma centers. $550 million for non-recurring maintenance to address structural deficiencies in VA medical facilities. The total amount requested by the President. The amount appropriated under P.L. 110-5 . This amount included $9.4 million for polyTrauma residential transition rehabilitation. the committee included bill language stipulating $2.9 billion for speciality mental health care, $130 million for the homeless veterans grant and per diem program. The committee recommendation also included $3.6 billion for medical administration, $193 million above the Administration's request. $480 million for medical and prosthetic research, a 17% increase over the President's request of $411 million (see Table 5 ). The committee did not recommend any fee increases as a result of the bill. for medical services includes an additional $125 million to increase the beneficiary travel reimbursement mileage rate to 28.5 cents per mile. The explanatory statement (discussed below) also stipulates that of the total amount appropriated for medical services, not less than $2.9 billion shall be expended for specialty mental health care. P.L. 110-161 has appropriated approximately $1.9 million for homeless grants and per diem program. The bill also includes $12.5 million for expanded outpatient services for the blind. the policy for a reduction in psychiatric inpatient care, taking into account the needs of returning OIF and OEF veterans. The explanatory statement directs the VA not to reduce the number of inpatient psychiatric beds at any facility that currently has a waiting list. Veterans access to VA care in remote rural areas has been a long standing issue. To address this issue the appropriators have directed the VA to provide a report to the committees that includes a description of the unique challenges and costs faced by veterans. in remote rural areas when obtaining medical services from the VA. The report should also identify the need to fund alternative sources of medical services in areas where VA medical facilities are not accessible to veterans without them leaving such areas. It should also contain an assessment of the potential for increasing local access to medical services for veterans in remote rural area through strategic partnerships with other government and local private health care providers. The explanatory statement accompanying the report should include the need for the VA to improve access to locally administered care for veterans. Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) system, which generally bases funding on patient workload. In FY2007, the VHA operated 155 medical centers, 135 nursing homes, 717 ambulatory care and community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs) The VHA also pays for care provided to veterans by private-sector providers on a fee basis under certain circumstances. Inpatient and outpatient care is also provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA) VA budget authority of approximately $80 billion, with about 90% of this discretionary funding going toward supporting VA health-care programs. The VHA operates the nation's largest integrated direct health- Care delivery system. The VA's health- care system is organized into 21 geographically defined Veterans Integrated Service Networks (VISNs) Although policies and guidelines are developed at VA headquarters, management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to VISNs. Congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to the VISNs based on the Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) system. The number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 110,000. The total number of outpatient visits, including visits to Vet Centers, reached 60.2 million during FY2006 and is projected to increase to 64.4 million in FY2008. As shown in Table 3 , there would be a 2.4% increase in the total number. of unique patients (both veterans and non-veterans), from 5.7 million in. FY2007 to 5.8 million inFY2008. Unlike Medicare or Medicaid, VA health care is not an entitlement program. In FY2007, the VHA estimates that it will spend approximately 64.8% of its medical services obligations on outpatient care. To understand some of the issues discussed later in this report, it is important to understand eligibility for VA health Care, the VA's enrollment process, and its enrollment priority groups. The VA estimates that its outpatient care spending will increase to 64.4 million in FY2007 and 67.4million in FY2008. mental health conditions, rehabilitation of veterans with limb loss, traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury, organ transplantation, and the organization of the health-care delivery system. VA researchers receive funding not only through this account but also from the DOD, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and private sources. As seen in Figure 1 , the total level of funding for VHA increased between FY2006 and FY2008. Most of this increase has been due to the increase in spending on medical services. must not affect the medical care of any other previously scheduled veteran. VHA guidelines state that veterans with service-connected conditions cannot be prioritized over other veterans with more acute health-care needs. The VHA is funded through multiple appropriations accounts that are supplemented by other sources of revenue. In FY2004, "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," Congress changed the VHA's appropriations structure. It funded VHA through four accounts: (1) medical services, (2) medical administration, (3) medical facilities, and (4) medical and prosthetic research. provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules. The VA carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals (BVA) The Veterans Health Administration is responsible for health-care services and medical research programs. The Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) is responsible, among other things, for providing compensations, pensions, and education assistance. The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) isresponsible for maintaining national cemeteries and burial sites. The VA's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts. Mandatory funding supports disability compensation, pension benefits, vocational rehabilitation, and life insurance. Discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services, including medical care. In FY2007, discretionary budget authority accounted for about 48.1% of the total VA budget authority of approximately $80 billion, with about 90% of it going to medical care, among other things. The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries. The VA is authorized to collect from third-party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran for the treatment of a nonservice-connected condition. The VA will apply the payment collected from the insurer to satisfy the veteran's co-payment debt related to that treatment. Under the Administration's proposal, veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of non-service-connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire co- payment. This proposal would apply to all insurance policies. The Committees on Appropriations include medical care cost recovery collections. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 ( P.L. 105-33 ) gave the VHA the authority to retain these funds in the Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF) Instead of returning the funds to the Treasury, the VA can use them for medical services for veterans without fiscal year limitations. The VHA can bill some veterans and most health-care insurers for nonservice-connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the VA system. The VA asserts that this proposal would align the VA with the DOD health-care system for military retirees and with the private sector. With the enactment of P.L. 99-272 in 1986, Congress authorized the VA to collect payments from third-party health insurers for the treatment of veterans with nonservice-connected disabilities. The Administration is requesting that Congress amend the VA's statutory authority by eliminating the practice of reducing first-party co-payment debts with third- party health-insurance collections. intended to enhance VA collections to the extent that reasonable charges result in higher payments than reasonable costs. In FY2004, the Administration's budget requested consolidating several medical existing collections accounts into one MCCF. The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2005 provided the VA with permanent authority to deposit funds from these five accounts into the MccF. These collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended. The funds would be available for medical services for veterans. required the VA to establish a revenue improvement demonstration project. The purpose of this pilot project is to provide a "comprehensive restructuring of the complete revenue cycle including cash-flow management and accounts receivable" The VHA has established a pilot Consolidated Patient Account Center in VISN 6. As shown in Table 4 , MCCF collections increased by 31%, from $1.5 billion in FY2003 to $2.0 billion inFY2006. During this same period, first-party first-source collections increased from $3.2 billion to $4.1 billion.

ROUGE-1: 70.79, ROUGE-2: 65.32, ROUGE-L: 23.69
BERTScore: 68.57

==============================================
==================== [79/100] ====================
Summary:
EPA has not completed any actions to ban or limit toxic chemicals under section 6 since the court rejected its asbestos rule in 1991. With EPA’s limited actions to control toxic chemicals, state and federal actions have established controls for some toxic chemicals. For example, a California statute enacted in 2007 prohibits the manufacture, sale, or distribution of certain toys and child care articles after January 1, 2009, if the products contain concentrations of phthalates exceeding 0.1 percent. In 2008, Congress took similar action. In 2008, Congress took similar action. California has also enacted limits on formaldehyde in pressed wood. In response to a petition asking EPA to use section 6 of TSCA to adopt the California formaldehyde regulation, EPA recently issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking. However, because of the legal hurdles the agency would face in regulating formaldehyde under TSC a, some stakeholders have recommended that EPA pursue legislation to control formaldehyde. In our previous reports on TSCa, we identified a number of issues that need to be addressed. not calculated the risk levels for intermediate levels of regulation because it believed there was no asbestos exposure level for which the risk of injury or death was zero. The court noted that TSCA’s requirement that EPA impose the least burdensome regulation reinforces the view that EPA must balance the costs of its regulations against their benefits. After completing the 1989 asbestos rule, EPA has completed only one regulation to ban or limit the production or use of an existing chemical (for hexavalent chromium in 1990) Since Congress passed TSCA nearly 33 years ago, EPA has issued regulations under the act to ban or limit or restrict the production or use of only five existing chemicals or chemical classes. Significantly, in 1991, EPA’s 1989 regulation broadly banning asbestos was largely vacated by a federal appeals court decision. In contrast to the United States, the European Union, as well as a number of other countries, studies of the health risks of asbestos as well and public comments on the proposed rule, EPA determined that asbestos is a potential carcinogen. European Union, as well as a number of other countries, has banned all, or almost all, asbestos and asbestos-containing products. Asbestos, which refers to several minerals that typically separate into very tiny fibers, is a known human carcinogen that can cause lung cancer and other diseases if inhaled. EPA invested 10 years in exploring the need for the asbestos ban and in developing the regulation. Based on its review of over 100 studies of the health risks of asbestos, EPA decided to ban it. at the time a chemical company submits a premanufacture notice for the chemical for EPA’s review. According to some chemical companies, the cost of initial testing could be reduced by amending TSCA to require EPA to review new chemicals before they are marketed. About half of the premanufactured notices the agency receives from chemical companies are for new chemicals that, for various reasons, never enter the marketplace, EPA says. The act contains no similar requirement for existing chemicals unless EPA determines by environmental release levels. to provide EPA with greater authority to require testing targeted to those areas in which EPA’s analysis models do not adequately predict toxicity. EPA could be authorized to require such testing if it finds that it cannot be confident of the results of its analysis. Under such an option, EPA could establish a minimal set of tests for new chemicals to be submitted at the time a chemical company submits a premanufacture notice. It could also require testing on chemicals with molecular structures similar to those of the new chemicals submitted by chemical companies. EPA estimates that most premanufacture notices do not include test data of any type. Only about 15 percent include health or safety test data. Chemical companies do not have an incentive to conduct these tests because they may take over a year to complete, and some tests may cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. EPA uses models to compare new chemicals with chemicals with similar molecular structures for which test data on health and safety is available. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. EPA officials told us that finalizing rules can take from 2 to 10 years. Given the time and resources required, the agency has issued rules requiring testing for only about 200 chemicals. Because EPA has used authority to issue rules to require testing so sparingly, it has not continued to maintain information on the cost of implementing these rules, officials said. The agency has not said how much it will cost to implement these rules. The cost of testing a person for exposure to a chemical can range from $1,000 to $10,000. demonstrate a need for data on a chemical’s toxicity rather than on a company to demonstrate that a chemical is safe. As a result, EPA does not routinely assess the risks of the roughly 80,000 industrial chemicals in use. EPA officials told us that in cases where chemical companies do not voluntarily provide test data and health and safety studies in a complete and timely manner, requiring the testing of existing chemicals of concern is the only practical way to ensure that the agency obtains the needed information. Congress could give EPA more authority to obtain test data from companies. In Canada and the European Union, testing requirements for low-volume chemicals are less extensive and complex. Another option would be to provide EPA with greater authority to require testing targeted at specific chemicals. The U.S. Department of Justice has been reviewing the effectiveness of TSCA since it was passed in 1990. The agency has not commented on this latest report, but says it will continue to review the issue of chemical testing. EPA officials told us that it is time-consuming, costly, and inefficient for the agency to use TSCA’s two-step process. EPA could review substantially more chemicals in less time if they had the authority to require chemical companies to conduct testing and provide test data on chemicals once they reach a substantial production volume. A major drawback to testing is its cost to chemical companies, possibly resulting in a reduced willingness to perform chemical research and innovation. To ameliorate such costs, or to delay them until the new chemicals are produced in large enough quantity to offset the costs, revise the act. effects of the chemical on the environment and the magnitude of the environment’s exposure to the chemical. EPA must also develop substantial evidence in the rulemaking record in order to withstand judicial review. Potential changes to TSCA include reducing the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet to take regulatory action under the act and amending the standard for judicial review that currently requires a court to hold a TSC a rule unlawful and set it aside unless it is supported by substantial evidence. We identified a number of options that could strengthen EPA”s ability to regulate harmful chemicals. TSCA authorizes EPA to issue regulations that may, among other things, ban existing toxic chemicals or place limits on their production or use. The statutory requirements EPA must meet to do so present a legal threshold that has proven to be difficult for EPA. In order to regulate an existing chemical under section 6 of TSCA, EPA must find that there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical presents or will present a threat to health or safety. Such a basis could be based on a condition of manufacture or import above some specified volume.such as that included in EPA’s High Production Volume (HPV) Challenge Program. TSCA requires EPA to find that current data is insufficient; testing is necessary; and that the chemical is or will be produced in substantial quantities. TSCA places the burden on EPA to demonstrate that data on health and environmental effects are needed. EPA estimates that most of the chemicals tested were not harmful to humans or the environment. The agency estimates that the most common chemicals tested by EPA were not dangerous to humans and the environment, according to a report by the Center for Responsible Toxicology. TSCA requires chemical companies to report to EPA any data that reasonably support a conclusion that a chemical presents a substantial risk. TSCA also authorizes EPA to promulgate rules to require manufacturers to perform tests on chemicals in certain circumstances or provide other data, such as production volumes, on existing chemicals. If EPA finds a chemical’s risks are unreasonable, it can prohibit or limit its production, processing, distribution, use, and disposal or take other action, like requiring warning labels on the substance. The Toxic Substances Control Act was enacted in 1976. TSCA authorizes EPA to review chemicals already in commerce (existing chemicals) and chemicals yet to enter commerce (new chemicals) Of the over 83,000 chemicals currently in the T SCA inventory, about 62,000 were already inCommerce when EPA began reviewing chemicals in 1979. Since then, over 21,000 new chemicals were added to the inventory and are now in use as existing chemicals. To assess risks, EPA examines a chemical’s toxicity or potential adverse effects and the amount of human and environmental exposures. EPA bases its exposure estimates for new chemicals on information contained in premanufacture notices. The anticipated production volume, uses, exposure levels, and release estimates outlined in these notices generally do not have to be amended once manufacturing begins. However, the potential risk of injury to human health or the environment may increase when chemical companies increase production levels or expand the uses of a chemical. TSCA addresses expanded uses of chemicals by authorizing EPA to promulgate a rule specifying that a particular use of achemical would be a significant new use. no similar requirement for existing chemicals unless EPA determines by rule that they are being put to a significant new use. Because of the large number of existing chemicals, EPA would need the flexibility to identify which chemicals should be given priority. TSCA could be amended to require individual chemical companies or the industry as a whole to compile and submit chemical data, such as that included in EPA’s High Production Volume (HPV) The proposal would put existing chemicals on a more equal footing with new chemicals. Key contributors to this testimony were David Bennett, Antoinette Capaccio, Nancy Crothers, Christine Fishkin, Richard Johnson, and Ed Kratzer. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other copyrighted images, we ask that you share them with us. Reach places the burden on manufacturers, importers, and downstream users to ensure that they manufacture, place on the market, or use such substances that do not adversely affect human health or the environment. While TSCA authorizes EPA to review existing chemicals, it generally provides no specific requirement, time frame, or methodology for doing so. Significantly, chemical companies are not required to develop and submit toxicity information to EPA on existing chemicals unless the agency finds that a chemical may present an unreasonable risk of injury to human health. reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical presents or will present an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. A finding of unreasonable risk requires an extensive cost-benefit analysis. In addition, before regulating a chemical under section 6, the EPA Administrator must consider and publish a statement regarding the effects of the chemical on human health and the magnitude of human exposure to the chemical. EPA officials believe that demonstrating an unreasonablerisk is a more stringent requirement than demonstrating, for example, a significant risk, and that a finding ofreasonable risk is more difficult to prove. the rule is not supported by substantial evidence in the rulemaking record. As several courts have noted, the substantial evidence standard is more rigorous than the arbitrary and capricious standard normally applied to rulemaking. Further, according to EPA officials, the economic costs of regulating a chemical are usually more easily documented than the risks of the chemical. It is difficult to show substantial evidence that EPA is promulgating the least burdensome requirement. EPA has had difficulty demonstrating that harmful chemicals pose an unreasonable risk. to human health or the environment or is or will be produced in substantial quantities and that either (a) there is or may be significant or substantial human exposure to the chemical. EPA must also determine there are insufficient data to reasonably determine the effects on health and the environment. This structure places the burden on EPA to demonstrate a need for data on a chemical’s toxicity rather than on the chemical itself. It must also show testing is necessary to develop such data before it can require a company to test its chemicals for harmful effects. EPA is required under the act to protect trade secrets and privileged or confidential commercial or financial information against unauthorized disclosures. Chemical companies may claim some of the information they provide to EPA under TSCA as confidential business information. EPA challenges about 14 such claims each year and that the chemical companies withdraw nearly all of the claims challenged, the authors say. Some state officials believe this information would be useful for informing and managing their environmental risk programs, they say. They say EPA does not have data on the number of inappropriate claims. The EPA does not have the resources that would be needed to investigate and, as appropriate, challenge claims to determine the number that are inappropriate. EPA focuses on investigating primarily those claims that it believes may be both inappropriate and among the most potentially important. The claims relate to health and safety studies performed by the chemical companies involving chemicals currently used in commerce. The EPA official responsible for data on the number of inappropriate claims says the agency does not know how many there are. The agency's goal is to find out how many are inappropriate and challenge them. that chemical companies provide to EPA, subject to regulations to be established by EPA in consultation with the chemical industry and other interested parties. In our September 1994 report, we recommended that the Congress consider limiting the length of time for which information may be claimed as confidential without resubstantiation of the need for confidentiality. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of Congress may have about this issue. I am happy to answer them. TSCA and REACH have provisions to protect information claimed by chemical companies. TSCA requires greater public disclosure of certain information, such as basic chemical properties. REACH places greater restrictions on the kinds of information chemical companies may claim as confidential. For example, REACH includes a provision for public access to basic chemical information, including brief profiles of hazardous properties and authorized uses. It combines a variety of ways that the interests of the public’s right to know is balanced with the need to keep certain information confidential. The European Union’s recently enacted chemical control legislation, REACH, represents a regulatory model that differs from the TSCA framework in key ways. REACH generally requires that chemical companies provide to, and in some cases develop for, government regulators information on chemicals’ effects on human health and the environment. We have previously recommended that the Congress amend T SCA to reduce the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet. The European Union has recently revised its chemical control policy through REACH. TSCA authorizes EPA to release chemical information obtained by the agency under the act. TSCA provides that certain information can be claimed as confidential business information by chemical manufacturers. EPA generally must protect such information against public disclosure unless such disclosure is necessary to protect against an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. Like the United States, the European Union has laws and regulations governing the manufacturing and use of chemicals. The EU has recently revised its chemical control policy through legislation known as REACH also includes a provision under which confidential information can generally be shared. recently revised its chemical control policy through legislation known as Registration, Evaluation and Authorization of Chemicals (REACH) REACH went into effect in June 2007, but full implementation of all the provisions of REACH will be phased in over an 11-year period. Under REACH, authority exists to establish restrictions for any chemical that poses unacceptable risks and to require authorization for the use of chemicals identified as being of very high concern. These restrictions could include banning uses in certain products, banning uses by consumers, or even completely banning the chemical. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or see http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/.

ROUGE-1: 71.78, ROUGE-2: 64.01, ROUGE-L: 27.68
BERTScore: 60.31

==============================================
==================== [80/100] ====================
Summary:
Security Presidential Directive 54 establishing the CNCI is classified. Some details of the initiative have been made public through departmental press releases, speeches by executive branch leaders, and analysis offered by individuals who follow cybersecurity- and terrorism-related issues. Rather than serving as an overarching national strategy document with specific instructions for federal agency implementation activities, the C NCI is seen as a plan of action for programs and initiatives to be addressed at the operational and tactical level. It also delineates "an approach that anticipates future cyber threats and technologies" The Administration's 60-day review's near-term action plan calls for preparing and updating a new national strategy for securing communications and information infrastructure. Others say it is not a comprehensive strategy but is instead a set of recommendations, much like the CSIS Commission report. Legislation proposed in S. 733 calls upon the President to present a national strategy within one year of the bill's enactment. This bill would also create a national advisory panel to oversee implementation of the strategic plan and to periodically advise. Some have criticized the provision, which would give the President emergency control over public and private networks in the event of a crisis. As this legislation is marked up, alternative proposals may be considered. Some Members of Congress have proposed legislation that would create new offices or to periodically advise the president on the need for revising the strategy. Some have argued that the bill is vague in addressing civil liberties protections. As the federal government continues to organize to defend its strategic cyber assets, some members of Congress are proposing legislation. President Obama announced the creation of a new cabinet-level position to coordinate cybersecurity strategy and policy across the federal government. This new "Cyber Coordinator" would report to the National Security Advisor and the Director of the National Economic Council. The new coordinator will have "regular access to the president" and will be considered a key member of the national security staff, while working closely with the economic team. Some duties will include improving federal agencies' computer security and coordinating with the White House and Congress. reorganizing the executive branch to better address cybersecurity-related issues, nor does it discuss the military's role in securing federal cyber networks. A common theme emerging from a review of the current proposals is the need for a current comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy. Critics maintain that without an overall government strategy and underlying policies to outline cybersecurity priorities, goals, and how to achieve them, executive organization and program funding may be a muddled process. Congress may consider drafting legislation that would outline a strategic security framework and priority areas. In a December 2008 report, the Commission provided findings and recommendations to secure cyberspace during the 44 th presidency. In May 2009, President Obama issued the results of the Administration's 60-Day Cyberspace Policy Review (60-day review) The review's goal was to assess U.S. policies and organizational structures for cybersecurity. In order to develop a strategic framework, the review noted the following near-term action plan issues: Appoint a cybersecurity official to coordinate interagency strategy and policy. Prepare and update national strategy to secure the information and communications infrastructure. Since 2008, numerous executive branch, legislative, and think tank recommendations and proposals have been offered to address various aspects of ongoing and emerging cybersecurity issues. Complicating the issue is a lack of consensus on the definition of "privacy" in the context of the Internet. The White House 60-Day Cyberspace Policy Review is the most current attempts to frame the issue and are often referred to when discussions arise regarding how best to identify challenges and implement changes to the current U.S. approach to cybersecurity. Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has primary responsibility for reducing cyber vulnerabilities in the electrical grid. Congress directed NIST to lead the Department of Energy and other agencies in ensuring an interoperable, secure, and open energy infrastructure. NIST is also tasked to promote the development of key security standards and guidelines to support the implementation of and compliance with the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA; P.L. 107-347 ). The Department of Health also has responsibility for cyber security. for all federal government information systems and networks managed by the Department of Commerce. The section would require the Secretary of Commerce to develop and integrate a national licensing, certification, and periodic recertification program for cybersecurity professionals. The Director of the National Science Foundation to give priority to computer, information science, and engineering research to ensure support is provided to meet cybersecurity challenges. See under: Section 5—State and Regional Cybersecurity Enhancement Program; Part A—Creation and Support of Cybersecurity Centers. Department of Health and Human Services has recently adopted new interoperability standards for health care information technology. HHS is responsible for implementing privacy and security standards for electronic personal health information. Department of Homeland Security leads the cybersecurity coordination for non-military departments and agencies in the federal government. National Cyber Security Directorate works with private industry on a voluntary basis to promote safe cybersecurity practices. DHS is also home to the National Cyber security Center, a clearinghouse whose mission is to coordinate information from all agencies to help secure. A persistent set of issues has stymied significant progress in detecting and deterring existing threats and implementing effective safeguard measures. Issues that appear to continually challenge U.S. cybersecurity efforts include uncertainty of the geographic location of the perpetrators of cyber attacks. The introduction of new vulnerabilities to the nation's infrastructure from increasingly sophisticated threats. A poorly coordinated federal-private sector approach to addressing emerging risks; and legal ambiguities with respect to U.s. cybersecurity. The evolving integration of mobile technology devices into critical information infrastructure. addressing emerging risks; and legal ambiguities with respect to U.S. response and offensive actions. Many security observers suggest that an equally daunting group of strategy and policy challenges must be addressed if the United States is to continue to rely on technology as a major component of societal activities. Since 2008, a number of strategy. and policy proposals have been offered that may assist in addressing the appropriate balance of relying on emerging technology and network-centric governance, according to the National Security Council. appropriate balance of relying on emerging technology and network-centric governance while safeguarding critical infrastructure and control systems. Recent events such as the April 2007 cyber attacks on Estonia and cyber attacks during the 2008 Georgian incursion have served to increase awareness that cybersecurity is not just about protecting computers. The Obama Administration declared that U.S. critical information infrastructures are a strategic national asset in a May 29, 2009, speech by the President. Recognizing the importance of cyberspace over the past few years. provide a report that includes "a summary that ranks the risks within and across transportation modes, including vulnerability of a cyber attack" H.R. 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of 2009 Status of bill : Introduced in House—referred to House Subcommittee on Information Policy, Census, and National Archives. Section 2 would require the Chief Technology officer to assess the impact of information technology and networked information technology systems. See under: Section 2—Office of the Chief technology Officer; Policy Planning, Analysis and Advice. the impact of information technology and networked information technology systems and applications on cybersecurity and personal privacy. advise the President on steps necessary to mitigate and manage security and privacy risks. The CTO would also be responsible for "fact-gathering, analysis, and assessment of the federal government's information technology infrastructures, information technology strategy, and use of technology" Other responsibilities would be ensuring "the security and Privacy of theFederal information technology infrastructure and networks" and "coordinating closely with other federal departments and agencies" security of classified networks. 8. Expand cyber education. 9. Invest in high-risk, high-reward research and development to ensure transformational change. 10. Define enduring deterrent technologies and programs. 11. Develop multi-pronged approaches to supply chain risk management (potential tampering within the production line and the risk associated with computer products and parts made outside the United States). 12. Defining the role of cybersecurity in private sector domains. A Cybersecurity Commission (the Commission) organized by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) was formed in 2008 to provide advice to the new Administration. Department of Defense has a number of programs designed to address vulnerabilities and threats to its own networks. Secretary Gates recently announced the creation of a new sub-unified command under the U.S. Strategic Command. This new command is to coordinate a unified approach to defending and securing military cyber networks. The December 2006 National Military Strategy for Cyberspace Operations (NMS-CO) guides computer network attack and defense principles. The Defense Industrial Base is a non-profit organization that provides information and support to the Department of Defense. The Defense Industrial Base (DIB) initiative provides a vehicle through which DOD and industry partners can better share information on cyber threats and defense practices. DOD also has established a Cybercrime Center (DC3) that assists in criminal, counterintelligence, counterterrorism, and fraud investigations by the Defense Criminal Investigative Organizations (DCIOs) and DOD counterintelligence activities. In addition to setting forensics standards, it provides training and testing laboratories for protection of defense information systems. Common themes often noted by many cybersecurity experts underscore a lack of transparency and dearth of defined departmental roles and responsibilities.  cybersecurity is broadly defined as the protection of critical information infrastructure and its processes and content. For the Department of Defense, cybersecurity takes on an offensive or defensive national security role. Conceptual and definitional differences among agencies make a unified government strategic approach to cybersecurity a challenge to coordinate. Some of the apparent gaps discovered may actually be addressed by existing classified programs, which cannot be discussed in this unclassified report.. Federal executive branch programs, strategy documents, and reports have been analyzed to illustrate the government's response to emerging challenges in cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is a cross-cutting field that affects many government and non-governmental stakeholders. The U.S. military views cyberspace as a warfighting domain as well as a force enabler. Agencies may have their own response plans, procedures, and responsible entities that vastly differ from those of other cooperating agencies. Some security observers are concerned about the federal government's present ability to first detect and then respond in a coordinated way to a cyber incident of major significance. The Department Cyberspace is a framework for organizing and prioritizing federal cybersecurity efforts, including the private sector. duties will include improving federal agencies' computer security and coordinating national cybersecurity awareness campaigns. Some security observers are concerned that the lack of apparent authority of the coordinator will reduce his ability to comprehensively address changes enumerated in the 60-day review. Programs in several departments address various aspects of cybersecurity within their respective areas of responsibility. While every department and agency has an individual and collective role in securing federal cyber enterprises, some organizations have more of a role than others in securing the nation's cyber infrastructure. as "information assurance"—as well as enabling the freedom of movement to fight and win battles in cyberspace. This approach differs from that of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which is tasked to coordinate cybersecurity between the rest of the federal government and the private sector. Some point to the 2003 National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace as a framework for organizing and prioritizing federal cybersecurity. DHS's task is complicated, as technology and processes are largely owned and operated by the privatesector. There is no single congressional committee that can claim primary jurisdiction over cyberspace. Neither is there a single executive agency or department with sole cybersecurity responsibility or commensurate authorities. As the President stated, "No single official oversees cybersecurity policy across the federal government. No single agency has the responsibility or authority to match the scope and scale of the challenge. Indeed, when it comes to cybersecurity, federal agencies have had to work together to address the problem" The White House has not commented on the President's comments. entities that vastly differ from those of other cooperating agencies. The Cyber Incident Annex to the National Response Plan of December 2004 describes many different authorities and policy documents to guide a response. Multiple federal information systems enterprise networks make a concerted strategic approach to network security even more difficult. Another cybersecurity difficulty for the government is balancing the protection of civil liberties and individual privacy protections with the desire for comprehensive security. The U.S. government has a responsibility to protect the privacy of its citizens, and to provide them with a level of security they can trust. and dearth of defined departmental roles and responsibilities in addressing cyber-related issues from a comprehensive national approach. Such concerns often assert that a continuation of addressing cyber incidents as a myopic individual agency responsibility will eventually lead to increased systemic national vulnerabilities and put the nation at greater risk. It is argued by some that a more strategic approach to detecting, identifying, mitigating, and responding to future cyber incidences may strengthen both the individual agency and the whole-of-government approach to securing the technologies that underpin every aspect of modern society. stated at an information technology security conference that there are 12 objectives supporting the initiative's goal. These include the following: Move toward managing a single federal enterprise network with common security standards across the network. Develop and deploy intrusion prevention tools. Review and potentially redirect research and funding. Develop a government-wide cyber intelligence plan. Increase the security of classified networks. Expand cyber education. Define cyber security issues in the U.S. for the first time in more than a decade. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. as one of the President's key management priorities and establish performance metrics. Designate a privacy and civil liberties official in the NSC cybersecurity directorate. Convene appropriate interagency mechanisms to conduct legal analysis of priority cybersecurity issues. Initiate a national cybersecurity public awareness and education campaign. Develop U.S. government positions for an international cybersecurity policy framework. Prepare a cybersecurity incident response plan. Develop a framework for research and development strategies that focus on "game-changing" technologies that enhance security. and non-disclosure policies written into statutory frameworks that may not specifically address cybersecurity. Civil liberties is an area of concern for both Congress and privacy advocates, but does not appear to be an immediate priority reflected in legislative action to date. This may suggest to some that existing programs have emphasized securing networks before tackling the attendant issues such as freedom of speech, privacy, and civil liberties. The Cybersecurity Act of 2014 is a bipartisan bill that aims to improve the security and privacy of the Internet. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPA A) Status of bill: P.L. 104-191 , 110 Stat. 1936. Summary: Defines criminality of security breaches and unauthorized access to data on federal computer systems and certain financial institutions. The Financial Services Modernizati on Act of 1999 (Gramm-Leach-Blil ey) status of bill : P.l. 106-102 , 113 Stat. 1338, enacted November 12, 1999. 1338, enacted November 12, 1999. Requires financial institutions to provide consumers with a privacy notice at the time the consumer relationship is established and annually thereafter. The privacy notice must explain the information collected about the consumer, where that information is shared, how that information was used, and the option to opt-out of sharing with third-party companies. See under: Disclosure of Nonpublic Personal Information (Financial Privacy Rule) for more information about the rule. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. It is difficult to secure information infrastructures and their content without tradeoffs between security and the freedoms associated with the Internet. Many concerned about civil liberties fear that the executive branch will use its national security powers and national defense mandate as justification for encroaching on privacy. Others regard security measures, such as network traffic monitoring, as a violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which states that "no one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or home" Title I of the ECPA protects wire, oral, and electronic communications while in transit. It sets down requirements for search warrants that are more stringent than in other settings. Title II of theECPA, the Stored Communications Act (SCA) protects communication held in electronic storage, most notably messages stored on computers. 18 U.S.C. § 1030 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984 Status of bill: P.L. 98-473 , 98 Stat. 2190 on October 12, 1984. S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009 (referred to Senate committee)—cybersecurity mentioned as a research priority for small businesses. H.R. 1131 Community Protection and Response Act of 2008 includes a cyber attack in the listing of major disaster. S. 2454 American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2010 (placed on calendar in Senate) includes cyber security as a concern. HR. 2200 Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act (reached Senate committee after responsibilities regarding security and privacy of the infrastructure and networks) S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009. The bill would amend the Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act to improve federal response efforts after a terrorist strike or other major disaster affecting homeland security. In the section for the definition of a major disaster it would include cyber attack on computer systems as one of the possibilities under "terrorist attack" See under: Section 6—Inclusion of Energy, Security, Transportation, And Water Related Research In The List of Topics Deserving Special. Water Related Research In The List of Topics Deserving Special Consideration As SBIR Research Topics. The bill would extend allocation of funds for research programs related to the Small Business Innovation Research program. Section 6 includes cybersecurity as one of the topics of interest, in particular the research by the National Academy of Sciences relating to cybersecurity. S. 1391 Department of Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. See under : Title IX—Department of Defense Organization and Management; Subtitle D—Other Matters; Section 932—Instruction of Private Sector Employees in Cyber Security Courses of the Defense. amend Part II of the Federal Power Act in order to address cybersecurity threats to the reliability of the bulk power system. In addition, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission would be authorized to respond in cases of imminent cyber security threats. The bill attempts to improve the cybersecurity of the critical electric infrastructure through added powers and responsibilities for the Secretary of Homeland Security as well as the Federal energy Regulatory Commission. The section also emphasizes ensuring that the Commission protects cybersecurity-related information. H.R. 2195 To provide additional authorities to adequately protect thecritical electric infrastructure against cyber attack, and for other purposes. Senate committee). H.R. 266 Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2009 (referred to House subcommittee)—expansion of professional cybersecurity education programs. S. 778 To establish, within the Executive Office of the President, the Office. of the National Cybersecurity Advisor. H.r. 2195 To amend the Federal Power Act to provide. additional authorities to adequately protect the critical electric infrastructure against cyber attack. and for other purposes. HR. 2165 Bulk Power System. electric infrastructure from cyber attack, and to provide emergency authority to address future cybersecurity threats to the reliability of the bulk power system. H.R. 2165 Bulk Power System Protection Act of 2009 would establish the National Office for Cyberspace within the Executive Office of the President. The Office would play a crucial role in deterring cyber attacks and defending the cyber critical infrastructure. The bill seeks to amend Part II of the Federal Power Act in order to protect the bulk power system from cybersecurity threats. See under: Section 3—Protection of Bulk Power system From Cybersecurity Threats. See also: Section 2-3 of the bill. Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act (referred to Senate committee after being received from House) S. 1436 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 (placed on Calendar in Senate)—for the "purpose of forming and governing a national energy sector cyber organization" The section would allocate funding for the Department of Energy as it relates to electricity delivery and energy reliability. As part of the funding the Secretary must establish an "independent national energysector cyber security organization to institute research, development and deployment priorities" agencies to identify areas where federal agencies with jurisdiction may best support efforts to enhance security of the bulk power electric grid. One of the objectives of the mentioned "federal policy" is to provide cybersecurity for the regional electrical grid. H.R. 3293 Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 (placed on calendar in Senate) Provides $607,482,000 for the public health and social services emergency fund to support activities related to countering potential threats to civilian populations. Appropriations Act, 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. The bill would allocate $1,700,000 for the Center for Counterterrorism and Cyber Crime, located in Norwich University, Northfield, Vermont. H.R. 2454 American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 status of bill : Placed on Calendar in Senate. See under: Title III—Protection, Preparedness, Response, and Recovery; Federal Emergency Management Agency; State and local programs; item 12 (B) H.R. 2200 Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act. Referred to Senate Committee after being received from House. Would require TSA to implement system of risk-based allocation of resources. Would also require report that includes "a summary that ranks the risks and benefits of various technologies and programs" for the U.S. electricity grid. The bill would also require "integration of smart grid technology to enhance the security of the electricity grid" The bill was passed by the House and is now being referred to the Senate. Private Sector Employees in Cyber Security Courses of the Defense Cyber Investigations Training Academy. No more than 200 full-time student positions may be filled at any one time by private sector employees enrolled under this section. Eligible private sector. employees will be those engaged in providing significant defense related support to the Department of Defense or other federal agencies or. those whose work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. in Cyber security Courses. In addition to the Cyber Security. Courses, the bill provides authority for the Secretary of Defense to permit private. sector employees to enroll in and receive instruction at the Defense. Cyber investigations training academy. governments of foreign countries to improve cybersecurity." Procurement Title XLI —procurement (in thousands of dollars) Under "Procurement—Defense Wide": Major Equipment DISA #027—Cyber Security Initiative $18,188. Under "Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Air Force": Cybersecurity for control networks research $4,000. Under Defense-wide: # 0305103G Cybersecurity initiative unknown amount (classified). Under "Operational Systems Development" Defense-side: # 0301372L Cybersecurity Initiative GDIP unknown amount. The annual report on the military power of the People's Republic of China must include "developments in China's asymmetric capabilities" Section 1814 requires the Secretary of Defense to prepare a plan for response to natural disasters and terrorist events. Section 3123 includes cybersecurity threats as part of the "plan for addressing security risks posed to nuclear weapons complex" P.L. 110-161 ( H.R. 2764 ) Consol idated Appropriations Act, 2008 . Includes $143,539,000 in FBI salaries. P.L. 110-329 ( H.R. 2638 ) Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance, and Continuing Appropriations Act, 2009. Includes $143,539,000 in FBI salaries and expenses to "address emerging threats in counterterrorism and cybersecurity" P.L110-329 would have directed $3,500,000 for State and local cybersecurity training. Would have also directed $4,000,000 to the Idaho National Laboratory's Power and Cyber Systems Protection, Analysis, and Testing Program. The bill would establish an Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor. The position would serve the President as the principal advisor for all cybersecurity related matters. The bill would authorize the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a program to award grants to institutions of higher education for the Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2008. In section 4, under the "authority of Director of Office of Management and Budget to establish information security," the bill would have authorized the purchase of equipment to provide training in cybersecurity for professional development and degree programs. Presidency reports, Congress may consider other options when addressing current and emerging cyber risks to the nation. Additional options may include the following: Drafting legislation, strategy, and policies that take into account rapidly changing telecommunications and Internet-based technologies. Requiring the Department of Homeland Security annually to produce cybersecurity risk assessments for all nonfederal government entities with security responsibilities. Establishing a permanent Congressional Commission or Task Force that would assess and report to Congress successes and ongoing challenges in U.S. cybersecurity programs and activities. Programs. Establish/update legal authorities —expanding and/or clarifying roles and responsibilities of cybersecurity stakeholders. Privacy and civil liberties —maintaining privacy and freedom of speech protections on the Internet while devising cybersecurity procedures. Awareness, research, education, and training —developing a workforce to meet cybersecurity goals. Raising citizenry awareness of cybersecurity best practices, and developing more secure technologies. These broad themes are used to compare current policy and legislative proposals with executive branch initiatives. attendant issues such as freedom of speech, privacy, and civil liberty protections as they pertain to the Internet. Another common area of focus appears to be addressing issues related to workforce development, outreach, and collaboration-based initiatives. The proposed S. 733 in its initial version contained provisions for presidential cybersecurity authorities. Such activities could be replaced or supplemented with the inclusion of additional focus on the training, education, and research aspects of cybersecurity. Questions of resources and appropriate organizational structures appear to be a concern. Congress have proposed legislation that would create new offices or positions, or give greater authority and direction to existing positions. It is unclear how proposals such as S. 778 to establish the Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor fits with the administration's recently proposed Cyber Coordinator. Privacy and civil liberties concerns are not highlighted in recent congressional proposals. However, there are Internet privacy and non-disclosure policies written into statutory frameworks that may not be covered by legislation. The proposal was introduced by Rep. Steve Israel, R-New Jersey. S. 773 Cybersecurity Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in Senate. Section 3 would instruct the President to designate a Cybersecurity Advisory Panel. Section 4 would require the Secretary of Commerce to implement a system to provide dynamic and real-time cybersecurity status and vulnerability information for all federal government information systems and networks. The bill would have established the "American Cybersecurity Commission" to investigate the current threats to the cybersecurity of American business and infrastructure from foreign entities. The commission would have focused on "strategy for American business, national infrastructure, and United States Government non-military and non-national security related related" to ensure support is provided to meet cybersecurity challenges. S. 778 would establish the Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor. The bill would require the President to develop and implement a comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy that includes such thigs as a long-term plan of the nation's cybersecurity future as well as a Quadrennial Cyber Review. It was introduced in the Senate and referred to the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. It has not yet been voted on by the Senate. Table 1 notes corresponding legislation proposed in both the 111 th Congress and the 110 th Congress to relevant existing statutory frameworks. Current appropriations bills are shown to illustrate congressional spending priorities. These lists are not exhaustive, but rather are designed to give a representative overview of cybersecurity related activities in the federal government. This information is current as of September 28, 2009. For the most up-to-date information, please consult the Legislative Information System (LIS) at http://www.congress.gov/ . to award grants to institutions of higher education for the establishment or expansion of cybersecurity professional development programs. Section 4 would require the Secretary of State to submit to the Senate and House a report describing "any actions taken by the United States to work with the governments of foreign countries to improve cybersecurity" S. 1438 Fostering a Global Response to Cyber Attacks Act was introduced in Senate and referred to Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. The bill expresses the interest of Congress is improving the nation's cybersecurity overall. work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. Section 1222 "Report on Cuba and Cuba's Relations With Other Countries" includes "the status and extent of Cuba's cyberwarfare program" as one of the seven subjects to be addressed by the report. H.R. 2647 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. Section 340 would improve congressional oversight of federal cybersecurity programs. S. 1494 Intelligence Authorization Act of Fiscal Year2010 Status of Bill: Passed/agreed to in Senate. sections mention cybersecurity in connection with overall security for chemical facilities. S. 1494 Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (passed/agreed to in Senate)—has an extensive and detailed section (340) on cybersecurity oversight. H.R. 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of 2009 (referred to House subcommittee)—to create the Office of the Chief technology Officer within the Executive Office ofThe President. Bill called for the President to create a "comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative advisory panel" P.L. 110-139 ( H.R. 6) Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. Mandates that the "smart grid" must incorporate "full cybersecurity" P.L., 110-181 ( H,R. 4986) National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008. Indicates that the annual report on the military power of the U.S. will be published. P.R., 110, 110-53 ( H.,R. 1) Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of2007. Section 340 would improve congressional oversight of federal cybersecurity programs. S. 1494 would require that the President inform Congress about every cybersecurity program currently in operation and every new program created thereafter. H.R. 2868 Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Act of 2009 defines "chemical facility security performance standards" S. 921 would establish the National Office for Cyberspace within the U.S. Information and Communications Enhancement act of 2009 would set up the National office for Cybersecurity in the United States. Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (awaiting conference)—civilian cybersecurity training authorization, creation of Joint Program Office for Cyber Operations Capabilities. Peripheral cybersecurity related or mentions P.L. 111-5 ( H.R. 1 ) American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 2009 —under Title XXX Health Information Technology and Quality, section 13001 directs privacy standards for electronic health information. Title VI directs the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to institute and expand the "broadband technologies and opportunities program" infrastructure, and United States Government non-military and non-national security related computer systems." Final status : Introduced in House. Summary list of Statutory Foundations for Cybersecurity Legislation 44 U.S.C. § 3541 Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 Status of bill: P.L. 107-347 on December 17, 2002. See under: Title III of the E-Government Act of2002. Contains standards for securing information and information systems within federal agencies, and requires compliance reports be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget.

ROUGE-1: 76.95, ROUGE-2: 70.04, ROUGE-L: 27.85
BERTScore: 60.18

==============================================
==================== [81/100] ====================
Summary:
burden of a royalty is increased by its subtraction from gross income. For example, an 8% royalty without the gross income offset is effectively a 6% royalty at a 25% marginal tax rate. Equations (2) and (3) are the same as equation (1) under current tax laws. Given the current percentage depletion rates, the costs of gross income deductibility of the royalty could, in certain cases, offset the benefits from royalty. The effective royalty is shown as a gross royalty, the r term, and the offset term - rt (d-1) the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 ( P.L. 97-248 ). In effect this limitation reduces the 22% depletion rate to an effective depletion rate of between 17.6% and 22%, depending upon the amount of cost depletion. As noted above, the imposition of a royalty, where none existed before, would increase a mining firm's operating costs and reduce profitability. Due to the deductibility of the royalty (as an operating cost of doing business) against the federal income tax, the deduction reduces tax liability and therefore lowers the tax costs. royalty could, in certain cases, offset the benefits from royalty tax deductibility. The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 ( P.L. 98-369 ) included a provision that gives preferential tax treatment to the mining industry. This provision allows mining companies to deduct the costs of mine closing and land reclamation in advance of the actual closing and reclamations, i.e., before the occurrence of the activity giving rise to the expenses. The provision is contrary to the general tax rule. laws for purposes of determining the percentage depletion allowance, one of several tax preferences or subsidies available to a mining firm. This royalty base has been suggested many times in the current and past royalty debates and is the base proposed in H.R. 2262. The main reason for suggesting this royalty base is that not only is gross income under the tax depletion rules consistent with the economic concept of an ad-valorem royalty, but the legal and regulatory apparatus has been in place since 1932, the year that percentage depletion first became available. depletion first became available to the hardrock mining industry. This would tend to reduce the costs of industry compliance and government administration of the royalty system. The term "gross income" as used for purposes of percentage depletion is somewhat confusing. While the term is intended to measure only sales revenue from mining operations, income in the context of a business generally refers to profits and not sales. Second, the term " gross" may be misleading because it may suggest a larger percentage of the total. which the industry lowered its tax burden, or conversely, the loss in tax revenues to the federal government. The bulk of these preferences is claimed by corporations. The intent is to assure that all taxpayers—individuals and businesses—pay some tax, which is not assured if taxpayers are able to claim a lot of special tax breaks, writes Paul Waldman, the author of the book "Mining in the U.S. Taxpayer's Taxpayer Bill of Rights," published by Oxford University Press. Firms that mine hardrock minerals on public domain lands pay no royalty, and benefit from fairly significant tax subsidies. One important special tax break available to the hardrock mineral industry is expensing of exploration and development expenditures. accelerated depreciation (a significant tax benefit for highly capital intensive business such as hardrock mining) has historically resulted in relatively low effective average and marginal tax rates. For example, CBO recently published a study of effective tax rates on different types of assets, and those used in mining. items are tax breaks that are important to the mining industry. Excess of percentage depletion over cost depletion, and the excess of the exploration and development cost deduction over a hypothetical deduction. A third item of tax preference that the mining firm would have to include in its list of tax preferences is accelerated depreciation over straight line depreciation. To the extent to which mining companies use these and other items of tax preference, this could have a significant impact on their tax bills in the future. It could also have a negative impact on the mining sector as a whole. a depreciation method (as opposed to the recovery period) that maximizes the value of the deduction over time. This is more advantageous than the theoretical treatment, which would call for a depreciation schedule based on the actual economic depreciation. Given that hardrock mineral producers are highly capital intensive and that the equipment used (stripping shovels, drills, bulldozers, drag lines, and haulers) can cost tens of millions of dollars, the tax code is more favorable to the industry than theoretical treatment. even with the net-income limitation, which limits the deduction to 50% of the taxable income from the mine. Percentage depletion rates range from 5% for stone and clay to 22% for uranium and beryllium. Most of the hardrock minerals have a depletion rate of 22%, and several have either a 15% or 14% rate. For iron ore (and coal) mined by corporations (as opposed to noncorporate firms), the allowance must be reduced by 20% over cost depletion. The U.S. hardrock minerals industry is subject to the same income tax laws which apply to all other for-profit businesses. The federal corporate income tax applies a 35% rate to most corporate taxable income. Under IRC §199, "manufacturing" businesses are allowed a deduction, as a business expense, for a specified percentage of the qualified production activity's income subject to a limit of 50% of the wages paid. Effectively, the deduction is equivalent to a reduced marginal tax rate. Gross income for depletion purposes is defined as "the actual price for which the ore or mineral is sold" If the miner's output is sold in an arm's-length transaction, then there is a sale of the mineral and that is the actual price used to determine gross income. In cases where there is no representative price from sales of the same ore concentrate (the mining output) in other markets, then gross income from mining is estimated by multiplying the mining output by other market prices. further downstream, would generally be greater than a gross price further upstream. Under Internal Revenue Code (IRC) §613, mining companies are allowed a depletion deduction, at varying percentages, based on the gross income from mining. Under IRC §613(c)(1) and (c)(2), the term gross income From Mining means sales revenue from the extraction of the ores or minerals from the ground. It also includes any treatment processes necessary or incidental to the mining process, specific treatment processes and also generally the costs of transporting the ore or minerals. For most hardrock minerals extraction produces a raw mineral ore, which of itself has little value and is generally not marketed. For most minerals, after the ore is mined it is sent to a mill or plant to be crushed and ground, and in some cases (lead, for example) is beneficiated to the point where it can be used in manufacturing. The gross income from mining is the mining company's revenue from the sale of the first marketable mineral product created as a result of mining. The deduction was 3% of income for 2006, is currently 6%, and is scheduled to increase to 9% when fully phased in by 2010. For the domestic mining industry (which includes the oil and gas industry), the deduction applies to any primary product "manufactured, produced, or extracted in whole or in significant part in the United States" Note that extraction is considered to be manufacturing for purposes of this deduction, which means that domestic firms in the business of extraction are subject to the limit. The percentage depletion allowance is a tax deduction against the federal income tax available to a mining firm. It is intended to give the mineral producer a deduction for the depletion of the investment in the mine. The allowance is analogous to the allowance for depreciation of equipment and structures and other assets that is available to all businesses. Any depletion deduction in excess of cost depletion is considered by economists to be a tax subsidy or incentive because the present value of the total amount deducted typically exceeds the initial investment.. The total amounts that can be recovered through percentage depletion generally exceed the total investment cost.  accelerated depreciation is the rules that determine how much a business may deduct for the depreciation of its capital equipment and structures. This deduction is intended to provide a business reasonable allowance for the exhaustion and wear and tear (i.e., depreciation) of business property. It is analogous to the cost depletion allowance for investment in a mineral deposit (as discussed below) The present depreciation treatment is known as the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (IRC §168). Generally, under this system, assets are depreciated for regular tax purposes over a specified recovery period. recovery period, and by applying one of the accelerated depreciation methods prescribed for each class of property. Mining equipment, assets used in the mining, quarrying, milling, and beneficiating of metallic and nonmetallic minerals, are assigned a seven-year recovery period. This system also allows producers to use a depreciation method (as opposed to the recovery period) that is more aggressive than that prescribed for recovery periods. The annual depreciation deductions are determined by applying this formula to the assigned recovery period and applying the 200% declining balance method or formula. output first be determined? Further, since throughout the production stage value is added or increased, at what stage does mining value end, and non-mining value begin? Production of valuable mineral products from raw hardrock minerals (e.g., metals such as iron, copper, aluminum, gold, lead) generally involves various stages: extraction or quarrying of the raw minerals, delivery to a plant or mill in order to prepare for the initial processing, beneficiating or concentrating. Depending on the type of mineral, and the structure of the industry, there may be several different types of mineral products with value. it is purchased from the miner, processed, and refined. At the point of sale to the refiner, funds received are considered gross income to the miner. If the mining firm is an integrated producer, i.e., it has smelting/refining operations, and also applies non-mining processes to the ore concentrate before the mineral is sold, there may be no sale of either the raw ore, or ore concentrate. The price of the ore concentrates would depend on the (wholesale) prices of the final metal (including related metals) on commodities markets. Production stages are shown for the typical case or mineral in Figure 1. Within these production stages, from extraction to the first sale to manufacturers, there may be various points at which there is created a valuable output, depending on the type of mineral. At this stage, there is a demand for the mineral ore concentrate as an input into the smelting/refining process for final sale in the wholesale commodities or manufacturing markets. Consider gold, for example. Raw gold is usually delivered to the refiner where it is purchased from the miner, processed, and refined. Excess of 50 miles unless the Secretary [of the Treasury] finds that the physical and other requirements are such that the ore or mineral must be transported a greater distance to such plants or mills. "Electrolytic deposition, roasting, calcining, thermal or electric smelting, refining, polishing, fine pulverization, blending with other materials, treatment effecting a chemical change, thermal action, and molding or shaping" It seems fairly clear from these statutory provisions that gross income from mining is not included in gross income. The term "mining" includes not merely the extraction of the ores or minerals from the ground but also the treatment processes considered as mining described in paragraph (4) (and the treatment process necessary or incidental thereto) The transportation of ores and minerals is not in excess of 50 miles unless the Secretary [of the Treasury] roasting, thermal or electric smelting, or refining, or by substantially equivalent processes or combination of processes used in the separation or extraction of product or products from ore or minerals. and sagger clay, rock asphalt, and ores or minerals which are customarily sold in the form of a crude mineral product. "Sorting, concentrating, sintering, and substantially equivalent processes to bring to shipping grade and form, and loading for shipment [613(c)(4)(C)];" "In the case of lead, zinc, copper, gold, silver, uranium, or fluorspar ores, potash, and Ores or Minerals which are not usually sold in that form" Mining companies pay a variety of claims fees (location fees, Bureau of Land Management processing fees, annual maintenance fees) These are charges for specific types of administrative services provided by the BLM. The annual maintenance (or holding) fee, necessary to hold a claim on public land, is presently $125 per claim. Both the location fee and the annual maintenance fee are adjusted for inflation. The fees help the BLM cover its costs of administering the mining law and regulations. They cover costs for such actions as processing and recording applications, certain exploration permits, name changes, and corporate mergers. both the claim's location fee and the annual maintenance or holding fee, from $30 to $50 per claim, and from $125 to $150 per claim respectively. The projected revenue effects from the proposed higher fees are shown in Table 3. The revenue estimates are net of federal income taxes. There would be some decline in income tax revenues due to the deductibility of royalty payments and fees against business taxes. Also, under federal budget rules fees collected by federal agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, are considered as offsetting budget receipts, or negative spending. of exploration tunnels and adits, and similar types of work. The costs of exploratory drilling to ascertain the extent of commercially marketable ores are treated by the tax law as a mineral exploration cost. These types of costs are all deductible rather than capitalized. Expenditures made after the existence of ores or minerals in commerciallyMarketable quantities has been disclosed are considered mine development expenditures. These are costs associated with bringing the mine to production. For example, the costs of constructing or sinking a mine shaft are development costs, which may be expensed. companies incur geological and geophysical (or surveying, and reconnaissance investigation) costs. These include the costs of staking the claim, removal of property line obstructions, limited removal of overburden, and limited sluicing. The removal of large amounts of overBurden would indicate that a deposit may have already been found and the mine may be in a different stage. Exploration expenditures include the Costs of Surveying, test pitting, trenching, drilling, driving of exploration tunnels and adits, and similar types of work. exploration and development costs. expensing applies only to domestic mines. Exploration and development cost of foreign properties must be either depleted or amortized over a 10-year period using straight-line amortization. corporate mining companies may only expense 70% of the exploration and development; the remaining 30% must be amortizing over five years. Recapture is accomplished by either including exploration expenses or when the mine is sold (for development expenses) or when production commences (for exploration expenses) in which the economic activity takes place. The Joint Tax Committee estimates the revenue losses from the above three special tax preferences or subsidies (formally called "tax expenditures"). The latest five-year estimates (from FY2007-2011) are as follows: $0.5 billion for expensing of mine exploration and development costs, $1.1 billion for the excess of percentage over cost depletion, and $ 0.2 billion for mine reclamation reserves deduction. Thus the total revenue loss from these three provisions over five years is $ 1.8 billion, an average of $360 million/year. markets, then gross income from mining is estimated by multiplying gross sales by the ratio of mining to total costs. As a hypothetical example, assume that the market price of the final cast copper on the commodities exchanges is $3.60/lb, which is $7,937/metric tonne of pure copper. Also assume that one metric ton of copper ore concentrate contains 30% pure copper and no other valuable minerals. The remaining 70% is sulfur, iron, and other impurities that have no value. or products from the Claims to any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser; and c) related insurance on such concentrates, metals (including bullion) or products. Thus, continuing with the above hypothetical copper example, the net smalter return would be the price at which cast copper could be sold after the costs of smelting and refining the copper ore are subtracted. Using the same figures as before, the market price of the final cast copper is $3.60/lb, and thus one metric tonne (2,205 lbs) of pure copper would be valued at $7,938. Whether a gross royalty base is smaller or bigger than a net royalty base depends on the point in the production stage the price is measured, and the deductions allowed. In general, the higher are metals prices relative to costs, the more net smelter returns diverge from gross income. A constant royalty rate also tends to minimize both economic distortions and administrative costs. Private royalty agreements, which are negotiated on a case-by-case basis, have widely varying royalty rates. These can range from 1-10%, and differ by mineral types. Some advocates of the net after-tax profit type of royalty, for example the 1993 bill S. 775, would have measured net profits at the mine mouth. Depending upon the royalty rate this could lead not only to smaller royalty payments than either a gross income or net smelter return royalty, but perhaps to no royalty at all. Further, a net profit royalty at the minemouth creates complications in allocating costs between extraction and other mining processing. Another effect of a net-profit type of. royalty is that it can lead to a decrease in royalties. Gross value will usually be defined with reference to the spot price of an average weekly or monthly spot price on specified markets for the commodity. The permitted deductions will include all charges by the smelter, such as smelting and refining charge as well as penalties for impurities in the ore. In some cases deductions may also be made for taxes except income taxes and, depending on the nature of the commodity, for marketing costs. If the operator ships to its smalter, charges should not exceed those that would be charged by an arm's length smelters in similar circumstances. In non-metal mines the selling price is usually 'fob mine site' because of the transportation costs involved in delivering the mineral product to the buyer. In Canadian law, net smelter return is defined in the same way. A net smalter return will be ... the net value of minerals from the property, where Net Value is Gross. No deductions are made for the operating costs of the mine-mill complex. In 2003, Baldwin (2003) writes: A net Smelter Return is the amount received by the mine or mill owner from the sale of the mineral products. "Net smelter return" is a common term used in the mining industry to refer to the net average revenue per unit of the smelted mineral product sold by the miner. If annual sales were 100,000 metric tonnes of copper concentrate, total net smalter return revenues would be $214 million. At 8%, the royalty on this would be about $17 million. In general, the higher are metals prices relative to smelting/refining costs, the greater the royalty. The Net Smelter Return is the amount of money which the smelter or refinery pays the mining operator for the concentrate produced. This estimate is based on the (gross) price received by the smalter/refiner for the marketable metal (e.g., the price on the London Exchange or the Chicago Commodities Exchange), less the costs of smelting/refining and other costs (typically treatment charges, penalties for impurities, and transportation charges from the mill to theSmelter) For geothermal resources, the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (as amended) instituted a 10%-15% royalty on federal leases based on the value of the steam or any other form of heat or energy produced and sold. Under amendments made by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-58 ), if the geothermal energy is not sold but is instead used to create a marketable product, the costs are deductible. These rules for oil, gas, and coal clarify that value is determined as close to the mine as possible. geothermal energy is not sold but is instead used to generate electricity. The royalty is between 1% and 2.5% and it is based on the gross proceeds from the sale of electricity rather than the value or volume of geothermal energy used in the generation of electricity. In some cases, a deduction against gross proceeds for transmission and wheeling costs is allowed. With regard to a specific royalty rate, economic theory is less clear beyond the implication that a royalty rate determined in the competitive marketplace is generally the most economically efficient rate. at a posted price to a pipeline company, and that is the price on which the royalty is based. In situations where oil is not sold in an arm's-length transaction, or is sold without a contract, royalties are based on various types of benchmarks. Royalties on coal extracted from federal lands, at the 8% or 12% royalty rate, are also assessed on the "gross proceeds" from the sale of the coal. The price is determined at the point of sale, which for coal is typically at or near the mine-mouth. fixed interest payments on capital regardless of the value of the capital loaned. Federal royalties are calculated on the gross proceeds (or gross sales revenues) from the contract sale. For oil and gas this generally occurs close to the wellhead, and so the contract price is used to determine gross proceeds. Being assessed on only one variable— output, rather than price and output—it does, however, avoid the usual complexities associated with determining value (price), costs, or even profits. Typically, for example,Oil and gas is sold at a posted price to a pipeline company. Net smelter returns mean the actual proceeds received by the Purchaser from a smalter or other place of sale or treatment. The Purchaser acknowledges that the Claims shall be subject to a royalty or charge in the amount of two percent (2%) of net smelters returns payable to the Vendor. For the purposes of this Agreement and the payment of the Net Smelter Return, net smalters returns shall mean the Actual Proceeds Received by Warren or any of his respective assignees or successors. successors in interest to the Claims from any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser from the sale of concentrates, metals (including bullion) or products from the Claims and sold. After deducting from such proceeds the following charges levied by third parties to the extent that they are not deducted by the purchaser in computing payment: a) assay costs and umpire assay costs; b) smelting and refining charges, penalties, and the cost of transportation and handling of such concentrates. expenses. This provision is contrary to the general tax rule. Under the cash method of accounting, expenses can only be deducted when the payment is actually made. under the accrual method ofAccounting, future expenses may be deducted in advance of actual payment but not in advance. of the economic activity that gives rise to the expenses. They must be deducted. in the year in which the economic. activity takes place. The Joint Tax Council is the tax authority for the U.S. federal government. or "locatable" minerals were removed from the law's purview. Each lease was negotiated on a case-by-case basis, and provided for both an annual rental per acre and a fixed royalty of so many cents per ton. Beginning in 1955, the Mineral Materials Act of 1947 instituted a leasing system for the non-hardrock and non-energy minerals. The common and less valuable minerals such as sand are alienated through a bonus bidding process, where there is competition, the minerals are alienated. mineral deposit. In the case of mineral lands, rents could be paid in various forms such as a bonus bid, annual rentals, or a royalty. Depending on the type of mineral, and whether there is a lease or not, and the contractual agreement between a developer of the resources and the landowner. For example, under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953, as amended, royalties are not paid on minerals on public lands. The exception to this rule, of course, has been the cases of locatable minerals on federal lands in the United States. the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953, as amended, the federal government leases lands for oil and gas development in return for a bonus bid, annual rents, and royalties. Lease sales are conducted through a competitive bidding process, and leases are awarded to the highest bidder. Annual rents range from $5 to $9.50 per acre, with lease sizes ranging form 2,500 to nearly 6,000 acres. royalty rates are, as noted above, either 12.5% or 16.67%. production on public lands is part of a much broader debate relating to reform of the Mining Law of 1872. Many other issues, such as whether public domain lands should be patented, are not addressed in this report. The General Mining Law can be traced to 16 th Century English and Spanish property and mineral rights laws and customs, which, as practiced in Colonial America, formed the basis for the granting of the rights to lands including those containing minerals. One of the earliest statutes was 17 Stat. 91. One of the earliest statutes was the "Royal Code of 1783" This Spanish law became the basis for acquiring mineral rights in Spanish colonies in the Americas. Also, the land charters issued by England to the original thirteen colonies provided generally that 1/5 th of the minerals on chartered lands were reserved for the crown. Several ordinances were enacted. The Ordinance of 1781 was the first mineral law in the U.S. and was used to settle claims disputes. It was also the first law to establish a royalty on minerals. After the Civil War, congressional policy became more openly geared to encouraging westward migration, and the economic development of the West. The General Mining Law of 1872 was the consolidation of amended versions of both the 1866 Lode Law and the 1870 Placer Act. Under this law, as amended, public lands with hardrock minerals (metals such as gold, silver, copper, lead, etc.) are conveyed, rather than leased for a rent and royalty to the federal government as in the past. The "California gold rush" of 1849 and the silver strike in Nevada of 1860 caused a significant westward population migration for the purposes of prospecting and claiming public domain lands. The issue of land ownership and easy and free access to federal lands was very controversial and fiercely debated. The Congress had approved several temporary leasing or land sales acts for gold, silver, and other minerals. But these did not address the question of mineral royalties specifically.had to be decided. Several ordinances were enacted—the Ordinance of 1785, the Land Act of 1796, and the Preemption Act of 1841. General Mining Law was enacted to promote westward migration and the economic development of the West. Up until 1994, a claim holder could obtain title to the land and mineral rights upon demonstrating the discovery of economically recoverable minerals. Originally, the Mining Law applied to all minerals. But over time all but the hardrock or "locatable" minerals were removed from the law's purview. The mineral lands become private property. The claim holder may also claim and patent nonmineral, noncontiguous lands to mill and process the ores. Since 1872, hardrock mining on federal lands has been governed by the General Mining Law. The law allows virtually free access to open public domain lands for mineral prospecting, staking claims, exploration and development, and extraction without payment of a royalty. Until 1994, claimants on hardrock mineral lands could take title to both the mineral rights and the land, after paying to the U.S. Department of Interior (DOI) the required fee or either $2.50 or $5.00 per acre. of actions authorizing mining on public lands and allow citizen lawsuits challenging federal decisions. Of actions authorizing mines on public land and allow lawsuits challengingFederal decisions. of actions authorizing Mining on Public Lands and allow Citizen Lawsuits. of Mining onPublic Lands and allowing Citizen Lawsuit of Mining. of Public Lands. of Mine on Public lands. of Mines on Public Land on the National Mall. of the National Park Service on the U.S. National Mall on the East Coast on the West Coast. of The National Parks Service on The West Coast on The East Coast. services from the mineral land would increase federal revenues, although revenue generation is not the primary rationale for the imposition of a royalty. The Congressional Budget Office has estimated the budgetary effects, revenue and spending, of H.R. 2262. The estimates are replicated in Table 3 , which shows both revenue effects of the 8% and 4% royalty and from the proposed higher fees. The 4% royalties on existing claims would generate revenues early, although no royalties would be imposed. The 8% royalty on new claims would be levied at a higher rate. Most of the revenues estimated under H.R. 2262 would come from existing claims. The 8% royalty on new claims is unlikely to generate significant revenues during the forecast period (2008-2017) It typically takes at least 10 years for a hardrock mine to begin production. No royalties would be paid in 2008 due to a provision that would defer royalties during the first 12 months after enacting the bill. The bill would also reauthorize and raise both the claim's location fee and the annual maintenance or state, local, and tribal governments; under an amendment to the Committee-approved bill, 50% of the cleanup funding would be directed to the state in which the royalties were generated; direct the Secretary of the Interior to prioritize reclamation projects that protect public health and safety, particularly from water pollution. establish a new definition of "undue degradation" of public lands and resources; allow Native American tribes to petition the federal government to withdraw federal lands with cultural and religious values from mining activities. The House approved this committee bill, with minor amendments, on November 1 by a vote of 244 to 166. The comparable bill in the Senate is S. 2750 , which also proposes an 8% royalty on new production. This report analyzes the economic issues underlying proposals to impose a royalty on hardrock (locatable) minerals on public domain lands. It also discusses the federal tax treatment of public domain minerals on federal lands. The report is based on the House-approved version of H.R. 2262, which was released on October 23. The Hardrock Mining and Reclamation Act of 2007 was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives on November 1, 2007. The bill would permanently end the sale or "patenting" of public lands for mining, which has been under moratorium since the early 1990s. It would also establish royalty payments for hardrock mining operations on federal lands and use 75% of the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites. This bill would: establish a new regulatory framework for administering permits to develop hardrock minerals. based on the value of the minerals as defined under the gross income definition of the income tax code. Use the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites. The 8% royalty would apply to new production. Production from existing mining operations would pay a 4% royalty. On October 2, 2007, the Subcommittee on Energy and Minerals of the House Natural Resources Committee held a hearing on this bill. A substitute bill was marked up and approved by the full committee on October 23. The House approved this committee. of the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites; impose an 8% gross income royalty future hardrock mining operations, and an 4% royalty rate on current mining operations; require miners to seek additional permits to explore for and develop mineral resources and meet certain standards related to reclamation of mined lands. create an abandoned mine reclamation program similar to the one currently in place for coal sites. make the income from hardrockmining fees and royalties available, subject to appropriation, to support reclamation programs and to provide assistance to certain state, local, and tribal governments. In 1993, President Clinton's comprehensive economic proposal, part of the State of the Union Address, included claims fees and a 12.5% ad-valorem royalty. Several bills were introduced in the 103 rd Congress to impose a royalty. S. 775 passed the Senate in May 1993 and was incorporated into H.R. 322 which was approved by the House in November 1993. H. R. 322 went to conference in 1994 but was not approved reportedly due to a lack of support. went to conference in 1994 but was not approved reportedly because of opposition from Western lawmakers, mainly over the royalty issue. In 1995, there was an unsuccessful attempt to incorporate a royalty as part of the FY1996 budget. In its FY1998 budget proposal, and again in FY2001, the Clinton Administration proposed a 5% "net smelter" royalty. At this writing, the major reform bill in the House is H.R. 2262, which, among other things, would impose an 8% ad-valorem royalty. Proposals to reform the Mining Law have been made almost from the time it was signed by President Grant. One of the contentious issues has been that the law makes no provision for the payment of a royalty on the production of hardrock minerals from federal lands. The royalty-free treatment of the hardrock mineral industry is unlike mining arrangements (leases) on private and state lands. mining of the leasable energy minerals is not subject to the same royalty rules as those for hardrock. private and state lands, mining of the leasable energy minerals (coal, oil, and gas) on federal lands, and even unlike hardrock minerals on acquired (as contrasted with public) federal lands. In recent years, the Congress has repeatedly considered, but not passed, reform of the Mining Law, including, in part, to require the payment of royalties. In 1990, committees held several hearings on proposed Mining Law reform, e.g., on S. 1126 (101 st Congress) which among other things would have imposed an 8% ad-valorem royalty. non-energy minerals—the common and less valuable minerals such as sand and gravel. For coal, this system of leasing continued until the early 1970s, when the Arab oil embargo and shortages of petroleum reserves focused attention on the vast coal deposits in the western states. In 1976 the Federal Coal Leasing Amendments Act was enacted, which among other changes, replaced the fixed royalty with an ad-valorem royalty of 12.5% for surface mines and 8% for underground mines. This kind of royalty payment system is now also used by the federal government in leasing oil and gas. would be a tax rather than to impose no royalty on the use of the land. This is the economic rationale for the abandoned mineland reclamation fee under SMCRA, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. If private landowners exercise monopoly power or some other type of market power, then it would be possible to use a market-determined royalty rate. If the market for the leasing of mineral lands between landowners and mining companies is not competitive, and second, if the mining industry itself isn't competitive, then the fee could be used. financial results and further consolidation within the industry. Rates of return on capital for the U.S. mining industry have also been higher as compared with many other industries. These negative industry and regional effects would be a natural and unavoidable part of the transition from a policy of resource subsidization to a Policy of resource neutrality. The policy of introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals would be expected to have positive economic effects in other sectors (the non-mining industry) and in the remaining parts of the country. than sales revenue by the costs of doing business, thus resulting in a smaller royalty base from which to calculate royalty payments. Reducing royalty payments to the federal government might be a major reason that it is supported by much of the hardrock mining industry and its supporters. Such an arrangement would not serve to impose the market-determined factor costs (royalties) on the mining operations. If net profit were to mean net before-tax profits, then the royalty would essentially operate like an income tax. type of market power, then it would be possible to extract from the mining companies higher than competitive royalty rates. In the second case, if the mining industry is concentrated and exercises market power it might lead to underpayment of royalties. These are complex issues which are difficult to analyze. Much of the land from which hardrock minerals are produced is owned by the federal government, which might be in a position to take advantage of its power to obtain royalty payments above the competitively determined rates. Such payments, combined with the bonus bids, would appropriate for society the economic rents. 40 companies and the top four account for 35% of total market capitalization. This would suggest that the market-determined royalty rate might actually be too low. On balance, however, it might be the case that the above two opposing forces tend to offset each other and the government would want to use the more appropriate competitive rate. Economic theory is also unclear whether the same royalty rate should apply to all hardrock minerals or whether the rate should vary by type of mineral in some cases. The royalty rates currently in effect on various types of minerals, both leasable and locatable, from federal lands are shown in Table 1. The location system for the hardrock minerals industry—involving no royalty payments or any other type of rental payment—has remained essentially unchanged since 1872. Part of the problem is confusion over just what a royalty is and what it means to pay for minerals from the federal lands. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of the Interior's website. Industry and the development of mineral resources were apparently a principal rationale for the location system involving no royalties and other rent payments established in 1872. The hardrock minerals industry is not an infant industry, and there is no longer a need for settling the American West. Arguments are made that the economic stimulus to the industry resulting from royalty-free treatment produces benefits. It is argued that imposition of a federal royalty on hardrock mining would damage most of the American hardrock industry, which, allowed from that price? What should the royalty rate be? And how does Congress decide what a fair royalty rate is? How does one balance the various considerations, such as efficiency and administrative considerations in deciding whether to impose a royalty? Would a royalty harm the domestic and international competitiveness of the U.S. hardrock mining industry? Finally, what taxes and fees does the hardrock mineral industry pay, and do they have any bearing on the question of whether or not a royalty should be imposed? The report discusses the federal tax treatment of the hardrock mineral industry. It also discusses the likely economic effects of royalty-free provision of public lands. The report also examines the three tax subsidies that affect the hard rock minerals industry, as well as claims and patent fees that the industry pays. Note that the question of payment of royalties from hard rock mineral production on public lands is part of a much broader question. The full report can be found at: http://www.irs.gov/irs/irs-reports/hardrock-mineral-industry-taxes. financial effect on the producers of these minerals, particularly on marginal producers. Both average and marginal costs would increase, and profits and employment in the hardrock mineral industry would decrease. Hardrock mineral production would be lower as marginal mines closed. This would also adversely affect those parts of the U.S. that rely on these industries. The payment of royalties combined with higher fees could also alter the competitive balance among mineral producers both domestically and internationally. The competitive disadvantage that royalty-paying mineral producers currently have would be lessened. hardrock mineral industry generally would be less competitive in relation to other domestic mineral producers and with international mineral producers. Hardrock mineral prices would probably not increase very much because for most minerals, prices are determined in the international market. This would further add somewhat to financial pressures for the marginally profitable mining company. On the other hand, the hardrock mining industry has been booming over the last four years. One indicator of this is the growth in metals and minerals prices, which have increased overall and have contributed to industry profitability. Hardrock mining is a highly capital intensive business and large enterprises can operate more efficiently. In the United States, many of the mining firms are large multinational mining conglomerates. Five of the top ten claim holders (who hold more than 16% of all claims on western public lands) are foreign corporations. Internationally, the hardrock mining industry is dominated by about 40 companies and the top four account for 35% of claims.a reliable indicator of competitive rates. For more information, visit hardrockmining.org. The mining industry was the largest contributor to growth in the Gross Domestic Product price index in 2006, accounting for 6.6% of price growth. PricewaterhouseCoopers predicted that 2007 should bring with it both record financial results and further consolidation within the industry. Table 2 shows this increase between 2002 and October 2007 for selected metals. Finally, rates have contributed to industry profitability, as shown in the table below. The table is based on data from the U.S. Department of Commerce. the subsidy and to the communities dependent upon that industry. But these benefits are not external benefits that the markets are not capable of taking into account. When resources are scarce, a condition that affects all economic systems and all countries alike, the use of resources in one sector means the loss of the resource in another sector. The loss of economic efficiency implies that the private benefits to the hardrock mining industry are smaller than the private costs to other sectors. This suggests that removal of the subsidies should be considered. mining would damage most of the American hardrock industry. Some argue that there is a national security aspect to subsidizing certain hardrock minerals. It is also pointed out that damage to the industry would harm those western communities that are economically dependent upon it. Subsidies for hardrock mining clearly produce economic benefits to theindustry receiving the subsidy and to the communities dependent upon that industry. It seems clear also that not all hard rock minerals are of U.S. national security concern. In any event, if a financial subsidy for certain strategic hardRock minerals industries was appropriate, a tax subsidy would probably be more efficient than total forgiveness of royalty payments. the remaining parts of the country. Less land would be mined and fewer U.S. hardrock minerals would be produced. This would likely contribute to a more economically efficient use of the nation's resources. The payment of a royalty to the federal government for the services from the mineral land would increase federal revenues, although not as much as a free-access policy would have. The current policy of free access involves a trade-off: Policymakers choose the benefits to the hardrock mineral industry above the benefits that would accrue to another domestic economic sector. subsidies for the hardrock mineral industry are discussed in the section "Federal Tax Treatment of the Hardrock Mining Industry," below. There is another side to the externality concept: external costs. Without land reclamation, there would presumably be damage to the environment, which is an external cost. It appears that some external effects associated with hard rock mineral production are net "external costs" rather than net external benefits. The external costs from hardrock Mineral production are the degradation of the environment and the damage of the land for other potential uses. presumably be damage to the environment, which is an external cost to society. This is a cost that the typical profit-maximizing hardrock mineral producer does not usually account for in the normal business decisionmaking process. Consequently, since the accountable business costs are lower than the real costs (including external costs), prices are lower and output is higher. Under this reasoning, if the presence of external benefits is dismissed, the appropriate federal policy would be a tax rather than to impose no royalty. to other sectors. This suggests that removal of the subsidies would produce a net welfare gain to citizens of the United States. As to the national security argument, there are minerals that are often referred to as "strategic minerals"—cobalt, columbium, chromium, manganese, platinum, and others. Excessive dependence upon foreign producers of these and other economically vital minerals might pose an economic disruption or national security threat to the U.S. These arguments are similar to those made about the U.-S. dependence upon other countries. the rate should vary by type of mineral in some logical way. Table 2 gives an illustration for metals. Another possibility would be to vary the royalty rates in direct proportion to the percentage depletion rates applicable to gross income from mining. Introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals could have an adverse economic and financial effect on the producers of these minerals, particularly on lead and zinc. The figures do not represent either itself would be a function of—it would vary positively with—the mineral's price. The royalty rates currently in effect on various types of be hardrock minerals, coal, or oil and gas. State governments also typically charge ad-valorem royalties for the extraction of locatable minerals. Hardrock mining on acquired federal lands (as opposed to public domain lands) is required to pay a royalty of 5%. The type of royalty that most closely is intended to capture the rents from mineral lands whose future productivity cannot be precisely determined due to risk is the ad-Valorem royalty. Most states with mineral resources imposed ad-valorem royalties at rates ranging from 2-10%. For leasable energy minerals on federal lands, the statutory royalty rates range from 5%-16.67%. For coal, the royalty rate is either 12% (surface mines) or 8% (underground mines) Even for hardrock minerals on acquired lands (as opposed to public domain lands, which are governed by the 1872 Mining Law), the Congress has established an ad-Valorem royalty rate of 5%. In most types of private royalty arrangements in the early 1990s, the most common type of royalty was the ad-valorem royalty at rates ranging from 2-8%, with an average rate of 5%. In the case of publicly owned lands, laws determine the return on the resources. There may be conditions under which the government might not want to use the royalty rate established by the market. If there are sufficient positive economic and social effects from the use of public lands for mining, there might be an economic rationale for charging the mineral producer a lower than market rate. profits royalty (i.e., one based on the net income or profit of the mining company)? If there is to be an ad-valorem royalty based on price or value, at what stage in the mineral producing process should value (or price) be measured? Should it be based on gross income (value of the mineral at the mine) or net smalter return (the value at the smelter less certain deductions)? When does a mining company produce a saleable or marketable product whose value can be measured. What deductions, if any, should be allowed from that price? What should the royalty rate be? 1 deer out of 5, it would perhaps be 1 out of 6). Likewise it would not be rational for the renter to pay to the landowner a royalty based on more than market value. The ad-valorem royalty appears to be economically the most efficient type of royalty. The question becomes to what base specifically should the royalty rate apply? The aggregate value of a commodity being the product of a price (value/unit) and a total output, the questions are: At what point can the value of the mine's output first be determined? Forgoing royalty and other payments through the location system in effect means that the services of a factor of production are provided free of charge. No royalty is ever collected from its use. In economic terms, this is comparable to the free provision of labor or capital equipment. Economic theory suggests that a consequence of providing factor services for free is that that factor services are provided for free to the public. This is the case in the U.S. for the use of federal land. In the UK, the practice is known as the ‘federal land tax’. that a consequence of providing factor services for free that would otherwise have economic value would be to distort the allocation of resources. This theory holds that if a factor is provided to a firm without charge, too much of that factor would be hired and the output of the firm would exceed the socially desirable amount. Consequently, not enough of a more valuable good is provided. From another perspective, the federal government is the steward of the public lands which it holds as trustee of American public. The development of public resources should only occur at a fair market. of public resources should only occur at a fair market value return to the nation, it is argued. An implication of the location system on federal lands is that all economic surplus that may be earned by the industry in the long run is retained by industry rather than allocated to society at large. These profits are excess or surplus returns to a resource owner above the level required to produce or supply the resource. In theory, they accrue naturally to the owner of any natural resource but are not necessary to. A royalty is a factor payment, part of the rent paid, or the return, to land as both a marketable capital asset and input to production. It is a payment made by the renter of the land to the landowner (whether private or public) in a voluntary exchange for the flow of services provided by that land over time. As afactor payment, the royalty is analogous to the wage rate, which is a paid for the services of labor. The royalty is not a tax. A royalty based on a constant rate per unit, say $5/ton, of mineral output (i.e., the ore concentrate) makes little economic sense. This was the type of royalty instituted under the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, the law which first introduced a federal leasing system, including a royalty, for coal. As a factor payment, thistype of royalty makes littleeconomic sense, being equivalent to charging fixed interest payments on capital regardless of the value of the mineral.be consistent with mainstream economic theory that a royalty is not a tax, but a factor Payment. risk is shared between landowner and mineral producer. The royalty becomes a way of allowing for mineral land rents to be paid, for the landowner to earn a return on the land. As a land rental, an ad-valorem royalty protects the mineral producer against excessive royalty payments (overestimation of rents) and the government against underestimation of economic rents. Being a factor payment, then, a royalty is not a tax, which is a compulsory levy on individuals and businesses to finance the cost of government. and businesses to finance the cost of government for the common welfare and not a return to a factor of production in exchange for specific services provided. This is an important point, one that might be used, for example, to argue against proposals to impose a royalty based on net profits. The distinction between a tax and the rental payment also distinguishes between the federal government as a sovereign entity with the power to tax, and as a landowner or proprietor with the right to pay a rental payment.  mineral rents are an attempt to capture the returns to the land above and beyond the returns paid to labor (wages), capital (interest), entrepreneurship (profits), and other factors. With perfect knowledge and no risks, for example, the rents resulting from mineral lands could be captured by the landowner as up-front payments. But mineral production, like all business, is risky; it is difficult to know in advance of production precisely the quantity and quality of the mineral. The precise division between royalties or bonus bids and annual rentals depends primarily upon how production risk is shared between landowner and mineral producer. which is a payment for the services of labor, or the interest rate. Mineral producers, as business organizations, require land, as well as labor, capital, energy, and other materials. The exception to this rule, of course, is land that contains a mineral deposit. And just as mineral producers must pay a wage in exchange for theServices of labor and interest for the service of capital, they generally must pay landowners for the Services of land that Contains a Mineral Deposit. But this is not always the case, as it has happened in the past. is based on the amount of the mineral produced. Lands producing minerals of higher quality and value pay a higher royalty amount. Those producing lower quality or value minerals, lead for example, pay a lower amount. It would be inconsistent with the concept of sharing and with a factor payment in a competitive market for a royalty to be based on other than market value minus the costs of obtaining it. For example, if instead of payments in kind (deer or crops) they were made in cash. owner of any natural resource but are not necessary to secure the continued supply of the resource. Only a normal long-run return is necessary to ensure such a supply. This is an important rationale for the payment of bonus bids and other rental payments. The theory suggests that any pure economic surplus return from a natural resource should accrue to society. In general, the economic concept of a royalty as a factor payment implies that the payment should be based on the market value of the producer's output, whether it be hardrock minerals, coal, or oil and gas. example, if instead of payments in kind (deer or crops or precious metals) the landowner were to be paid in money, one would expect him to receive the monetary equivalent of the value of the output. Rational landowners would not settle for less than what the deer, crop, or metal is worth because they could always have the deer and metals taken to market and sold for at least market value. If they wanted less rent, then presumably that would have been negotiated as a smaller share (instead of 1 deer out of 5, it would perhaps be 1)

ROUGE-1: 79.45, ROUGE-2: 72.88, ROUGE-L: 23.47
BERTScore: 56.98

==============================================
==================== [82/100] ====================
Summary:
Of the 7 KPPs not met, 3 pertain to the NSC’s cutter boat operations. The Coast Guard and COTF have different interpretations of the cutter boat K PPs. According to Coast Guard officials, the September 2012 requirements document should have been written more clearly to convey the sea state expectation for cutter boat launch and recovery operations. In January 2016, the Coast Guard conducted IOT&E to determine if the three KPPS involving cutter boats were not fully met since the boats are unable to operate through all sea state 5 conditions. COTF found the NSC to be operationally effective and suitable, but with 10 major deficiencies. None of the major deficiencies were rated as severe, which would preclude NSC from accomplishing its mission. Five of the 10major deficiencies pertained to NSC’s weapon systems and cutter boats. The reliability and operational availability issues of the weapon systems—the CIWS, NULKA, and the cutter boats—were cited as a major concern by DOT&E in its assessment of IOT&E. The CIWS, NULKA launcher, and air search radar were all repaired following IOT&E. Post-operational reports indicate that problems persist with these systems as they were often unavailable during operations. Despite these findings, as noted above, COTF found the NSC to be operationally effective and suitable. While COIs and deficiencies factor into a system’s operational effectiveness and suitability rating, KPPs are measures of the capabilities considered essential to mission accomplishment. are measures of the capabilities considered essential to mission accomplishment. In our January 2016 report, we found that during IOT&E and other test events, the NSC fully met 12 of its 19 KPPs. The Coast Guard is not able to demonstrate that it is providing the capabilities that it intended to field. For instance, the Coast Guard has not yet demonstrated that it can achieve a hard and soft kill against a subsonic cruise missile as required, or fully meet interoperability requirements with the Department of Defense, DHS and other government agencies. suitability, and, according to Coast Guard acquisition guidance, occur prior to a full-rate production decision. The test event concludes with a rating of operationally effective or not effective, operationally suitable or not suitable. Follow-on operational test and evaluation (FOT&E) focuses on refining the conclusions that were made during previous operational test events. It also validates any incomplete or deferred requirements and verifies the correction of deficiencies identified during IOT &E. The event is conducted after an asset’s full rate production decision and focuses on evaluating production changes and reevaluating the system. COTF writes a test report that focuses on the resolution of the asset’s COIs and any deficiencies that were identified during testing. FOT&E concludes with an operational effectiveness and suitability rating similar to that of IOT &E. We have previously found that delaying critical test events can have a negative effect on the reliability of the NSCs. As we reported in January 2016, Iot&E took place about 2 years later than planned and after 7 of the 8 planned N SCs were under contract, with 3 operational. The ADM also directed the Coast Guard to verify the correction of all deficiencies, including the 7 unmet KPPs. According to Coast Guard officials, they have corrected 4 of the 10 major deficiencies from IOT&E that involved equipment failures. Other testing events are expected to occur through 2017 and possibly beyond, the ADM said. The Coast Guard may not correct 2 deficiencies due to the cost of making fleet-wide changes, and because of the nature of the equipment failures, officials said. The 8 NSCs are planned to be fully operational by 2020. The Coast Guard is phasing out the legacy 378-foot High Endurance Cutters. During testing, the NSC successfully demonstrated 18 of its 19 COIs. One COI, cybersecurity, was deferred to the DHS Director of Operational Test and Evaluation (DOT&E) This deferral was due to the testing of the N SC’s cybersecurity capabilities until a more robust test was conducted. The 8 N SCs will enter operations in 2020. major acquisition programs for proper management, oversight, accountability, and alignment with DHS’s strategic functions. The resulting acquisition decision memorandum (ADM) from October 2014 directed the Coast Guard to conduct FOT&E and complete three action items. The cybersecurity COI is planned to be tested in 2016, which, if successful, will address the first and third requirements of the ADM. Other testing events are expected to be held in 2016 and 2017, but other testing events also are planned. DHS and Coast Guard acquisition guidelines require operational test and evaluation by an independent test agency. The Coast Guard uses the U.S. Navy’s COTF to conduct operational tests and other evaluations for its major acquisition programs. For operational effectiveness, testers determine whether or not an asset can meet its missions. For for operational suitability, testers assess an asset's operational effectiveness and suitability to perform its duties as a Coast Guard vessel or aircraft carrier. For full-rate production, testers must confirm that the production configured system meet all requirements before approval.  Operational testing can occur over many test events. Initial Operational Test and Evaluation (IOT&E): This event is meant to gather the data necessary to resolve COIs, determine an asset’s operational effectiveness and suitability, and, according to Coast Guard acquisition guidance, occur prior to acquisition.into an asset's overall operational effectiveness, suitability rating. Key performance parameters (KPP) are the capabilities considered essential for mission accomplishment. KPPs are listed by threshold values, which are the minimum acceptable level of performance. critical operational issues (COI) are one metric used to determine an asset’s operational effectiveness and suitability. Unmet COIs are often the result of related deficiencies, which are identified during testing. Deficiencies are scored based on the severity of the problem and its impact on the asset's ability to accomplish its mission. COTF assessed the NSC's COIs, for example, by comparing the outcome of the test event against the full scope of the COI. delivered on schedule. We will continue to assess the progress of the FRC and OPC acquisitions going forward. If you or your staff have any questions about this statement, please contact Michele Mackin at (202) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov. In addition, contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include Katherine Trimble, Assistant Director; John Crawford; This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.to this testimony include Katherine Trimble, Assistant Director; John Crawford; Lindsey Cross; and Peter W. Anderson. The full transcript of this testimony is available on the GAO website. Coast Guard conducted a full and open competition to select three contractors to perform preliminary and contract design work. In May 2009, we reported on best practices that commercial shipbuilders use to ensure that ships are delivered on time and within budget. We found that before a contract is signed, a full understanding of the effort needed to design and construct the ship is reached, enabling commercial buyers and shipbuilders to sign a contract that fixes the price, delivery date, and ship performance parameters. to minimize risk. The Coast Guard’s fiscal year 2016 Capital Investment Plan reflects $1.5 billion in funding for the OPC. After the first 3 of the planned fleet of 25 OPCs are built, the Coast Guard plans to increase its purchase to 2 O PCs per year until the fleet is complete.and deliver this ship in 2021. The Coast Guard attributes the delays to procurement delays, including a bid protest that GAO ultimately denied in June 2014. As we found in April 2015, the initial and full operational capability dates both slipped 15 months. practices that we have highlighted in our past work on shipbuilding. The Coast Guard purchased the technical specifications and licenses necessary to build the FRC in order to use the information to conduct a full and open competition for the remaining 26 of 58 planned vessels. According to Coast Guard officials, the second phase of the acquisition was intended to promote competition and allowed bidders on the contract to make certain design changes to the ship. But the key performance parameters remain the same and the design for several critical systems—such as the propulsion system—remains the same. The Coast Guard plans to award a contract for the second phase of this acquisition by the end of June 2016. When the government owns technical data rights, it does not need to rely on only one contractor to meet requirements. The Coast Guard is using a two- phased, competitive strategy to select a contactor to construct the OPC. The design for several critical systems—such as the propulsion system, generators, hull structure, and bridge layout—remain the same. In general, as we have previously In addition to its efforts to enhance competition, the Coast Guard has developed a warranty provision under its contract with Bollinger Shipyards. The Coast Guard does not always have insight into how much it costs the contractors to fix these issues. But after multiple deficiencies interrupted production, officials noted they are confident that the Coastguard has received value from this warranty. The U.S. Coast Guard plans to use these strategies when purchasing the OPC. Based on best practices that we have, we have decided to purchase the O PC. Shipbuilders complete key design phases that correspond with the completion of a three-dimensional product model. Final information on the systems that will be installed on the ship is needed to allow design work to proceed. During construction, buyers maintain a presence in the shipyard and with key suppliers to ensure the ship meets quality expectations and is delivered on schedule.ship performance parameters. We will continue to assess the progress of the project and keep you updated on the progress as the project progresses. For more information, go to: http://www.nasa.gov.uk/news/features/top-stories/ship-performance-parameters. The Coast Guard has accepted the delivery of at least the 6th NSC before the testing is complete. By the time of the spring 2014 IOT&E event, the Coast Guard had nearly four years of experience operating the NSCs. The Coast Guard will be operating 6 N SCs before it has resolved issues from IOT &E and knows the cutter’s full capabilities. DHS agreed with these recommendations and estimated they would be implemented by November 2016. To the cost of making fleet-wide changes, and because the Coast Guards has developed an interim solution. FOT&E will begin in the fall of 2016 and is scheduled to continue through at least 2017. In January 2016 we recommended, and the Coast Guard concurred, that the NSC’s KPPs for the operation of the cutter boats should be clarified. Following IOT&e, DHS held an acquisition review board (ARB) to discuss the outcome of IOT &E. The ARBs review major acquisition programs for proper management, oversight, accountability, and alignment. The Coast Guard has matured its acquisition processes, which has been demonstrated in its approach with the FRC and OPC programs. The process to date reflects some lessons learned from the NSC acquisition, for example in the areas of competition and the schedule for IOT&E. In addition to its efforts to enhance competition, the Coast Guard is also trying to increase its purchase to 2 OPCs per year until the final asset is delivered, currently scheduled for fiscal year 2035. The Coast Guard expects to have 1 operational OPC of a planned buy of 25 by December 2023. The Coast Guard is in the process of designing the OPC, which is the last of the major cutter classes to be built. DHS’s directive on test and evaluation does not include any direction or guidance on FOT&E. We concluded in our January 2016 report that this gap in DHS guidance also has implications for future DHS assets. Most significantly, the Coast Guard has no guidance on how to conduct FOT &E on the new OPC. The OPC will be built as part of the U.S. Department of Defense. The Coast Guard could continue to buy assets without having demonstrated their full capabilities in testing. Without updated guidance that establishes timeframes and responsibilities for completing all testing, the Coast Guard risks encountering the same scenario with the OPC. This cutter class is intended to bridge the mission gap between the FRC and NSC. It is estimated to cost $12.1 billion, making it the most expensive Coast Guard recapitalization program to date. In January, the U.S. Coast Guard announced plans to build a new cutter class. The Coast Guard has encountered several issues that require major retrofits and design changes on the NSC. The total cost of changes we identified as of June 2015 totals approximately $202 million. In order to minimize cost increases for some of these changes, the Coast Guard plans to maintain the original equipment design for the production of the remaining NSCs and plans to conduct retrofits after accepting delivery of the cutters. The Coast Guard will be faced with paying for the replacement of these systems with new equipment that it must also purchase. the cutters. In some instances, replacement equipment is still in the prototype phase. The problems identified with these systems during operations will continue to impact the NSC until the design changes are implemented across the fleet. Early testing can allow performance issues to be discovered at a point when fixes can be incorporated into the design of an asset. As we have previously found for Department of Defense programs, continuing with full-rate production before ensuring that assets meet key criteria is not a good idea. Figure 1 shows selected systems that will require retrofits after all eight cutters are built. equipment that it must also purchase. The Coast Guard has encountered a variety of problems with the cutter’s propulsion systems during operations. The root causes and the method and cost of potential solutions are not yet known. The problems include: (1) high engine temperatures, which limit the top speed of the cutter in certain conditions, (2) cracked cylinder heads, which are occurring at a rate higher than expected and are the NSCs number one operational degrader and cost driver for maintenance. number one operational degrader and cost driver for maintenance. Overheating generator bearings have caused at least one patrol to be cut short due to the lack of an effective backup generator. Until the causes are identified and corrective actions implemented, the Coast Guard is at risk of experiencing costly and potentially mission-limiting problems with this equipment across the fleet. DHS agreed to provide oversight and specify any further actions the NSC program should take at the conclusion of the study. The Coast Guard has two studies underway to identify the root causes.

ROUGE-1: 81.97, ROUGE-2: 73.42, ROUGE-L: 30.37
BERTScore: 62.22

==============================================
==================== [83/100] ====================
Summary:
The study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model estimates a 24-percent reduction in carbon monoxide emissions by increasing average vehicle speed from 30 mph to 50 mph. When a 95-percent confidence interval is applied, the change in emissions can range from a 72-percent decrease to a 75-percent increase. EPA has been unable to quantify the model's uncertainty primarily because of the cost and time associated with such quantification, the fact that the on-road vehicle population is a constantly changing universe. The agency will not be able to quantify the uncertainty associated with its MOBILE model estimates. “Uncertainty is pervasive in all three emission modeling components,” the EPA says. EPA officials said they plan to address each of the above limitations in the next revision, MOBIle6. The agency will also be looking at the cost of vehicle studies. The next revision of the MOBILES model is expected to be released later this year. It will be the first in a series of updates to the model that will go into effect in 2015. result in only trivial emissions impacts and those that could be significant. Where it was possible to do so, we believe the estimated emissions impact had already been quantified or qualitatively described in the report. One of the 14 limitations of the MOBILE model is that it does not currently have information about, nor estimates of, the uncertainty associated with its emissions estimates. However, we agree that researchers viewed some limitations as having a more significant impact on emissions than others, and we have provided this view in theReport. variability in vehicle emissions (leading to further data gaps/limitations) Agency officials pointed out that there is substantial variability across vehicle types, operating conditions and driver behavior. For these reasons, OMS officials told us they do not plan to develop uncertainty ranges with the next revision to the MOBILE model. Similar to the global positioning issue for road, this is a global issue for vehicle emissions as well as for road safety in the U.S., the agency said. For more information, visit the OMS website. EPA officials said significant technological advancement may be needed before it becomes cost-effective to address this issue. Future vehicles may have on-board computers with the ability to instantaneously record and later report emissions under different operating scenarios. EPA officials pointed out that it is their plan, at some point in the future, to report uncertainty ranges for some model estimates. They said they are currently saving both qualitative and quantitative descriptors for the data being collected by and for the agency in order to perform these calculations. rates, and impact of remote sensing efforts. Except for remote sensing, the current model’s estimates for these parameters is based on aging and limited data. EPA has not performed any tampering surveys since 1992, and agency officials said that as a result of this lack of data, the tampering assumptions for MOBILE6 will remain unchanged from MOBILES5a. However, EPA's goal for MO BILE6 is to provide users with greater flexibility in designing I&M programs, as long as the state or local programs’ estimated I &M credits can be substantiated. state or local data. With respect to newer vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics, because of the limited data on the longer-term emissions impact of this technology, the agency has provided credit for these OBD-equipped vehicles equal to that provided for operating an enhanced I&M program. A fifth concern is the proper representation of diurnal emissions. EPA officials said that, in addition to the states’ own studies, they were unsure whether sufficient data would be available in time to further revise the I &M assumptions in MOBILE6. More recent data from the U.S. Department of Transportation indicates that passenger cars are driven about 2,000 miles more annually than currently estimated by EPA’s MOBILE model. Heavy duty gasoline-powered vehicles, which have higher certification standards than their light duty counterparts, are believed to comprise a significantly larger percentage of the overall vehicle fleet. EPA plans to update the fleet characterization data forMOBILE6, including reflecting the increases in the heavy-duty vehicle population. Similarly, another fleet characterization issue involves urban buses.  MOBILE5a’ estimates are based on the assumption that, on average, light duty vehicles are driven about 14,000 miles annually when new. EPA does not envision at this time that significant changes in the in-use emissions rates for heavy duty vehicles will be included in MOBIle6. A seventh concern is the fleet characterization data in EPA’s database, stemming from a concern that much of the data used for MOBILES5a are quite old. More recent data from the U.S. Department of to estimate the deterioration rate of such vehicles and that researchers since then had had more time and more vehicles to test than were available to EPA. They also said the model’s correction factor for vehicles with 50,000 or more odometer miles would likely be lowered in MOBILE6, but they were uncertain at the time of our audit how much this emissions estimate would be reduced. A special subgroup of the FACA mobile model workgroup has been established to address this issue, and their work is still ongoing. reductions is compared with observed data. A 1997 study of wintertime oxygenated fuels suggested that the observed oxygenated fuel benefits were much lower than the 20 to 30 percent estimated by EPA’s model. A third concern is MOBILE5a’ estimates of emissions system deterioration for vehicles with more than 50,000 odometer miles. EPA officials agreed that this is also an area that needs more study, but one which they plan to address inMOBILE6.. concern is MOBILE5a’ emissions credits and assumptions about inspection and maintenance programs. According to a 1995 National Research Council report, vehicle condition—whether the vehicle is well maintained, or has been tampered with or is malfunctioning—is more important than vehicle age in determining emissions. There is a need to update the basic data supporting I&M emissions reduction credits to reflect a growing population of vehicles in which rates of tampering may be diminishing. Also, vehicle owners often replace older, carbureted vehicles with newer fuel-injected vehicles. a hill—although some studies have indicated that both the increased load on the engine from climbing a hill and the decreased load that accompanies engine deceleration significantly increase vehicle emissions. EPA officials explained that obtaining the basic data from instrumented cars and chase cars to make such adjustments would be expensive at this time. According to agency officials, it is not expected that MOBILE6 will have adjustments for road grade, although such adjustments are being planned for MOBILES7. In addition to being uncertain about the amount of emissions related to roadgrade, EPA officials said that because of the cost and length of such adjustments, it would be difficult to make them. this time and that because of the cost and length of time required for these studies, the impact of road grade will probably not be addressed until MOBILE7. State and local agencies would have to plot road grades for millions of miles of roadways in their jurisdictions, also a costly and time-consuming activity. However, as global positioning technologyfor vehicles becomes less costly and more widely available and used, it is envisioned that the impacts of roadgrade emissions will be more fully understood. It is envisioned this will lead to a reduction in road grade emissions. MOBILE6 will allow users to separate start emissions from any linkage to the FTP driving cycle assumptions. The EPA plans to partially fund ongoing research with the Department of Transportation to develop a modal emissions model that may one day allow user to model additional parameters, such as the relative emissions impact of sequencing traffic signals to enhance traffic flow. As noted above, an EPA-sponsored FACA mobile model workgroup made up of representatives from other federal, state, and local government agencies, academia, the automobile. be a high priority for MOBILE6, due to be issued in late 1998. Under this revised model, the magnitude of start-up emissions will not depend on vehicle speed or the driving cycle. Instead, EPA is proposing to allow model users to model the emissions impacts of cold starts on the basis of local areas’ estimates of the number of cold-start vehicles in the area. For the first time ever, EPA will move from an areawide, trip-based model to a roadway-specific model. The MOBILE model was originally designed only for estimating areawide emissions on vehicles. EPA plans to expand the current list of vehicle categories from 8 to 20, one of which will be a separate category for buses. The current model does not have a separate classification for urban buses, although this is a growing vehicle category in many urban areas with unique operating characteristics, such as very frequent starts and stops. An eighth concern is the level of distinctions in roadway classifications. TheMOBILE.5a was originally Designed to estimate areawides emissions on cars, trucks and buses. MOBILE5a is a computer program that estimates the emissions of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and nitrogen oxides for eight different types of gasoline-fueled and diesel highway motor vehicles. The model consists of an integrated collection of mathematical equations and assumptions about the emissions from vehicles manufactured from 1960 to 2020. EPA officials are examining 14 areas in the current MOBILE model in which major limitations exist. According to agency officials, it is their plan for each new version to reflect the most recent testing, data collection, and research that are being done. Table 1 summarizes the areas in which major limitations exist, as well as EPA’s plans to address these limitations in its next revision to the model, MOBILE6, due to be issued in late 1998. EPA officials told us that incorporating new estimates for these emissions-producing activities would be a high priority for MOBIL6. According to agency officials and model experts we contacted, it is the nature of models to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has periodically updated the estimating capabilities of its mobile source emissions model. Five of the major limitations in the current MOBILE model relate to FTP parameters. These five are emissions from road grade, air conditioner usage, emissions at higher speeds, emissions from aggressive driving, and emissions immediately after engine start-up (cold- start) EPA has added correction factors to the model to estimate what emissions would be for speeds in excess of 57 mph, for rapid acceleration beyond 3.3 mph/second, and for other scenarios such as different temperatures or different fuels. For example, the impact of temperature on emissions can be substantial. MOBILE5a reflects the 10th major revision since the model was first introduced in 1978. The underlying basis for EPA’s original model, and all subsequent versions, has been the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) The FTP is roughly based on a typical urban area trip, complete with starts and stops, covering 7.5 miles in the Los Angeles urban area in the late 1960s. Such a trip is about the length of a typical car trip in the U.S. today. reflect the most up-to-date information. More recent information indicates that nitrogen oxide emissions may be from 30 to 75 percent greater at some speeds than the current model’s estimates when the air conditioner is used. Increases in speeds above 65 mph have left data gaps in the currentmodel that are not adequately represented by existing correction factors. Others have recognized that the MOBILE model's estimates are inextricably tied to the FTP's estimates. The EPA-FACA materials disseminated in March 1997 noted that the 10-percent additional load intended to simulate the effect of airconditioner usage “is obsolete. evaporative emissions, under certain conditions. To compensate for the complexities of these and other emissions-producing activities, EPA has periodically adjusted its basic formula. In essence, the correction factor is a multiplier added to the basic formula (miles traveled times emissions rate per mile) to adjust the model’s output to more closely reflect actual emissions. Except for California, EPA supplies the baseline emissions rates and correction factors for other model users. State and local agencies typically supply their own estimates of the number of vehicle miles. The amount of data needed to estimate the impact of road grade is still years away. Time would be needed to develop consistent guidance on how state and local agencies should go about collecting these data. With respect to the representation of other emissions-producing activities not represented by the FTP, EPA officials have made periodic adjustments but recognize that the current model’s correction factor adjustments may not reflect the most up-to-date information. For example, as noted in, the EPA has made periodic. adjustments. driven, or about 8 times the amount a new car would emit. EPA acknowledges that these adjustments were made on the basis of limited data. Only recently have 1990-technology vehicles become old enough to accurately assess their emissions deterioration. An April 1997 study of 227 vehicles (model years 1991 to 1993) with more than 50,000 odometer miles found no significant changes in emissions or deterioration as indicated by the current model. OMS officials said they used all the data that were available to them at the time (1991-1992) Major updates and improvements to the model have been made as more has become known about the complexity of the factors affecting vehicle emissions. According to agency officials, these improvements have resulted in the refinement of emissions estimates for evaporative emissions, wear and tear, and for other factors. In 1978, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency made the model available for use in 1978. In 2009, the agency made the new model available to the public for the first time. In 2010, the EPA began testing new models for emissions.  declining modeling resources have affected the pace of model improvements over the years. For example, a study of the emissions characteristics of 100 passenger cars for both exhaust and evaporative emissions could cost from $1.4 to $ 1.6 million. Studies of heavy duty trucks and other larger vehicles would cost considerably more. As an illustration of the magnitude of the problem, the agency’s current estimates of the cost of such a study are $1 to $2 million. The study would not address the emissions impacts of road grade, air conditioning, or most fuel studies. Some vehicles with fuel leaks can exceed the evaporative emissions of corresponding vehicles by one to two orders of magnitude. EPA has testing under way to determine how to better define this category of vehicles with significant fuel leaks. A 1996 automotive industry study of 150 vehicles found that 24-hour diurnal emissions ranged from 0.6 grams ofHC to 777.2 grams of HC, with vehicles with liquid fuel leaks providing the vast majority of the emissions. EPA officials explained that while they may develop a separate category for some vehicles withsignificant fuel leaks, this does not necessarily mean there will be a significant overall increase in evaporative estimates. poor vehicle maintenance or tampering; and for other factors. EPA and others have indications that as much as half of all hydrocarbon emissions from motor vehicles are evaporative emissions, under certain conditions. To compensate for the complexities EPA’s significantly higher rate of emissions system deterioration once vehicles reach 50,000 odometer miles. For example, prior to MOBILE5, the model assumed that a vehicle with 100,000 miles emitted about 1.0 grams of hydrocarbons for each mile driven. fifth concern is the proper representation of diurnal emissions. Diurnal emissions refer only to hydrocarbons and are a form of evaporative emissions that occur when a vehicle is parked and the ambient temperature is fluctuating. For all previous versions of the MOBILE model, the data supporting these 8- to 24-hour emissions estimates were collected during a 1-hour period during which temperatures were forcibly increased over a range of temperatures. More recent testing over 24- hours and longer periods without constraining temperature increases to a one- hour period indicates some differences from the MO BILE5a estimates for such evaporative emission. The MOBILE model exists because precise information about the emissions behavior of the approximately 200 million vehicles in use in the United States is not known. The need exists to estimate the impact of motor vehicles on air quality. The model’s estimates provide EPA regulators with critical information that is used to evaluate the adequacy of a state's program and the relative benefits of various policies to control motor vehicle emissions. The estimates can affect state policy decisions on issues such as the content and volatility of fuels. on issues such as the content and volatility of fuels, and some decisions on highway improvement projects. The model’s original purpose was to support the development of mobile source emissions inventories. Today, its estimates have a substantial influence not only on state and local programs but also on the automobile and oil industries. For example, the 1991 Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) required, among other things, that state transportation improvement programs in certain nonattainment areas conform with the applicable state implementation plan. control strategies, producing state implementation plans (SIP), and—subsequently— demonstrating control strategy effectiveness to EPA and others. The states are allowed to vary a number of control strategy features, including the types of fuels used, the type of inspection and maintenance (I&M) testing network, the frequency of I&M testing, the ages and types of vehicles to be inspected, the stringency of the tailpipe test, the number and percent of inspected vehicles that may receive a waiver,and a host of other factors. often replace older, carbureted vehicles with newer fuel-injected vehicles. The current model provides no additional I&M credits for vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics(OBD), a requirement for all 1994 and later light duty vehicles and trucks. This vehicle computer technology alerts a car owner when an emissions system malfunctions, permitting quicker repairs. More recent and more complete data are needed on the effectiveness of repairs in an I &M program, including the adequacy and durability of these repairs. Research Council report, “Virtually all motor vehicle testing has been based on a limited set of driving test cycles that inadequately represent current urban driving conditions” EPA officials pointed out that there is not a consistent definition of what constitutes aggressive driving, that aggressive driving happens only over a portion of the trip and is highly variable among drivers. However, one model expert told us that it took more than 1 year to evaluate one component of the model and that collecting vehicle emissions data on large data sets is very costly. on data approximately 20 years old, and there has been much change in the technology and emissions rates of these vehicles since that time. Still, the certification standards are higher for heavy duty vehicles than their light duty counterparts, and they are generally older and driven more miles annually. EPA officials said that testing heavyduty vehicles is difficult and quite expensive and agreed that there is a lack of recent data on the in-use emissions from this category of vehicles once they have been put in service. While some studies are under way, EPA high emitters because, among other reasons, the owners of such vehicles may avoid surrendering such vehicles for inspection and maintenance (I&M) and other testing at a higher rate than the normal population. A 1993 CARB study of 186 vehicles indicated that high emitters could represent 16.8 percent of the California fleet, or nearly 5 times the assumption in the California model. EPA officials have some concerns with the study, its reliance on remote sensing devices, and the study’s use of high-tech technology. One concern is the representation of high emitters in EPA’s MOBILE model database. Sierra Research testified in 1995 that the worst polluting 22 percent of the vehicles produce about 50 percent of emissions. EPA estimates that, overall, from 10 to 30 percent of vehicles cause the bulk of the pollution problems. The impact on the emissions estimates can be substantial, as noted by Sierra Research in 1995. The data now indicate that this group of vehicles accounts for a disproportionate amount of an area's overall emissions. concerns with the study, its reliance on remote sensing devices, and its applicability to other states. EPA officials believe that the larger data sets provided by their ongoing I&M lane testing in three other states properly identify most high emitters. A second concern is the current correction factors for lower volatility fuels and for oxygenated fuels. For example, EPA officials agreed that appropriate representation of high emitter is important to the model’s emissions estimates. They noted that this is also a high priority issue currently being addressed by EPA and one of the subgroups of the mobile modeling workgroup. Model users will be able to estimate emissions for three different types of roadways. EPA officials agreed that the limitation is an area of concern and noted that the agency has ongoing work to address the issue. One concern is the representation of high emitters in EPA’s FTP. The agency has also noted that it is working with stakeholders to address this issue as well as other potential issues with the model. The model will be available to the public by the end of the year. It is available for free on the EPA website. of pollution. This was also a significant issue for one of the Session Chairs for the Coordinating Research Council’s (CRC) April 1997 Workshop, who noted that, in his opinion, this is the single greatest issue that EPA faces. He and others have concerns that the existing database may underrepresent high emitters because, among other reasons, the owners of such vehicles may not be included. The nonfederal co-chair also noted that if the occurrence ofsuch vehicles is not properly represented in the model, the model's emissions estimates can be seriously flawed. A small number of vehicles can potentially be responsible for unusually high levels of pollution. This was also a significant issue for one scientist. He told us that he still believes this to be one of the most significant issues facing EPA today, primarily because of the number of cars on the road. Cause the bulk of the pollution problems, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) The EPA says it has no plans to change the way it calculates emissions from cars and other vehicles in the near future.  MOBILE5a likely underestimates the impact of low reid vapor pressure (RVP) fuels on hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions at temperatures above 75 degrees. The correction factor for low RVP fuels has not changed since February 1989. The RVPs for most fuels used to be higher than 9.0 psi, but today they can go lower than 7.0. EPA officials said that they plan to eliminate the constraint code in the next model, MOBIle6. receive credit for correction factors for fuels lower than 9.0 psi; however, they noted that work in this area is still ongoing. In addition, a 1996 National Research Council study suggested that the model may overestimate the benefits of oxygenated fuels. Similarly, a 1997 study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model “apparently overpredicts the oxygenated fuel effect by at least a factor of two” when the model's estimate of carbon monoxide reductions is compared with observed data. being able to calculate reductions below this level. The January 1997 Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program (AQIRP) Final Report suggested that reducing fuel volatility by 1 psi, from 9.0 to 8.0 psi, would reduce exhaust CO by 9 percent, exhaust HC by 4 percent, and total evaporative HC by 34 percent (NOx remained unchanged) The RVPs for most fuels used to be. The limited data collected since that time indicate that reducingfuel RVP from 9 to 7.0 psi may reduce hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide exhaust emissions from 18 to 27 percent more than the model estimates. among drivers, and that the above observations are not representative of average driving patterns. The Congress has also recognized that the FTP may not reflect actual driving conditions. In 1990 the Congress added Section 206(h) to the Clean Air Act, which required EPA to review and revise the FTP within 18 months “to insure that vehicles are tested under circumstances which reflect the actual current driving conditions under which motor vehicles are used” EPA’s October 1996 final rule on FTP revisions addressed four emissions-producing activities. 1996 final rule on FTP revisions addressed four emissions-producing activities that are not adequately represented in the current FTP. These activities include aggressive driving behavior, rapid speed fluctuations, emissions immediately after engine start-up, and actual air conditioner usage. EPA has not yet revised the MOBILE FTP rule for vehicles with 2WD, 3WD, or 4WD engines and 4WD with 4WD or 5WD engines. For more information, visit the EPA’s website at: http://www.epa.gov/vehicle/FTP. EPA suggested that in lieu of describing some limitations associated with its use of the Federal Test Procedure as a basis for estimating emissions, these would be better described as “FTP parameters” EPA also suggested that we provide specific citations for four studies referred to in appendix I. Report did not clearly distinguish between limitations that may result in only trivial emissions impacts and those that could have a significant impact. We made the language changes suggested by EPA, including adding the citations. Report was also concerned that the report did not clear up the distinction between trivial and significant emissions impacts. FTP may underestimate hydrocarbon, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide emissions by 27, 68, and 17 percent, respectively. A 1993 study sponsored by EPA’s FTP improvement project found that more than one-third of the trips studied had acceleration rates of more than 7 mph/second. Another study found that 18 percent of total driving time in the Baltimore area was composed of higher speeds and sharper accelerations than those represented on the FTP test. According to the 1995 National Research Council report, “Virtually all motor vehicle testing has been done using the FTP.” urban area in the late 1960s. Such a trip is known as a driving cycle, which can be approximated on a dynamometer. EPA added 10 percent to the FTP dynamometer load in an attempt to simulate the effects of air conditioner usage. However, five of the major limitations in the current FTP driving cycle are still in place, including speed, acceleration, flat surface and speed over a 7.5 mile trip. The current parameters stipulate, among other things, that vehicles average 19.6 miles per hour (mph) over the 7. 5 mile trip, do not exceed 57 mph. the MOBILE model’s estimates are inextricably tied to the FTP. Some studies have questioned the representativeness of key assumptions. For example, the California Air Resources Board (CARB) commissioned Sierra Research in 1993 to develop an improved driving cycle. Among other things, this driving cycle allows cars to travel up to 67.2 mph (versus 57 mph for the FTP) and allows for acceleration at a rate of up to 6.9 mph/second. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address should be made out in the form of a check, money order, or a cashier’s check, when possible. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. Orders may also be placed by calling ( 202) 512.6000 or by using fax number (202. 512-6061) or TDD (202). 512-2537.or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013. days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For more information, please visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/how-to-get-a-list-of-benefits-from-the-government-you-can-use-for-your-taxpayer.html?utm_source=cnn&utm_medium=email. are not accounted for in the current model and that other emissions-producing activities are not adequately represented. EPA officials said that it is important to note that EPA has conducted and/or partially funded some of the studies that have led to the new data that now question the old estimates and assumptions. EPA has work under way to address most of these limitations. For example, since its formation in September 1995, an EPA-sponsored Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) subcommittee workgroup has identified 47 high-priority issues. Advisory Committee Act (FACA) subcommittee workgroup has identified 47 high-priority items for improvement in the current model. EPA is also in the process of developing new procedures for improving models in general, which are discussed below. Several model experts told us that it is the nature of models such as MOBILE5a to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. Agency officials agreed with this assessment, noting that theCurrent model is better than any previous versions and reflects consistent growth in the quality and quantity of information available. House Committee on Commerce asked us to describe the major limitations in the current version of EPA’s MOBILE model. We also describe EPA”s process for improving both current and future versions of the MOBILES model. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/science/environment/mobile-model-limitations-congressional-comittee-on-overtime-and-investigations. We provided copies of a draft of this report to the Environmental Protection Agency for its review and comment. While still not able to quantify the improvements, they said that in their opinion, each new version of the MOBILE model is better than its predecessor. We obtained comments from EPA officials, including the Director of the EPA Office of Mobile Sources. EPA agreed with the overall message of the report but expressed concerns with imprecise language and suggested several changes to clarify information in the report. For example, EPA suggested that in lieu of describing government agencies. more groups have become involved in non-EPA-funded vehicle emissions studies than in the past, allowing EPA to benefit from their studies and observations. EPA officials said that it is their plan for each new version of the MOBILE model to reflect the most recent testing, data collection, and research that are available. Except for the impact of road grade on emissions and revising the in-use credits for heavy duty vehicles, EPA officials say they plan to continue with the current model until 1998. would cost considerably more. Since then, because of higher priority needs, OMS has been allocated only $21.8 million, cumulatively, for modeling improvements. However, many more groups have become involved in non-EPA-funded vehicle emissions studies. This June 1990 analysis indicated that the Office of Mobile Sources would need about $60 million for the modeling improvements known at that time. But since then, the research needs have increased, and the cost of the project has increased as well. Early in EPA’s study to predict whether the agency may recommend that EPA require its offices to follow the other actions listed above when creating or revising models. OMS plans to perform sensitivity analyses for the next version of the model and to have the studies supporting key changes for MOBILE6 peer reviewed. Agency officials explained that declining modeling resources are to blame for the lack of progress on the MOBIle6 project. The Office of Mobile Sources (OMS) plans to carry out all six of the above activities as part of their improvement process. consistent growth in the quality and quantity of information available on very complex issues. The revisions to the next MOBILE model have been undertaken with significantly increased openness and input from other government agencies, academia, the automobile and oil industries, environmental groups, and others. Several commended EPA’s efforts in recent years to reach out to persons outside of the agency, and some noted that the outreach effort had given them a much better understanding of the issues at play in the EPA's program. July 1995, and has held five meetings since that time to obtain external views by those not involved in the model’s development. OMS officials acknowledged that some of the key formulas in the current model have not been properly documented. However, they said they have efforts under way or planned to address these and other modeling needs. For example, one of one of the ways to improve the MOBILE model is to make it more user-friendly and easier to understand. The MOBIle model has not been peer reviewed. EPA has a project under way to develop agencywide procedures for improving models. Office of Research and Development (ORD) is planning a workshop in December 1997 to discuss the status of modeling across several media and other modeling issues. The project director also said that the Science Advisory Board’s January 1989 resolution on models was one of the best documents available on the processes for creating and improving models in general. The SAB executive director and the ORD project director told us that in their opinion, there are specific actions that, when followed, can enhance a model's predictive capabilities. other things, these actions include the following: Obtaining external stakeholders’ input to ensure that the model’s assumptions and formulas receive critical review. Documenting the implicit and explicit assumptions so that others can evaluate the basis of the formulas embedded in the model. Performing sensitivity analyses over key parameters to identify the most sensitive parameters and to establish the areas most in need of further research. Verifying the adequacy of the model's mathematical code. Testing the models predictions with laboratory and field data. EPA issued agencywide guidance in 1994 specifically calling for the peer review of such models. In September 1996 and March 1997, we reported and testified on the uneven implementation of EPA’s peer review policy. EPA agreed with our recommendations for educating staff and managers about the merits of and procedures for conducting peer review. The agency has set in motion a three-pronged approach to improve the implementation of peer review agencywide, includingpeer review of the next MOBILE model. According to the ORD project director, it is too early to predict whether the agency may review the next model. others, and we have provided this view in the report. We conducted our review from October 1996 through August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. A detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix III. As arranged with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 15 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to the Administrator of EPA and other interested parties. We will also make copies available. air quality officials relative to ongoing activities and documented plans for making model revisions. We also discussed EPA’s past, ongoing, and planned actions with representatives of academia, industry, environmental groups, consulting firms, and other government agencies. We conducted our review from October 1996 though August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Lawrence J. Dyckman, Lawrence J.-Dyckman and Robert J. Schulder conducted the review for the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

ROUGE-1: 81.51, ROUGE-2: 72.57, ROUGE-L: 22.18
BERTScore: 57.75

==============================================
==================== [84/100] ====================
Summary:
The focus of NIH research, and to some extent its organizational structure, have been criticized by some in the academic literature. U.S. health care spending is more than 2.5 times the OECD average. Yet, the health of the U.s. populace, as measured by life expectancy, is ranked 24 th of the 30 countries. "An agency devoted to current health would do well to focus on tobacco control, exercise, nutrition, sanitation, and more cost-effective delivery of health care" The Senate bill would amend Section 402 of the PHS Act by adding a new subsection (m), which describes a strategic plan for NIH. Within two years of enactment, and once every six years thereafter, the NIH Director would develop a six-year NIH Strategic Plan. The NIH Strategic Strategic Plan would be coordination of research among the ICs, priorities for funding research through the Common Fund, training the biomedical workforce, and collaboration with other agencies and departments. The individual IC strategic plans would be required to be prepared regularly and informed by the NIH Strategic plan. The NIH Strategic Plan would provide direction to the biomedical research investments made by NIH. The research strategy would address the disease burden in the United States, including rare diseases. Rare and pediatric diseases would remain a priority. Mission Priority Focus Areas would be identified that best serve the goals of preventing or eliminating the burden of a disease and scientifically merit focused research over the next five years. The initial strategic plan would be completed not later than 270 days after enactment. The NIH Director would be required to ensure that maintaining the biomedical workforce, including the participation of scientists from traditionally underrepresented groups. Precision medicine is a relatively new term for what has traditionally been called personalized medicine. This approach relies on companion diagnostics to target drugs and biological products to specific subsets of patients. Rare diseases often have genetic origins, and advances in medicine have resulted in the development of new an assessment of the program within 48 months of enactment, and to seek public input. It also would allow the Secretary to expand the limited population use pathway if deemed beneficial by the assessment above. It would aim to improve health outcomes and improve patient outcomes. The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP) is a cooperative initiative among 10 federal agencies and 119 institutional recipients of federal funds. In 2005 and 2012, FDP conducted surveys of principal investigators of federally funded projects to determine the impact of federal regulations and requirements on the research process. In both surveys, researchers reported spending 57% of their time engaged in research and 43% in completing pre- and post-award tasks. The FDP is sponsored by the National Academies, with a purpose of reducing the administrative burdens associated with federal research grants and contracts. The Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration "to advance the mission" of FDA. Its duties cover activities such as identifying and then prioritizing unmet needs. It is led by a Board of Directors, four of whom are ex officio members, nine from candidates provided by the National Academy of Sciences. The foundation is funded by donations from individuals, foundations, corporations, and governments. It was created by a law passed by the U.S. Congress in 1987. The FY2017 President's budget requests a total of $309 million for the PMI: $4 million to FDA, $5 million to ONC, and the remaining $300 million to NIH. Precision medicine research efforts rely on the collection of large amounts of health data. Access to this data may be a concern in the context of this type of research. The sharing of genetic and genomic data among private individuals, researchers and the federal government has, at least in the past, been controversial.  NIH has established a comprehensive policy for the sharing of genomic data. This policy requires investigators to outline their data-sharing plans as part of their funding applications. If investigators fail to submit the required data, NIH may withhold funding. The policy applies to all NIH-funded research that generates large-scale human or non-human genomic data as well as the use of these data for subsequent research. In contrast to compelled disclosure of research data by FOIA request, sharing of genome data generated by NIH- funded research is a priority of NIH. The Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 would codify the President's Precision Medicine Initiative. It would also protect identifiable, sensitive information from release under FOIA. The act would also require the sharing of NIH-supported research data in certain circumstances. The bill would also support high-risk, high-reward research in the U.S. and around the world. It was introduced in the Senate on September 14, 2015. It has been referred to as the Advancing precision medicine act of 2016. H.R. 6 addresses precision medicine but is not comparable to S. 2713 in its approach. Add a new PHSA Section 402(m) to allow the NIH Director to approve requests by institute and center directors to engage in transactions other than a contract, grant, or agreement with respect to projects for high-impact, cutting-edge research. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress evaluating the activities under this new subsection by September 30, 2020 (§6) The White House hosted a Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) Summit to mark the one year anniversary of the initiative's launch. The mission of the PMI is "(t)o enable a new era of medicine through research, technology, and policies that empower patients, researchers, and providers to work together toward development of individualized care" The PMI's three key agencies—National Institutes of Health (NIH), Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the FDA, are working to improve health outcomes and save costs. The NIH Common Fund, within the Office of the NIH Director, supports the High-Risk, High-Reward Research Program. These awards are intended "to encourage creative, outside-the-box thinkers to pursue exciting and innovative ideas about biomedical research" The program has "four unique funding opportunities for exceptionally creative scientists who propose highly innovative approaches to major challenges in biomedical research," according to the program's website.to submit the required data, NIH may withhold funding. The program is intended to provide funding for research that is highly innovative, risky, and potentially high-reward. future biomedical research workforce. Recent concerns have focused on ways to reduce the time between when young investigators complete their training and when they receive their first independent NIH research grant. The NIH has created a number of initiatives that strive to shorten this time, in part to attempt to better retain young investigators in biomedical research. The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2016 ( P.L. 114-113 , Division H), instructed the NIH Director to enter into a contract with the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to Other transaction (OT) authority is a special vehicle used by certain federal agencies for obtaining or advancing research and development (R&D) An OT is not a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, and there is no statutory or regulatory definition of "other transaction" Only those agencies that have been provided OT authority may engage in other transactions. Generally, OT authority is created because the government needs to obtain leading-edge R&D from commercial sources. Some companies (and other entities) are unwilling or unable to comply with the government's procurement regulations. H.R. 6 would require the NIH Director to submit to Congress a report on NIH efforts "to attract, retain and develop emerging scientists" Section 1041 would authorize a new extramural NIH loan repayment program that would provide not more than $50,000 of loan repayment benefits annually. Section 402(b)(5) of the PHSA specifies that the NIH director "shall ensure that scientifically based strategic planning is implemented in support of research priorities" The bill would increase the amounts that could be repaid under existing loan repayment programs from $35,000 to $ 50,000.  NIH funds seven loan repayment programs for researchers. Three of these are intramural programs that provide educational loan repayment benefits to researchers in exchange for undertaking research while employed by NIH. NIH also funds four programs to assist in the repayment of extramural researchers' educational loans. NIH has a contract with the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to conduct a comprehensive study of the policies affecting the next generation of researchers in the United States. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year. programs to assist in the repayment of extramural researchers' educational loans. These funds are awarded competitively to researchers who are employed by a qualifying educational institution. Specific programs are available to researchers investigating health disparities, undertaking contraception and infertility research, engaging in clinical research, and examining pediatric-related topics. Researchers may receive up to $35,000 per year in loan repayment benefits under each of these programs. The regulations that govern the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment program regarding participant eligibility, application procedures, selection criteria, loan repayment contract terms, tax liability for payments received, service obligation, and penalties for breach The NIH Director would be authorized to amend the categories eligible for intramural loan repayment as scientific and workforce priorities change. The provision would prohibit the NIH Director from entering into a loan repayment contract with individuals unless they have substantial amounts of educational loans relative to income. It would also allow amounts appropriated for new loan repayment contracts to remain available until the end of the second fiscal year after they are appropriated. And it would increase loan repayment amounts to a maximum of $50,000 per year. The proposal would also retain authorization for current topics eligible for extramural loans. S. 2014 includes two provisions that would create programs to develop and retain the biomedical workforce funded or employed by the NIH. Section 2 of S. 2014 would amend Part A of Title IV of the PHSA by adding a new Section 404M to consolidate existing NIH intramural and extramural loan repayment programs. Section 3 would increase annual loan repayment amounts from $35,000 to a maximum of $50,000 and provide loan repayment benefits for individuals who conduct research in areas of emerging scientific or workforce needs. 4 would amend Section 492B of the PHSA, adding that the IC Directors must consult at least once annually with the Director of the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities. The IC strategic plans would have to include details of such objectives. The NIH Director would be required to consider whether applicable grant award recipients have complied with the reporting requirements of ClinicalTrials.gov when awarding any future grants to such an entity. Section 5 would amend Part A of Title IV, adding a new Section 404M, "Research Related to Sexual and Gender Minority Populations" would require the NIH Director to encourage efforts to improve research related to the health of sexual and gender minority populations through the increased participation of such groups in clinical research. Section 6 would amend Section 464z-3 of the PHSA, measures. Section 7 would require the Secretary, acting through the Director of NIH, to convene a working group to make recommendations for a formal policy to enhance the rigor and reproducibility of scientific research funded by the NIH. It would also require the director of NIH to consult with outside groups and conduct outreach in developing (and updating) the policies. or respond to medical products, based on, for example, genetic differences. This could make a treatment less effective or perhaps more toxic for individuals with specific genotypes. Therefore, it is important to study in clinical trials the safety and effectiveness of medical products in a broadly representative sample of people who will likely use the products following FDA approval. Section 492B of the PHSA requires the Director of NIH to include women and minorities in NIH-funded clinical research and to conduct or support outreach to recruit minorities and women into clinical research. Section 1029 of H.R. 6 is broadly comparable to Sections 3 through 6 of S. 2745. The House provision would express the sense of Congress that the NIH National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities "should include within its strategic plan ways to increase representation of underrepresented communities in clinical trials" S.2742 contains several provisions similar to those in the House provision, such as the requirement to improve adherence to the requirements of Section 492B of the PHSA. of S. 2742 would amend Section 405 of the PHSA. It would require that Directors of ICs be appointed by the NIH Director, with the exception of the Director of the National Cancer Institute. The term of office for the director of an IC would be five years and would permit the director to be reappointed at the end of a five-year term. There would be no limit to the number of terms served by a director of the IC. The proposal would also require that, if the office of a director was created, it would be named by the President. It would require that, if the office of a director of an IC becomes vacant before the end of a five-year term, the director appointed to fill the vacancy begin a new five- year term. The compensation limitations in Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993, would be removed. Each current IC Director would be deemed to be appointed for a five year term as of the date of enactment, and the NIH Director could terminate the appointment prior to end of the term. would require the working group to consider various specified factors, including, for example, preclinical and clinical experiment design. It also would require the Director of NIH, not later than 18 months after enactment, to consider the recommendations and develop or update policies as appropriate. Finally, the section would require a report to be issued to the Secretary and Congress two years after enactment. The bill was signed into law by President Barack Obama on July 25. It is expected to become law by the end of the year. than 90 days after enactment, to establish a Task Force on Research Specific to Pregnant and Lactating Women. The task force would be terminated two years after its establishment, with an option for a two-year extension. Section 9 would require the Director of NIH, within two years of enactment and taking into consideration the findings of the task force, to update regulations and guidance, as appropriate, regarding the inclusion of pregnant women and lactating women in research. The section would also require the Secretary, not later than two years afterwards, to updated regulations. Section 3 of S. 2742 includes a series of requirements that would address the administrative burden on researchers funded by NIH and other federal agencies. The bill would direct the Secretary, within two years of enactment, to lead a review by research funding agencies of all financial conflict-of-interest regulations and policies. The Reducing Administrative Burdens of Researchers provision in H.R. 6 Section 1023 is comparable to Section 3 of s 2742 . The House provision would remove compensation limitations for consultants and individual scientists (not just NIH IC Directors) burdens experienced by primary NIH grant awardees related to monitoring grant sub-recipients. Third, the Secretary, in consultation with the NIH Director, would be required to evaluate financial expenditure reporting procedures and requirements for NIH funding recipients. Fourth, within two years of enactment, the. Secretary would have to complete a review of regulations and policies for the care and use of laboratory animals and. make appropriate revisions to reduce administrative burden on. laboratory animals, the bill says. The bill is expected to be signed into law within the next few months. The Director of the National Cancer Institute is appointed by the President. Each NIH Institute Director reports directly to the NIH Director. Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993 ( P.L. 102-394 ), states that the payment of compensation to consultants or individual scientists appointed for limited periods of time is "not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions," which is not less than 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay. establishing the Initiative, the NIH Director would have to take into consideration recommendations made by NAS in its study on the next generation of researchers. S. 2742 contains several provisions aimed at streamlining and improving administrative matters at NIH. Section 3 of S. 2014 would amend PHSA Section 487A to consolidate existing NIH intramural and of underrepresented communities in clinical trials. Section 403(a) of the PHSA requires the NIH director to submit to Congress biennially a report on NIH activities. the PHSA by adding a new Section 404M to establish within the office of the NIH Director the Next Generation of Researchers Initiative (the Initiative) Through the Initiative, the NIH director would be required to coordinate all NIH policies and programs focused on promoting and providing opportunities for new researchers. Among other things, the director would have to coordinate with relevant agencies, professional associations, and academic institutions to improve and update information on the biomedical workforce in order to inform training, recruitment, and retention programs of biomedical researchers. less than 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15 of the General Schedule; and ... not greater than the rate of Basic Pay for level III of the Executive Schedule. Section 2 of S. 2742 would amend Section 403(a) of the PHSA to replace the biennial reporting requirement of the NIH Director with a triennial requirement. The section would add new, and clarify existing, reporting requirements, including a description of intra-NIH activities and funding made available. evaluation of board activities regarding its purpose and responsibilities and submit a report to Congress. Section 5 would modify or eliminate a number of different NIH reporting requirements. Within two years of enactment, it would require the heads of each IC to submit to the NIH Director a report on the amount of funding made available for conducting or supporting research that involves collaboration between a given IC and at least one other IC. This information would be included in the triennial report required by Section 403(a), as amended by Section 2 of S. 2742. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) added a new FFDCA Section 529, creating the pediatric priority review voucher program. This voucher program, funded by user fees, provides a transferable voucher, under specified conditions, to a sponsor of an approved new drug or biological product for a rare pediatric disease. The purpose of the priority review drug voucher programs is to incentivize development of new treatment for diseases that may otherwise not attract development interest from companies due to cost or lack of market opportunities. The 21 st Century Cures Act contains no comparable provisions to S. 2055 as reported. Under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 (PDUFA), FDA agreed to specific goals for improving the drug review time and created a two-tiered system of review times. Compared with the amount of time standard review generally takes (approximately 10 months), a Priority Review designation means FDA's goal is to take action on an application within 6 months. Currently, FDA has two authorized priority review voucher programs (the rare pediatric disease priority review program, than one priority review voucher issued under S. 1878 for the same product application. H.R. 6 contains a comparable provision (Section 2152, Reauthorization of Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher Incentive Program), which would extend the authority to award rare disease vouchers. Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision would add to the list of characteristics of a pediatric rare disease product application that the product not have received a tropical disease priority review vouchers. Like S.1878, the provision also would require that GAO study the voucher program. The bill would extend eligibility for a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher. It would also extend the authority to award such priority review vouchers until September 30, 2022. A new drug application or a biologics license application submitted to FDA after the enactment of H.R. 6 and before December 31, 2018, would remain eligible to receive apriority review voucher even if approval comes after December 30, 2018. The bill also would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" by adding the following words: "The disease is a serious or life-threatening disease" The term "rare pediatric disease" refers to a disease that affects fewer than 200,000 persons in the United States. FDASIA terminated the authority to award such vouchers one year after the Secretary awards the third-priority voucher. S. 1878 would amend the definition by adding the following words in italics: "The disease is a serious or life-threatening disease in which the serious or. life- threatening disease is for which there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making the drug available in the U.S. will be recovered" S. 1878 would amend FFDCA Section 529(b)(4) by adding the requirement that the sponsor of a rare pediatric disease product application that intends to request a voucher for a rare Pediatrics product notify the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The bill also would amend the definition of a "rare Pediatrics product application" to mean a human drug application approved after the enactment of S.1878. It also would add the phrase "a serious or life-threatening disease in which the serious orLife-threatening manifestations primarily affect individuals aged from birth to 18 years" to the definition. scientific rationale for the determination. At any time following the Secretary's determination of the product's primary mode of action, the sponsor would be permitted to submit a proposed combination product review plan. The Secretary would be required to provide a written response to the sponsor indicating whether the plan was accepted, accepted in part, or denied. For premarket review of a combination product that includes an approved constituent component, the secretary would be allowed to require that a sponsor submit only a drug or device. The bill would allow the sponsor, if, to remain in effect except with written agreement of the Secretary. would be allowed to require that a sponsor submit only that information that is necessary to determine the safety of the combination product. For premarket review of a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent, the applicant would be permitted to rely upon investigational studies not conducted by the applicant and for which the applicant has not obtained a right of reference. In relying upon these studies, the applicants would be required to certify any patents that claim that claim the product is safe and effective. The applicant would also be required to certify any patents that claim the product is safe and effective. OCP is required to determine the primary mode of action of a combination product and regulate it based on that determination. OCP treats a drug-device combination product as a drug unless the manufacturer can prove that it satisfies the device exclusionary clause. A manufacturer whose product is assigned to CDER will have a higher standard of evidence, a potentially higher requirement for supporting the product's claims. The product does not rely on chemical action to achieve its primary intended purpose, OCP says. It is not dependent upon being metabolized for the achievement of its primary wanted purposes. as the single mode of action expected to make the greatest contribution to the overall intended therapeutic effects of the product. If the sponsor of a combination product disagreed with the Secretary's determination and requested an explanation, the Secretary would be required to provide a substantive scientific rationale for the determination. The Secretary would not be permitted to determine that the primary mode ofaction is that of a drug or biologic solely because the combination product has any chemical action within or on the body. In addition, the sponsor would have to provide an explanation. applicant would be required to certify any patents that claim the approved drug or claim use of the approved drugs. An application for a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent would be considered a 505(b)(2) application. The application would also have to give notice to the holder of a patent that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. The approval of an application containing such certification would be. required to be made effective as specified in FFDCA Section 503(c)(3), among other requirements. approved drug constituent would be considered a 505(b)(2) application. Bill would not prohibit a sponsor from submitting separate applications for the constituent parts of a combination product. The bill would further require OCP to help coordinate timely review of combination products across relevant agency centers. It would also specify additional duties for OCP related to communication, facilitating meetings between the agency and the sponsors, and dispute resolution. It was introduced in the House of Representatives on Wednesday. It has been referred to the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions. product that contains an approved drug constituent, unless the applicant provides a patent certification and notifies the holder of the approved application and patent owner that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. The bill would also require the Secretary to identify, not later than 18 months after enactment, types of combination products that the Secretary proposes may adopt different good manufacturing practices. This list would be required to be published in the Federal Register and updated as needed. Section 2181 of H.R. 6 addresses the issue of combination product, but would take a different approach than the previous section. In 2002, Congress directed FDA to establish an Office of Combination Products. The bill would require the Secretary, not later than four years after enactment, to issue final guidance on the combination product review process. It would add reporting requirements to the annual report to Congress on the activities of OCP as specified, and would amend FFDCA Section 520(h)(4) to prohibit the use of information contained in an application for premarket approval of a class III device from being used in a combination product application. higher standard of evidence, a potentially higher requirement for supporting data, a higher user fee, and probably a longer premarket review time period. S. 1767 would amend Section 503(g) of the FFDCA to require the Secretary to assign a primary center for the regulation of combination products. The bill would require the secretary to determine the primary mode of action for a combination product—defined as the single mode ofaction expected to make the product more competitive with other drugs and devices. the Secretary, are simple laboratory examinations and procedures that have an insignificant risk of an erroneous result. Demonstrating the latter includes showing that a test's accuracy is comparable to a method whose accuracy has already been established and documented. S. 1622 Section 3 would require the Secretary, not later than one year after enactment, to publish draft guidance that revises Section V of the current guidance, including providing draft guidance on how to prove accuracy in a test. It would also require the secretary to provide draft guidance to Congress. or an IDE must also include a brief statement on how the least burdensome requirements were considered and applied. H.R. 6 (Title II, Subtitle M, Section 2223) is comparable to S. 1622. Under the House provision, the Secretary would be required to issue draft guidance, no later than 12 months after enactment, that would update the October 4, 2002, final guidance on the least-burdensome provisions. In developing the guidance, the secretary would berequired to hold a meeting of stakeholders "to ensure a full record" effectiveness shall be specified as a result of a determination by the Secretary that such data are necessary to establish device effectiveness. The Secretary shall consider, in consultation with the applicant, the least burdensome appropriate means of evaluating device effectiveness that would have a reasonable likelihood of resulting in approval. Section 513(i)(1)(D) Whenever the Secretary requests information to demonstrate that devices with differing technological characteristics are substantially equivalent, the Secretary shall only request information that is necessary to making substantial equivalence determinations. for interactive communication with the device sponsor during the review process," and expedite "the Secretary's review of manufacturing and quality systems compliance" The Secretary would be required to "disclose to the sponsor, not less than 5 business days in advance, the topics of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device" The secretary would be allowed to, as appropriate, "coordinate" with the sponsor regarding early agreement on a data development plan. The Secretary also would be able to " coordinate" with a sponsor regarding "early agreement" on a "data development plan" part, or denied. The bill would allow the sponsor, if the plan were to be denied, to request a meeting with the Secretary to discuss the information and requirements necessary to make the plan acceptable. A denied plan would be allowed to be resubmitted. With respect to an accepted plan, in whole or part, the Secretary would be required to accept the plan if the Secretary determines the data to be collected are appropriate for premarket approval. A plan that has been accepted would be needed to remain in effect except with written consent. devices (unless exempt) must have an investigational device exemption (IDE) before the clinical study is initiated. An HDE application is similar to a PMA, but it is exempt from the effectiveness requirements. Such devices may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved their use in that facility, except in certain emergency situations. The provision would amend Section 520(g) of the FFDCA, regarding IDEs, by removing the word "local" in all references to local IRBs. in all references to local IRBs, including in the stipulation that an approved humanitarian use device may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved such use, except in certain emergency situations. The use of non-local IRBs for review of IDEs and HDEs provision in H.R. 6 is comparable to S. 1622. The House provision would also require the Secretary, within 12 months of enactment, to revise or issue regulations or guidance, as necessary, to carry out these amendments. agencies, which apply the regulations to the research they fund. Under the Common Rule, research protocols must be approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) to ensure that the rights and welfare of research subjects are protected. FDA has issued its own set of Human Subject Regulations, which are similar, but not identical, to the Common rule. FDA applies these regulations to all the research it regulates, including clinical trials of new drugs and medical devices. All clinical evaluations of investigational devices (unless exempt) must have an investigational device exemption (IDE) The Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) of 1988 provide the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) with authority to regulate clinical laboratories. CLIA requires laboratories to receive certification before they are allowed to carry out clinical laboratory testing on a human sample. certification is based on the level of complexity of testing that a laboratory is performing, graded as low, moderate, or high. FDA is responsible for categorizing clinical laboratory tests according to theirlevel of complexity. Laboratories that perform only low-complexity tests are not required to receive CLIA certification.  Laboratories that perform only low-complexity tests (called waived tests ) receive a certificate of waiver (COW) from CMS. Conversely, only laboratories certified to do so may perform moderate- and high- complexity tests. Under current law, waived tests are those "that have been approved by FDA for home use or that, as determined by the Secretary, are simple laboratory examinations and procedures that have their level of complexity determined by FDA" FDA determines whether a test is waived (i.e., low- Complexity) or not based on information submitted about the test by the manufacturer. On April 23, 2014, FDA issued the following draft guidance: Expedited Access for Premarket Approval Medical Devices Intended for Unmet Medical Need for Life Threatening or Irreversibly Debilitating Diseases or Conditions. FDA issued final guidance on April 13, 2015. The guidance focuses on balancing risks versus benefits for patients, drafting a Data Development Plan by the medical device sponsor, and collecting postmarket data on a medical device that has received a priority review designation. As indicated in the title, the FDA draft guidance covered only premarket approval (PMA) medical devices. application, relies on the use of surrogate endpoints and the collection of postmarket data. FDA intends to withdraw approval for a device if the sponsor fails to adhere to the postmarket requirements, such as data collection. Comments on the April 2014 FDA draft guidance questioned FDA's ability to enforce postmarket study requirements. Comments urged the agency and Congress "to evaluate whether FDA has sufficient authorities to promptly withdraw product approval if the necessary data are not promptly collected or suggest that the product benefits do not outweigh risks" in a widespread recall, and the hazards posed by particles shed from [DePuy] metal-on-metal hip replacements were not predictable based on engineering insights or in vitro studies. The 2002 FDA guidance states, "[r]eliance on postmarket controls ... should be considered as a mechanism to reduce the premarket burden for 510(k)s and PMAs" However, the FDA's authority to require postmarket studies of medical devices is limited. A September 2015 GAO study found that of the 392 postmarket surveillance studies ordered by FDA, only 38 were ordered by the FDA. One media source stated that, regarding the EAP program, FDA "estimates that, at least in the early stages, on average, about six devices a year may qualify for the program" The estimated six devices would represent about 15% of FDA's total PMA applications in one year. S. 1077 would add a new Section 515B, "Priority Review for Breakthrough Devices," to Chapter V of the FFDCA. The new section would be part of the FDA's PMA review process. S. 2503 would require FDA to issue final guidance on 510(k) device modification. Industry had voiced concerns that the 2011 guidance would slow the device regulatory process. H.R. 6 would provide review priority for life-threatening or irreversibly debilitating human diseases or conditions. There are no comparable provisions in H.r. 6 under FFDCA Section 515(d)(5), in order to provide for more effective treatment or diagnosis, the Secretary shall provide reviewpriority. determination by the Secretary that an application provides a reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the device" The provision would amend FFDCA Section 517A(a), adding that each substantive summary of the scientific and regulatory rationale for any decision made by FDA's Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) regarding the submission or review of a PMA, a 510(k), or an IDE must also include a brief statement on hold a meeting of stakeholders "to ensure a full record to support the publication of such document" to introduce a device intended for human use into interstate commerce, to report to the Secretary. This notification requirement is part of the 510(k) premarket approval pathway, a process that is unique to medical devices and if successful results in FDA clearance. The manufacturer must demonstrate that a new device is substantially equivalent to a device already on the market (a predicate device) Substantial equivalence is determined by comparing the new device to a predicate device already in the market. The FDA requires the manufacturer to provide a list of the class in which the device is classified and the actions taken to comply. S. 2503 would amend FFDCA Section 510 by adding a new subsection (q), "Reusable Medical Devices" It would require the Secretary, not later than six months after enactment, to identify and publish a list of reusable device types. Reports issued after the publication of this list would be required to include instructions for use and validation data, as specified by the Secretary. It also would require reports under Section 510(k) must include (1) instructions for Use and (2) validation data regarding cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization. Reusable medical devices are those devices that may be reprocessed and used on multiple patients. In March of 2015, FDA released final guidance on the reprocessing of reusable medical devices: Reprocessing Medical Devices in Health Care Settings: Validation Methods and Labeling. This guidance states that, among other things, certain reusable devices, such as duodenoscopes, bronchoscopes and endoscopes should submit to the FDA for approval to be sold in the U.S. of combination products, but would take a different approach than the Senate legislation. The H.R. 6 section would amend FFDCA Section 503(g)(4)(C) to require that the Secretary "issue final guidance that describes the responsibilities of each agency center" Increasingly, health care facilities are using computer systems for routine administrative and financial transactions. One area that is undergoing especially rapid growth and innovation is mobile health. This term refers to the use of portable devices, such as smartphones and tablets. FDA published final guidance on the least burdensome provisions on October 4, 2002. Under the guidance, FDA may allow the use of non-clinical data in place of clinical data for the approval of PMA devices. When clinical data are needed, FDA allows manufacturers to consider study designs to shorten the length of the study. Such study designs include the use Of "surrogate" study designs, which can be done in a variety of ways, such as by using a computer or mobile phone. S. 1622 would amend FFDCA Section 515(c), adding a new paragraph that would require the Secretary to "consider the least burdensome appropriate means necessary to demonstrate device safety and effectiveness" A summary of the audit findings would be required to be submitted to the Senate HELP Committee and the House Energy and Commerce Committee and posted on the FDA website. It would define the term necessary to mean "the minimum required information that would support a determination by the Secretary that an application provides a reasonable explanation" supervisors, receives training on the "meaning and implementation of the least burdensome requirements" and to periodically assess the implementation of such requirements. Under the Senate bill, 18 months after enactment, the FDA ombudsman responsible for device premarket review would be required to conduct an audit of training, including the effectiveness of the training. The audit would also include "interviews of persons who are representatives of the industry" and a list of the measurement tools used to assess training effectiveness, the bill says. bill would add a new FFDCA section 565A, "Priority Review to Encourage Treatments for Agents that Present National Security Threats" This section would establish a new priority review voucher program, funded by user fees. Section 8 of this bill would require GAO to report on the effectiveness of the priority review vouchers program. There is no comparable provision in the House bill. Congress has had a long-standing interest in developing the future biomedical research workforce. Recent concerns have focused on ways to improve biomedical research. The new section would require the Secretary to establish a program to provide priority review for medical devices. Such requests would be evaluated by a team of experienced FDA staff and senior managers. The section would allow requests for priority review from device sponsors of PMA medical devices and one other type of regulatory decision involving a medical device. If the Secretary approves a priority review designation for a device, the Secretary would not be able to withdraw the designation because another "breakthrough" device was subsequently cleared or approved. issue, not later than one year after enactment, guidance on the implementation of the new Section 515B of the FFDCA. The Secretary would be required to issue a report, on January 1, 2017, to the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee and the House Energy and Commerce Committee. The provision in H.R. 6 regarding priority review for breakthrough devices (Title II, Subtitle L, Sections 2201) is comparable to S. 1077 . Importantly, the Secretary would have to report on the program added under the new FFD CA Section 5 15B. The House bill contains a comparable provision. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA workforce. The House provision would allow the HHS Secretary to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees, notwithstanding certain General Schedule pay rate requirements. Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision wouldn't require a GAO study with regardto the FDA's ability to hire, train, and retain qualified scientific, technical, and professional staff. hired; however, some subsets of employees are hired under alternative government-wide or agency-specific authorities. Numerous hiring authorities target scientists and other technical workers. For example, FFDCA Section 714 authorizes the Secretary to appoint employees to positions in FDA to perform, administer, or support activities related to review of medical device applications and human generic drugs. The FDA Commissioner would be allowed to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees. provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2285, "Hiring Authority for Scientific, Technical, and Professional Personnel"), which would add a new FFDCA Section 714A, Additional Hiring Authority. Like the Senate bill, the House provision would allow the Secretary to "appoint qualified candidates to scientific, technical, or professional positions" The House provision specifies that these positions would be within FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Center for Biologics evaluation and research, and other centers. FDA regulatory authority over medical product safety and effectiveness covers drugs, biological products, and medical devices. House provision would not require a GAO study with regard to the FDA workforce. Senate bill would not requirement the allocation of a certain percentage of funding for this research.of funding for such projects. The agency generally divides responsibilities for the review of marketing applications in its product-centered offices. The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research reviews new drug applications for approval, the Center for Biologics evaluation and research reviews biologics license applications for licensure. As part of the Vice President's Cancer Moonshot Initiative, the Obama Administration has proposed an Oncology Center of Excellence. The proposed center of excellence would streamline collaboration across FDA's Human Drugs, Biologics, and Devices and Radiological Health programs. According to the FY2017 Congressional Justification, "FDA needs to take an integrated approach in its evaluation of products for the prevention, screening, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer" Although the Administration's proposed center is not set to go into effect immediately, it is expected to be in place by 2018. and treatment of cancer." This provision would add a new FFDCA Section 1014, "Food and Drug Administration Intercenter Institutes" Such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to cancer. Some groups have suggested that such pilots could also be done in other areas (e.g., cardiology, neurology, and infectious disease) The proposed center of excellence is specific to cancer, but there has arguably also been an increase in the number and complexity of diagnostics and therapeutics for other diseases. Such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to specific disease area(s) H.R. 2700 would require the Secretary to establish at least one institute within one year of enactment of the bill. It would also require a public comment period while each institute is established. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the first quarter of 2014. It is currently under consideration in the Senate and the House of Representatives, both of which are expected to vote on the bill this week. and 43% of their time in completing pre- and post-award requirements. The most commonly experienced administrative responsibilities included those related to federal project finances, personnel, and effort reporting. For researchers engaged in projects that required human or animal subjects, the related Institutional Review Board (IRB) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) requirements were by far the most time-consuming. Other areas viewed as particularly time- consuming were those involving clinical trials, subcontracts, and cross-agency differences. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505(c) to permit the Secretary to rely upon "qualified data summaries" to support the approval of the supplemental NDA. This section defines qualified data summary as a "summary of clinical data that demonstrates the safety and effectiveness of a drug with respect to a qualified indication" The Senate provision does not include treating cancer in its definition of "qualified indication," as determined by the Secretary. The House provision would add a new Section 505H, which would address the data requirements. The House provision would require the sponsor to submit the full data sets used to develop the qualified data summaries. The definition of "qualified data summary" in the House provision is similar to the Senate bill: "a summary of clinical data intended to demonstrate safety and effectiveness with respect to a qualified indication for use of a drug" The House provision also would require that the FDA Commissioner issue implementation guidance for the streamlined data review program and would allow the Commissioner to issue regulations for implementation. The Senate bill would allow for the FDA to make approval decisions for certain supplemental applications based on qualified data summary. This provision would require the Secretary to post guidelines on the FDA website, with input from experts, that detail best practices for drug safety surveillance using FAERS. This provision would also amend FFDCA Section 505(r)(2)(D) to remove the requirement that the Secretary prepare a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for a drug "by 18 months after approval" This provision also would expand the authority to evaluate the ETASU for a drugs to include "or other advisory committee," compared with current law. and expanded the risk-management authority of FDA. A REMS may include "an elements to assure safe use" (ETASU), which is a restriction on distribution or use. This provision would require the Secretary to conduct regular screenings of the FAERS database instead of the bi-weekly screenings required by current law. It would also require the Department of Health and Human Services to post more information on the drug on the FDA's FAERS website. The provision would amend FFDCA Section 505(k)(5) to require the department to post the information on its website. The Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to take several actions regarding how it informs the public. The law required biweekly screening of the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database and quarterly reporting on the FAERS website regarding new safety information or potential signals of a serious risk. The FDAAA also required the development and maintenance of a database of drug safety and effectiveness information for use by the public and expert committees. The FDAAA also required the development and maintenance of a website with extensive drug safety information. The Secretary of Health and Human Services must prepare a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for the drug, including identification of any new risks not previously identified, potential new risks, or known risks reported in an unusual number. The FDAAA named the risk-management process "risk evaluation and mitigation strategies" (REMS) and expanded therisk-management authority of FDA. A REMS may be used to identify and mitigate serious risk. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505 by deleting bill. The new 505(x) would restate the deleted 505(d) requirement for the Secretary to "implement a structured risk-benefit assessment framework in the new drug approval process" This provision would define "patient experience data" as "patient-focused drug development tools as part of approved applications" It would also require the FDA Commissioner to publish, no later than June 1, 2021, 2026, and 2031, on the FDA website. observational studies and other analyses conducted to assist in the understanding of the natural history of a rare disease or condition and in the development of a therapy..." H.R. 6 contains a related provision (Section 2151. Extension of Exclusivity Periods for a Drug Approved for a New Indication for a Rare Disease or Condition). Unlike the Senate bill which would broaden the use of grants for development of rare diseases, the House provision would add a new FFDCA Section 505I. approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission of the other sponsor. S. 1597 would amend FFDCA Section 569C by adding a new subsection (b), "Statement of Patient Experience," which would require the Secretary, upon approval of a new drug application, to make public any patient experience data and related information submitted and reviewed. It would also allow for identification of patient representatives who do not have any, or have minimal, financial interests in the medical products industry. FDA reports the number of investigational drug requests it receives, manufacturers do not. The provision would add a new FFDCA Section 561A, "Expanded Access Policy Required for Investigational Drugs" Some sponsors have been reluctant to provide investigational drugs outside of the standard investigational new drug (IND) processes. H.R. 6 would require a manufacturer to make its policies on responding to compassionate use requests publicly available.resources, and need for data to assess safety and effectiveness. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . FFDCA Section 505 and accompanying regulations provide the framework for FDA's approval of sponsors' drug marketing applications. For a drug whose active ingredient has never been FDA-approved, the law requires the sponsor to submit a new drug application that includes data to provide evidence of the drug's safety and effectiveness for its intended use. Once a product has been approved by the FDA, it can be sold in the U.S. without approval. FDA issues more than 100 guidances each year. Some Members of Congress have expressed concern with FDA's use of guidance documents in lieu of the rulemaking process in certain instances. This provision would amend FFDCA Section 701(h)(1)(C) by adding clause (iii), this provision would add clause (ii) to this section to make the guidance documents available to the public in written form and, as feasible, through electronic means. The provision would also add a clause ( iv) to the section that would allow the Secretary to make such documents available in written and electronic form. provision would amend FFDCA Section 701(h)(1)(C) by adding clause (iii), which would require the Secretary, when proposing or finalizing a guidance document, to include in that guidance document a statement explaining why the interpretation or policy set forth in such guidance is being provided in a nonbinding guidance document. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . PHSA Section 319 authorizes the HHS Secretary to determine the existence of a public policy that is not established through rulemaking. that revises Section V of the current guidance. Section 2228 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle M) is substantively identical to the Senate legislation. Section 205 of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA, P.L. 105-115 ) amended Section 513 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), adding two provisions. Not later than one year after the comment period for the draft guidance closes, the Secretary would be required to publish final revised guidance. Section 3 would require the Secretary to report to Congress at least every two years on the number of requests for approval. Section 4 states that S. 185 should not be construed to alter premarket approval for such antibacterial drugs for limited populations. It also would require GAO to report on the coordination of monitoring activities required by S.185, and the extent to which this limited pathway has streamlined pre market approval for the drugs. For a broader indication, this legislation would allow the secretary to remove any post-marketing conditions (e.g., labeling requirements) S. 2700 would amend 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35 to exempt NIH research from the requirements of the PRA. Through various amendments to the FFDCA, Congress has required the Secretary (sometimes through the delegation of authority to FDA) to submit specified reports to Congress or to contract with other entities (e.g., the Institute of Medicine [IOM]), to conduct specified studies. This provision would remove the following: Section 505(k)(5), which required the secretary to report to Congress not later than two years after the enactment of the FDAAA in 2007 on certain FDA procedures addressing post market safety issues. that of the 392 postmarket surveillance studies ordered by FDA between May 1, 2008, and February 24, 2015, 88% were inactive, 10% were ongoing, and 2% were complete. Activities related to implementing the least burdensome provision, including training for staff and advisory panels, are posted on FDA's website. S. 1622 would amend FFDCA Section 513 by adding a new subsection (j), "Training and Oversight of Least Burdensome Requirements" The Secretary would be required to ensure that each FDA employee involved in the review of premarket submissions, including supervisors, receives training. the Secretary to contract with the IOM, not later than three years after the enactment of the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act of 2007, to conduct a study, which was further specified in this section. Section 505B(l), which required the Secretary, within three years of the enactment. of the Pediatric Research Equity Act, to "conduct a study and report to Congress regarding the pediatric. studies conducted pursuant to this section or precursor regulations" Section 523(d), whichrequired the Secretary to conduct. a study related to devices, as early as January 10, 2007. Patients that have serious or life-threatening infections and unmet medical needs due to the lack of an effective approved antibiotic. This streamlined approach would result in more uncertainty about potential risks posed by the product, and therefore a greater need for post-market scrutiny. Section 2121, subsection (g) would add a new subsection 317U to the PHSA requiring the HHS Secretary to establish a monitoring system for the use of antibacterial and antifungal drugs, including products approved under the LPAD pathway. limited population of patients with unmet needs; (2) the standards for new drug application approval are met; and (3) the Secretary receives a written request from the sponsor to approve the drug as an LPAD drug. It would require that the Secretary's determination of the safety and efficacy of a limited population antibacterial drug "reflect[s] the benefit-risk profile of the drug in the intended limited population" Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use. Each year in the United States, at least 2 million people become infected with bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics. At least 23,000 of them die from these infections. Addressing barriers to antibiotic drug approval may help counter this problem. One such proposal is the so-called Limited Population Antibacterial Drug (LPAD) approval pathway for new antibacterial drugs. Such a pathway would involve smaller clinical trials in a limited population of patients that have serious or life-threatening infections and unmet medical needs. the use of antibacterial and antifungal drugs, including products approved under the LPAD pathway, as well as changes in bacterial and fungal resistance to drugs. The Secretary would be required to make summaries of data from this system publicly available. Section 3 would create new FFDCA Section 506(g), "Limited population pathway for antibacterial drugs" This review pathway would allow the Secretary to approve an antibacterial drug as an LPAD drug if certain conditions are met. states that S. 185 should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices. The House provision would add a new FFDCA subsection 505(z), "Approval of certain antimicrobial and antifungal drugs for use in a limited population of patients" This would be an expedited review pathway for certain antibacterial and antIFungal Drugs. It would be intended for use for patients that have severe, life-threatening infections for which current treatment options are inadequate. that have severe, life-threatening infections for which current treatment options may be limited or absent. Products approved using this pathway could outweigh harms that would not be acceptable in broader population use. The Secretary could consider limited data sets and non-clinical data as substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness, recognizing the smaller populations available for study of an LPAD drug, and the different balance of benefit versus harm in these populations. Some elements of the review pathway proposed in the House bill are comparable to those in the Senate bill. Firms may lack the financial incentives to sponsor products to treat small patient populations. Orphan drugs receive their designation pursuant to FFDCA Section 526(a), a designation created by the Orphan Drug Act of 1983. Since the law's passage, FDA has approved over 400 new orphan drugs and biological products. The House bill contains an identical provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle E, Section 2083, "Finalizing Draft Guidance on Expanded Access"). Incentives for sponsors of orphan drugs include seven years of market exclusivity, tax credits for clinical trial expenses, user fee waivers, and federal grants to cover costs of qualified clinical testing expenses. The FFDCA contains provisions to grant market exclusivities for statutorily defined time periods (in months or years) to the holder of the NDA for a product that is, for example, a drug used in the treatment of a rare disease or condition, the first generic version of a drug to come to market, certain pediatric uses of approved drugs, and new qualified products. Section 5 of the Orphan Drug Act (21 U.S.C. 360ee) allows the Secretary to make grants and enter into contracts with certain entities to assist in "defraying the costs of qualified clinical testing expenses" This provision would expand the definition of qualified testing to include "prospectively planned and designed observational studies and other analyses conducted to assist with the development of drugs for rare diseases and conditions" During the period of exclusivity, FDA does not grant marketing approval to another manufacturer's product. an exemption for a drug for a rare disease or condition under section 505(i) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. preclinical testing involving a drug is designated under section 526 of such Act and before the date on which an application with respect to such drug is submitted under section505(b) or under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. Preclinical testing involves a drug that occurs after the date of such drug's designation and before an application is submitted. States or affects more than 200,000 persons in the United States and for which there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making the drug available will be recovered from U.S. sales. S. 2030 would define genetically targeted drugs, genetically targeted technology, and variant protein-targeted drugs. New Section 529A should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities. The comparable provision in the House bill ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle C, Section 2041, "Precision Medicine Guidance and Other Programs of Food and Drug Administration") would add a new Subchapter J, Precision Medicine. Subchapter J, Precision Medicine, to Chapter V of the FFDCA would include a new Section 592, "Precision medicine regarding orphan-drug and expedited-approval programs" For a precision drug or biological product application where the product is for the treatment of a serious or life-threatening disease or condition, the new Section would allow the Secretary to rely on information about a drug. First, as with the Senate bill, the Secretary would be allowed to rely upon information about the drug. Targeted therapies are generally first developed for patients with the most frequent disease-causing mutations. To provide therapies for the full spectrum of certain genetic rare diseases, additional targeted therapies would need to be developed. Targeted therapies, because they may be treating small subsets of patients, sometimes qualify as "orphan drugs" Such drugs are called orphan drugs. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. drugs to address an unmet medical need in one or more patient subgroups, including subgroups of patients with different mutations of a gene. This legislation would authorize the Secretary to allow the sponsor of a new drug application for a genetically targeted drug or a variant protein-targeted drug to rely on data and information that has been previously developed and submitted, either by the same or a different sponsor (with permission) for a drug that incorporates or utilizes the same genetically targeted technology or for a similar drug. Biological products must be licensed by FDA, pursuant to PHSA Section 351, before they can be marketed in the United States. Senate bill would amend Section 351(j) of the PHS Act by adding that the provisions of the FFDCA that refer to an "official compendium" as developed and published by the U.S. Pharmacopeia would not apply to biological products regulated under PHS act Section 351. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6. standards development for cellular therapies and regenerative medicine products in March 2014. This section would amend the FFDCA by adding a new Section 506G, "Standards for Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Therapies" It would require the Secretary, in consultation with the National Institute of Standards and Technology and specified stakeholders, to facilitate the development of standards. The term "regenerative medicine and advanced therapies" is defined as including cell therapy, gene therapy, and stem cell therapy. "advanced therapies" is defined as including cell therapy, gene therapy and gene-modified cell therapy. Rules (or regulations) generally start with an act of Congress. In lieu of or in addition to rulemaking, agencies may issue guidance that, although not legally binding, explains the agency's interpretation of, or policy on, a regulatory or statutory issue. Guidance may be used, among other things, to explain the agency’s interpretation of a law or regulation that it is considering. Regenerative medicine is defined by NIH as "the process of creating living, functional tissues to repair or replace tissue or organ function lost due to age, disease, damage, or congenital defects" The regulation of cells or tissues intended for implantation or infusion into a human patient is the responsibility of the FDA Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research. FDA refers to such cells as HCT/Ps, which stands for human cells, tissue, and cellular and tissue-based products. an approved drug already on the market when FDA approves a supplemental application for that drug for a new indication to prevent, diagnose, or treat a rare disease or condition. The sponsor of a drug that receives the extended exclusivity under this provision would be required to notify the Secretary "of any discontinuance of the production of the drug for solely commercial reasons" The six-month extension would not be available for aDrug that had already received a six- months extension under this provisions. Regenerative medicine is defined by NIH as "the process of regenerative medicine" Clinical trials are conducted in three phases. Phase I trials try to determine dosing, document how a drug is metabolized and excreted. If the Phase II trials indicate that the drug may be effective, the drug moves to Phase III. This phase further tests the product's effectiveness, monitors side effects and, in some cases, compares the drug's effects to a standard treatment, such as a flu vaccine or an anti-depressant. The drug is studied in a larger number of participants with the disease (approximately 1,000-3,000) Section 11 of S. 2742 would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIB. The Senate bill would add material to the NCATS annual/biennial report. The next NCATS report, following enactment, would include a complete list of all such methods and tools developed by research supported by NCATS. The House provision would extend the exception for treatment of a rare disease or condition through theend of Phase III (instead of PhaseIIB) some cases, compares the product's effects to a standard treatment, if one is already available. As more and more participants are tested over longer periods of time, the less common side effects are more likely to be revealed. Under current law, although the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) may develop and provide infrastructure and resources for all phases of clinical trials research, it may support clinical trial activities only through the end of Phase IIA, with specific exceptions. NCATS may support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIB for a treatment for a rare disease or. "Data and information" refers to patient experience data, information on patient-focused drug development tools, and other relevant information, as determined by the Secretary. S. 1597 would require the Secretary, acting through the FDA Commissioner, to develop a plan to issue draft and final guidance, over a period of five years, regarding the collection of patient experiencedata and the use of such data in drug development. This section describes the content of those required guidance documents and defines "patient experience data" as data that are collected by any persons. "patient experience data" would be defined as data collected by patients, parents, caregivers, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, medical researchers, research sponsors, or other parties determined appropriate by the Secretary. The new subsection would also require the Secretary to issue implementation guidance after holding several methodological workshops and a public meeting. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), each year in the United States, at least 2,000 people die of cancer. and nonmanufacturer groups. manage information in order to facilitate research, and to consult with specified experts. The Secretary would be required to include information on demographics, relevant risk factors, and diagnostic and progression markers. Optional data elements would include information about the epidemiology, natural history, prevention, detection, management, and treatment approaches for the diseases. The bill also would authorize the Secretary to furnish grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements with public or private nonprofit entities to implement this provision. The secretary would berequired to make information and analysis obtained from the data obtained. The Secretary would be able to ensure that clinical trial design is as efficient as practicable. Agreements on clinical protocols would be considered binding, but may be subject to change under certain circumstances. Section 1121 of H.R. 6 would instruct the Secretary to enter into a seven-year cooperative agreement, contract, or grant with one or more eligible entities (i.e., tax-exempt academic institutions) to implement a pilot. The provision would be required to begin implementation of the provision within 18 months of enactment. eligible entities (i.e., tax-exempt academic institutions) to implement a pilot program to enable registered users to conduct further research on reported clinical trial data. Eligible entities seeking funding would have to submit an application that contains certain specified information, including a description of the system the eligible entity will use to store and maintain such data. The eligible entity must also prove that it will allow onlyregistered users to access and use de-identified clinical trialData. The application must also include evidence demonstrating the ability to compile clinical trial Data in standardized formats. use de-identified clinical trial data; (4) evidence demonstrating the ability of the eligible entity to. ensure that registered users disseminate the results of their research; and (5) evidence that the eligible. entity has a proven track record of protecting confidential data. Prior to FDA approval, medical products are tested in a clinical trial using human volunteers to see how the products compare to standard treatments or to no treatment. FDA uses the data from clinical trials to determine whether to approve a manufacturer's application for marketing a medical product. FDA allows for substitution of laboratory data in certain circumstances. The absence of problems in laboratory testing may not always predict what happens to a device over time in the human body. For example, "the malfunction of [Medtronic and St. Jude Medical] implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads, which resulted in a widespread recall, and the hazards posed by particles," according to the study. The study used "surrogate endpoints and statistical methods, such as Bayesian analyses" consultation with the IC Directors, would be required to conduct annual progress reviews for each strategic focus area. The plans would be reviewed and updated every five years. Minorities traditionally have been underrepresented in clinical trials. There can be biological differences in how people process or respond to medical products, based on, for example, genetic predispositions. For more information, go to www.clinicaltrials.gov or call the National Institutes of Health at 1-800-273-8255. Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use for a limited and specific population of patients. Sponsors must submit promotional materials to FDA for review 30 days prior to dissemination. FDA would be required to issue draft implementation guidance within 18 months of enactment. This provision should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices (such as off-label prescribing). Other elements of the review pathway were found only in the House provision, for example: FDA may enter into written agreement with the sponsor to define the process and data needed to review the limited population use application. would be allowed to rely on information about a drug or biological product that has been previously submitted, either by the same or a different sponsor (with permission) This may be for either a new product, or for a different indication for an existing product. In contrast to the Senate bill, it would allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs, including accelerated approval. Similar to S. 2030 , new Section 592 should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities. its approach. This section would require the Secretary, not later than 18 months after enactment, to issue and periodically update guidance. It would also, for a precision drug or biological product application where the product is for the treatment of a serious or life-threatening disease or condition and has been designated as an orphan drug, allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs. For more information, see S. 2030 , the Advancing Targeted Therapies Act of 2030, which would require drug companies to develop precision drugs and biological products. The House provision would allow priority review requests from device sponsors of both 510(k) devices and PMA medical devices. The provision would also allow a manufacturer or distributor to revise its policy at any time. This provision would become effective on the later of the date that is 60 days after the enactment of S. 2700 or "the first initiation of a phase 2 or phase 3 study ... with respect to such investigational drug" The House bill contains a comparable provision ( H.R. 6 , Title 6, Section 2201) of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device that [FDA] intends to undertake with external experts or an advisory committee. The House provision adds specific details regarding efficient clinical trial design. The agreement on clinical protocols and any subsequent changes must be agreed to in writing, the provision says. The provision does not specify a deadline on the requirement for FDA guidance on clinical trial protocol changes, the House provision says, but it does not mention a deadline for the FDA to issue guidance on the matter. The FDA says it will provide guidance on "the adoption of shorter or smaller clinical trials, application of surrogate endpoints, and use of adaptive trial designs and Bayesian statistics" requiring the NIH Director to inform responsible parties of the option to request that information for a medical device clinical trial be publically posted prior to the date of clearance or approval. A clinical trial for a combination product would be considered a drug clinical trial, if the Secretary determines that the primary mode of action of the product is that of a drug or biological product. The Secretary would also need to determine if the product was a device or a combination of two or more products. The NIH Director would need to decide if the trial was for a drug, a combination, or a device. FDA may grant expanded access to a patient with a serious disease or condition for which there is no comparable or satisfactory alternative therapy. The widespread use of expanded access is limited by an important factor: whether the manufacturer agrees to provide the drug. Manufacturers may consider several factors in deciding whether to provide an investigational drug, such as available supply, perceived liability risk, limited staff and facility resources, and need for data to assess safety and effectiveness. FDA does not have the authority to compel a manufacturer to participate. FDA regulates the U.S. sale of drugs and biological products. Under certain circumstances, FDA may permit the sponsor to provide an unapproved or unlicensed product to patients. One such mechanism is expanded access to investigational drugs, commonly referred to as "compassionate use" If you or a family member have contemplated taking an investigational drug, contact the National Institutes of Health at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. manufacturing process, and the drug labeling. FDA requires that the manufacturer submit a supplemental NDA each time the manufacturer wants to change the labeling, the manufacturing process, or the dosing, or when it wants to add a new indication (a new intended use) of the drug. Regulations at 21 C.F.R. Sections 314.50 and 314.54 describe the required contents of those applications. Regarding clinical data, the regulations direct the applicant to submit, in addition to descriptions and analysis of controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies. drugs outside of the standard investigational new drug (IND) processes because of the uncertainty of how FDA would consider potential adverse events associated with the expanded access use. This provision would require that the HHS Secretary finalize the guidance "Expanded Access to Investigational Drugs for Treatment Use—Qs & As," issued in draft form in May 2013. The final guidance "clearly define how the Secretary of Health and Human Services interprets and uses adverse drug event data reported by investigators," the provision says. uncontrolled clinical studies, (iv) A description and analysis of any other data or information relevant to an evaluation of the safety and effectiveness of the drug product. (21 C.F.R. 314.50(d)(5)(iv) The clinical data submission must also include an "integrated summary of the data demonstrating substantial evidence of effectiveness for the claimed indications" The application must be submitted by the end of the month, and the drug must be approved within 30 days of the submission. FDA released a nonbinding guidance document on mobile medical apps in September 2013. The agency does not plan to regulate smartphone or tablet manufacturers. In February 2015, FDA released updated guidance on its risk-based approach to regulating mobile medicalApps. The updated guidance includes examples of mobile apps that do not meet the statutory definition of a medical device and so are not subject to its regulatory authority. They include apps used to automate general office operations in health care settings. The guidance also gives examples of apps that may meet the definition of medical device but for which the agency intends to exercise enforcement discretion. interested in mobile apps that could pose a risk to patients if they malfunction. These include apps used to display and transfer data from a patient monitor. Apps that transform a mobile platform into a medical device (e.g., an app that allows patients to use their smartphone to record electrocardiograms using a lead that connects to the phone) Apps that help asthmatics track inhaler usage and asthma episodes; apps that give patients a portal into their own EHR. apps intended for individuals to log, track, or make decisions related to general wellness. H.R. 6 would exclude various types of software applications from FDA's regulatory oversight. Excluded applications include products that provide administrative and health management functions. The House bill also would establish a risk-based exception allowing FDA to exert regulatory authority. But the bill would create a narrower exception for CDS software that the agency determines "poses a significant risk to patient health" The bill also includes provisions on mobile medical apps, which are similar to those in S. 1101. The health software provisions in H. R. 6 , Sections 2241-2243, are similar. a medical device, and they pose a significant risk to patient safety if they do not function as intended. Examples include apps that connect to an existing device for the purpose of controlling its operation, function, or energy source. S. 1101 would exclude certain types of health software from the FFDCA definition of medical device. The updated guidance did not address regulation of CDS software. That topic remains under consideration, according to the FDA's updated guidance on CDS tools and devices.. The number of health-related mobile apps being developed, downloaded, and used is increasing at an almost exponential rate. Some apps simply access stored medical information, while others capture and input patient data into an electronic health record (EHR) Many apps now provide clinical decision support (CDS) using algorithms that use clinical information to generate customized (i.e., patient-specific) diagnosis and treatment recommendations. Regulators are particularly interested in mobile apps that could pose a risk to the health of patients. S. 2511 would require ONC to convene stakeholders to develop a trusted exchange framework and a common agreement among existing networks to exchange electronic health information. ONC would be authorized to refer instances of information blocking to the Office for Civil Rights if a HIPAA privacy consultation would resolve the matter. The Secretary would be required to establish a digital contact directory for health care professionals, practices, and facilities. And it would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. S. 2511 would require GAO to conduct a review of the methods used for secure patient matching. ONC and OCR would be required to develop policies that support dynamic technology solutions for promoting patient access. OnC would have to ensure that HIT standards and certification support patients' access to their electronic health information. The bill would also require ONC to help educate individuals and providers on patients' rights under HIPAA. It would be funded by the 21 st Century Cures Act, which includes Section 3001 of the Act.  MACRA requires the Secretary, in consultation with stakeholders, to establish interoperability metrics to measure progress toward achieving the national objective of widespread interoperability of certified EHR technology by July 1, 2016. ONC released a report to Congress on health information blocking in April 2015. The report defined information blocking as knowingly and unreasonably interfering with the exchange or use of electronic health information. MACRA also requires eligible hospitals and physicians, beginning April 2016, to indicate through meaningful use attestation (or some other process specified by the Secretary) that they use EHRs. plan to improve the rating, or risk having the product decertified. Hospitals and physicians would be exempted from the Medicare EHR payment adjustment if their EHR technology was decertify. Developers, exchanges, and networks found to have engaged in information blocking would be subject to civil monetary penalties. Health care providers found to be blocking information would be given incentives and disincentives to change their behavior. ONC would give the HHS Office of Inspector General the authority to investigate and penalize information-blocking practices. the administrative and other burdens of using EHR technology, and increase patient access to electronic health information. ONC also would be required to encourage the certification of HIT for use in medical specialties and sites of service. (§2) S. 2511 would establish a program and methodology for calculating and awarding a star rating to each certified HIT product—based on criteria for pediatricians and other specialties. It would also require ONC to adopt certification criteria for HIT used by pediatricians. HIT developers would be required to report on these criteria for each of their certified products. The rating program's methodology and criteria would be posted online. Each developer of an HIT product that received a one-star rating would have to develop and implement a plan to improve the rating, or risk having the product shut down. It would be based on criteria such as the product's security, user-centered design, interoperability, and conformance to certification testing. The star rating system must use at least three stars.  MACRA declared it a national objective to achieve widespread interoperability. A key challenge is overcoming legal and governance barriers to trusted information exchange. The law defines interoperability as the ability of health information systems to not only exchange clinical information but to also use the information based on common standards in order to improve care and patient outcomes. In addition, MACRA instructed the Secretary, within one year of enactment, to submit a report to Congress on ways to help health care providers compare and select certified EHR technology, such as through surveying EHR users and vendors. ONC released a national interoperability roadmap in October 2015. The roadmap establishes interoperability goals for the next 10 years. 2017 set as the deadline for individuals and health care providers along the care continuum to be HIT interoperable by. ONC expects the roadmap to evolve in partnership with the public and private sectors as technology and policy dictate. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. changes to the meaningful use program in response to the concerns of health care providers about the challenges and burdens they face in making EHR technology work. CMS eliminated several clinical documentation objectives, and instead focused on a few objectives that capture more advanced uses of the technology. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program established new transparency requirements for HIT developers. It also seeks to improve interoperability, for example, by requiring certified HIT products to adopt new and updated vocabulary and content standards for structured health information. giving patients access to their electronic health information and exchanging patient data during transitions of care. Beginning in 2015, hospitals and physicians that are not meaningful EHR users are subject to a Medicare payment adjustment (i.e., penalty) unless they qualify for a hardship exception. CMS published a final rule in October 2015 modifying the meaningful use Stage 2 objectives and establishing the objectives for Stage 3, which hospitals and Physicians must meet by 2018. The agency made significant changes to the meaningfulUse program in response to the.  ONC released a report on patient identification and matching (i.e., linking patient records with the correct individual) in February 2014. Certified EHR systems must be able to create a summary-of-care document that includes the following standardized patient data: first name; last name; previous name; middle name (including middle initial); suffix; date of birth (year, month, and day are required fields) The Improving Health Information Technology Act ( S. 2511 ) includes multiple provisions to promote HIT interoperability. software that the agency determines "poses a significant risk to patient safety" based on the same four criteria specified in S. 1101. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009 authorized Medicare and Medicaid incentive payments to acute-care hospitals and physicians who attest to being meaningful users of certified electronic health record (EHR) technology. The law instructed the Secretary to make the measures of meaningful use more stringent over time, which CMS has done in stages. and physicians to use EHR technology to meet a series of meaningful use objectives. Providers must use Ehr technology that has been tested and certified as having the capability to perform these functions. Testing and certification entities are authorized by the HHS Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) Stage 2 ofmeaning use requires eligible hospitals to use their EHRTechnology to perform more advanced functions, such as giving patients access to their electronic health information and exchanging information with each other. For more information on EHR certification, visit the ONC's website. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule gives individuals the right of access to inspect, obtain, and transmit to a third party a copy of their health information. One of the meaningful use objectives that must be met by hospitals and physicians using certified EHR technology is to provide individuals with the ability to view, download and transmit (VDT) their electronic health info. As part of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, hospitals must ensure that they have not knowingly and willfully taken any action to limit or restrict the interoperability of their certified Ehr technology. In 1986, in order to stabilize the pediatric vaccine market, Congress established the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program. There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6. An exception is made under current law for new vaccines that are routinely recommended by CDC for use in children, which are automatically included in the Injury Table. In 2013, the Advisory Commission on Childhood Vaccines advised the Secretary that current VICP authority may discourage the growing use of vaccines for pregnant women, as the law does not allow for addition of such vaccines if they are not also recommended for children. Section 6 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary to incorporate into the list of covered vaccines any vaccine recommended by CDC for routine use in pregnant women. It also would clarify that both the woman and a child or children in utero when the vaccine was administered would be eligible for compensation. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . It would apply to vaccines that are not also recommended for children, and does not clearly cover injury to an infant born to a woman who was vaccinated during pregnancy. vaccine availability, and may recommend routine use of a vaccine for only a subset of the population for whom FDA has licensed its use. Vaccine manufacturers have an interest in understanding the factors considered by ACIP and CDC, as well as FDA, in making vaccine use and licensing decisions. Section 7 of S. 2742 does not explicitly require that CDC personnel meet with vaccine developers. It does, however, require the CDC Director to ensure that CDC centers and offices coordinate their vaccine program and policy efforts. compensation. A vaccine may be both a commercial product and a public good. Congress has established several federal payment mechanisms and health insurance coverage requirements to support the production and use of vaccines in the U.S. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 for a vaccine that is a "commercial product" or a "public good" or both. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year or early next year, depending on how it fares in the Senate. The Senate's medical innovation package is that chamber's companion effort to the House's 21 st Century Cures initiative. H.R. 6 is the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the House Energy and Commerce Committee dating back to spring 2014. The Senate's package includes S.2742, Promoting Biomedical Research and Public Health for Patients Act; and S. 2700, FDA and NIH Workforce Authorities Modernization Act. The House passed the 21 st century Cures Act on July 10, 2015, on a vote of 344 to 77. H.R. 6 is primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in medical research at NIH. The hearings and roundtables focused on a broad range of topics, including modernizing clinical trials, incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes. This report provides for each of the 18 bills in the Senate medical innovation package: (1) background on the bills; (2) details of each bill; and (3) a summary of the bills' provisions. For more information, visit: http://www.senate.gov/health-innovation-package. Both the House and the Senate are considering legislation to support medical innovation. Reforms to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and changes to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Both NIH and FDA are agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Senators Lamar Alexander and Patty Murray, chairman and ranking Member of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments, devices and cures to patients and the public" Section 1028 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle B) addresses high-risk, high-reward research. It would not establish OT authority, nor would it require a report to Congress. Section 1028 would require the NIH institute directors to establish programs to pursue innovative approaches to major contemporary challenges in biomedical research. The Senate bill would not. More information, see S. 2030 , the Advancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act of 2015 (S. 2030) into law on April 19, 2016 (P.L. 114-146) The remaining 18 bills that comprise the Senate's medical innovation legislative effort include the following: S. 1878, The Advancing Hope Act of 2015; S. 1622, The FDA Device Accountability Act of2015. S. 2503, Preventing Superbugs and Protecting Patients Act; S., 2030, Theadvancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act of 2014. S., 800, The Enhancing the Stature and Visibility of Medical Rehabilitation Research at NIH Act; and S. 849, Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases. 2015; S. 2511, Improving Health Information Technology Act. S. 1077, The Advancing Breakthrough Medical Devices for Patients Act of 2015. S 2055, The Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2014. S 1597, Patient Focused Impact Assessment Act of 2013. S 2713, Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016; S 2745, Adv advancing NIH Strategic Planning and Representation in Medical Research Act; and S. 2742, Promoting Biomedical Research and Public Health for Patients. getting safe treatments, devices and cures to patients and the roles of the [FDA] and the [NIH] in that process. This initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the Senate Health, Labor, Education, and Pensions (HELP) Committee. One of these 19 bills, The Adding Zika Virus to the FDA Priority Review Voucher Program Act (S. 2512), subsequently was passed by both chambers and signed into law on April 19, 2016. H.R. 6 addresses a number of areas not covered by the Senate bill. It would eliminate the HIT Standards Committee and require the Secretary to contract directly with standards development organizations. Beginning in 2020, hospitals and physicians demonstrating EHR meaningful use would have to attest that they are not engaged in information blocking. But the bill would repeal the interoperability provisions in MACRA. It also would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. H.R. 6 would not establish a star rating program for certified HIT products. It would not address patient access to electronic health information, patient record matching, or the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology. The bill would repeal the interoperability provisions in MACRA. The Project BioShield Act would provide additional medical countermeasures to respond to an attack using chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear (CBRN) agents. It was passed by the Senate and is now being considered by the House. HHS Human Subject Regulations are a core set of federal standards for protecting human subjects in HHS-sponsored research. These regulations are commonly referred to as the Common Rule because the same requirements have been adopted by many other federal departments and agencies. For a summary of all the provisions in H.R. 6, including an explanation of how the bill would change current law, see CRS Report R44071, H.r. 6: The 21st Century Cures Act.in the House and Senate bills is substantively identical. Century Cures Act ("Ensuring Interoperability of Health Information Technology") includes a series of HIT interoperability provisions. Like S. 2511 , the House bill would give the HHS Office of Inspector General new enforcement authority to investigate claims of HIT developers engaged in information blocking. However, in place of the Senate bill's star rating program, H.R. 6 would put a star rating system in place for HIT developers. Other provisions in H.r. 6 have no counterpart in the Senate bills. in the Senate medical innovation package: (1) background on the issue, or issues, addressed by the bill; (2) a summary of the bill's provisions; and (3) where applicable, identification of comparable provisions in H.R. 6 that address the same topic. In a few instances, the language in the House and Senate bills is substantively identical. In other cases, the House or Senate legislation address the topic in a similar way but with key substantive differences. For Section 1122 would add a new PHSA Section 399V-6, "Surveillance of Neurological Diseases" The bill does not include an authorization of appropriations. The Secretary would be required to make information and analysis in the surveillance system available, subject to HIPAA privacy laws. The bill would require the Secretary to establish a National Neurological Disease Surveillance System to track the epidemiology of neurological diseases, including multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease. It would also make data available to researchers. The bill would define medical rehabilitation research as "the science of mechanisms and interventions that prevent, improve, restore, or replace lost, underdeveloped, or deteriorating function" The PHSA does not explicitly authorize or require surveillance of neurological diseases in general, although the Secretary may conduct such activities under general authorities in PHSA Title III. S. 849 would take action to avoid duplication among those programs through actions such as entering into interagency agreements. The bill would also require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to report back to Congress on the progress made on the bill. amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and autism spectrum disorder). S. 849 would add a new PHSA Section 399S-1, "Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases" It would authorize the HHS Secretary to improve the collection of data on neurological diseases. The Secretary would be explicitly authorized to establish a new registry, using existing data sources. In doing so, he would be required, among other things, to focus on up to five of the most prevalent or burdensome diseases (as determined by the Secretary) S. 800 would amend Section 452 of the PHSA instructing the Director of the Center to develop and update a comprehensive plan for medical rehabilitation research. The research plan would have to include goals and objectives for such research. Within 30 days of revising and updating the plan, the director would be required to transmit the plan to the President, the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. S. 800 also would require the Secretary, with the other federal agencies, to review their medical rehabilitationResearch programs. Section 452 of the PHSA established the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research (the Center) within the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (the Institute) at NIH. It also required the NIH Director to create a Medical rehabilitation Coordinating Committee and a National Advisory Board on Medical rehabilitation Research. The Director of the Institute is required to develop, and periodically revise and update, a comprehensive plan for the rehabilitation of individuals with physical disabilities. It is also required to create and update a medical rehabilitation plan. consultants and individual scientists (not just NIH IC Directors) as stipulated by Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993. Section 301(a) of the PHSA establishes the general research authorities of the Public Health Service through the Secretary of Health and Human Services. It requires the Secretary to "conduct in the Service, and encourage, cooperate with, and render assistance to other appropriate public authorities, scientific institutions, and scientists in the conduct of, and promote the coordination of, research" Section 4 would amend Section 301(a) of the PHSA to allow the Secretary to direct the contractors to collect payments for the costs incurred to make available these substances and organisms. These amounts would be credited to the appropriations accounts that incurred the costs of making the substances and organism available. There are no changes to this section of the law that would affect federal funding for biomedical and behavioral research. It would only apply to research substances and living organisms that are made available to researchers through contractors. The bill would not affect federal funds for research substances or living organisms. the PMI, and by allowing specified components and authorities in the carrying out of the PMI as well as identifying requirements of the initiative. Amend PHSA Section 301(d) to require the Secretary to issue a Certificate of Confidentiality to research investigators of federally funded research in which sensitive, identifiable information is collected to protect the privacy of research participants. The provision would prohibit the individual with the certificate from disclosing sensitive information about the research participants, with certain exceptions, as specified, and would make this type of information immune from the legal process. from the legal process (§3) Amend PHSA Section 301 to allow the Secretary to exempt from disclosure under FOIA exemption (b)(3) specified biomedical information that identifies an individual or that has an associated risk that the information may be reidentified. Add a new PHSA to require recipients of NIH grants or agreements to share data generated from such NIH grants and agreements in a manner consistent with all applicable federal law (§5) The Secretary would be required to make each such exemption available in writing and to the public, upon request (§4) consideration of certain vaccines. Sponsors of clinical trials for drugs, biologics, and devices regulated by the FDA are required to submit registration and summary results information to ClinicalTrials.gov. There is no comparable provision in S. 2742. Subparagraph 402(j)(2)(B) requires the NIH Director to ensure that the public may, in addition to keyword searching, search the entries in the data bank by various specified criteria. The NIH Director is instructed to add search categories as deemed necessary. Section 1101 of H.R. 6 would add new language to Section 402(j) of the PHS Act. The language would require the NIH Director to ensure that the registry and results data bank is easily used by the public. The House provision would strike the information in ClinicalTrials.on, the website where the data is stored. It would also require that standard terminologies and code sets are used, to the extent possible, to facilitate electronic data matching, among other things. September 2008, and submit adverse events information since September 2009. The Secretary is required, by rulemaking, to expand the requirements for submission of summary results information. Section 9 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary, acting through the NIH Director and not later than two years after enactment, to submit to Congress a report that "describes education and outreach, guidance, enforcement, and other activities undertaken to encourage compliance with Section 402(j) of the PHSA" The Secretary would also have to submit a report on registered clinical trials, as specified. compliance with the requirements in Section 402(j) The Secretary would be required to submit an initial report not later than two years after the compliance date of the final rule. Two follow-up reports would be needed, which include information on actions taken to enforce compliance with the ClinicalTrials.gov reporting requirements. Section 1101 of H.R. 6 is comparable to S. 2742, but the House provisions address public access to, and research on, the information in ClinicalTrialing.gov. Section 2 of S. 2742 would eliminate an annual reporting requirement regarding the number of experts and consultants whose services are used by NIH. Section 5 also would eliminate the report on Centers of Excellence. Section 10 of the bill would amend Section 405 of the PHSA, eliminating the National Institute on Nursing Research biennial report. The bill also would make a minor modification to the doctoral degree reporting requirement, and make a technical correction to a vaccine reporting requirement. It would also eliminate the periodic reports on rapid HIV testing, and the annual NCATS annual report. information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a 12-month period. PRA does not apply to certain types of scientific research, including collections that are neither sponsored nor conducted by the agency and those that are subject to a clinical exception. The provision would amend Section 301 of the PHS Act by adding a subsection stating that the PRA would not apply during the conduct of NIH research. The Exemption for the National Institutes of Health from the Paperwork Reduction Act Requirements provision (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1024) is comparable to S. 2700. The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) specifies nine categories of information that may be exempted from the rule of disclosure. Exemption 3 allows agencies to withhold applicable records if the data are specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than FOIA, if that statute meets criteria laid out in FOIA. These types of Exemption 1 and Exemption 2 statutes are included in this list of exempted records. The full list is available at the bottom of the page. For more information, visit the FOIA website. out in FOIA. These types of Exemption 3 statutes are often referred to as b(3) exemptions. A Certificate of Confidentiality protects investigators from being compelled to disclose information that would identify research subjects in any civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceeding. This requirement can help promote participation in research by adding an additional layer of privacy protection. NIH currently issues Certificates of Conf confidentiality pursuant to §301(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. §241(d)) the HHS Secretary to determine the existence of a public health emergency, which in turn authorizes certain further actions to enhance response flexibility. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) ensures that federal agencies do not overburden the public with federally sponsored data collections. Section 17 would add an additional provision to PHSA Section 319 to waive requirements for voluntary data collection under the PRA. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 .. The PRA requires review and pre-clearance of federal data collection proposals by the Office of Management and Budget. The current requirement is that funds received from the Treasury be held in separate accounts. The provision would change the requirement. The House bill provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2283, "Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration") is the same as the Senate bill. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35), enacted in 1980 and amended in 1995, established the Office of Information. 1980 and amended in 1995, established the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) Congress required that agencies seek OIRA permission before collecting information from the public. The PRA requires that federal agencies receive clearance from OIra before requesting most types of information. PRA clearance is required when standardized information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a period of time. The first of 11 stated purposes was to "minimize the paperwork burden for individuals ... and other persons resulting from the collection of information by and for the Federal Government" The Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act ( P.L. 109-417 ) established the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) BARDA contracts with companies to develop and commercialize potential countermeasures. The Project BioShield Act established a special process and funding mechanism through which the HHS Secretary may obligate funds to procure countermeasures that still need up to 10 more years of development. These contracts specify development activities for the company to perform and may extend multiple years. improve efficiency and decision making, and enhance BARDA program effectiveness and accountability. Section 4 would require ASPR to provide additional information in its "coordinated 5-year budget plan" The budget plan would also need to consider the development of countermeasures and products for emerging infectious diseases that may present "a threat to the nation" Section 5 would allow the HHS Secretary to partner with "an independent, non-profit entity" to "foster and accelerate the development" of medical countermeasures. requirement to specify the recipients of the report. The report would be required by "March 1 of each year in which" the amount available drops below $1.5 billion. Section 3 would move contracting authority for Project BioShield and BARDA advanced development from ASPR to BARDA. Such a move was recommended by the Blue Ribbon Panel on Biodefense to "reduce unnecessary bureaucratic delays, improve efficiency and decision making, and enhance BARDA program effectiveness," the panel said. technology innovation and successful partnering with the federal government. The HHS Secretary acting through the BARDA Director would provide the entity with the government needs and requirements and a description of the work to be done under the agreement. The entity would be required to provide regular reports on the spending of funds provided by HHS and on progress meeting the identified needs. The bill would require the Government Accountability Office to evaluate this partnership four years after enactment. This authority would sunset on September 30, 2022. Section 6 would remove the current need for the President to approve use of the funds. HHS has two mechanisms to support CBRN countermeasure advanced development and commercialization. Up to half of the total amount of the Project BioShield contract may be paid out for the company meeting specified developmental milestones. Section 2 of S. 2055 would require the HHS Secretary to provide "timely and accurate recommended" guidelines for using the medical countermeasures in the Strategic National Stockpile. The Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2016, as reported, has several provisions that would change the manner as reported. remove the current need for the President to approve use of the Project BioShield special reserve fund. The Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense recommended this change to streamline the ProjectBioShield contracting process. The Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, and the appropriation committees in each chamber would be notified of a decision to use Project Bio Shield funds. Other than the provisions relating to Food and Drug Administration priority review (discussed elsewhere in this report), the 21 st Century Cures bill would not change much. radiological, or nuclear (CBRN) agents. Implementation of the federal countermeasure strategy requires coordinated activities by several separate agencies. An interagency working group, the Public Health and Emergency Medical Countermeasure Enterprise (PHEMCE), is responsible for coordinating these activities. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ), the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA, P. l. 109-417 ), and Pandemic and All Hazard's Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 (PAHPRA, P l. 113-5) established new authorities and programs in the Department of Health and Human Services. coordinating these activities to ensure federal countermeasure needs are addressed efficiently. The PHEMCE is headed by the HHS Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) and includes representatives from the Food and Drug Administration, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institutes of Health, Department of Defense, and Department of Homeland Security. In addition, the Pandemic and All-Hazards Prep preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 ( P.L. 113-5 ) requires the ASPR to develop an annual "coordinated 5-year budget plan" of medical countermeasures; ... promote the development of new and promising [countermeasure] technologies; ... [and] address unmet public health needs. The U.S. intelligence community has successfully used a similar strategic investor model to address its unmet technology needs through In-Q-Tel. This bill would establish certain criteria for the partner, including prior experience in technology innovation and successful partnering with the federal government. The bill would also provide business advice and use venture capital practices to invest in companies developing medical counter Measures. may contribute up to 10% of a Service member's pay to that person's already established retirement system at the institution of higher education at which the member had been employed. The provision would rename the SBRS as the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (the Service) It would increase the number of authorized members to 2,000, and would add "biomedical product assessment" as a desired field of expertise. Finally, the provision would require GAO to study the changes to the Service and their effects on HHS departments and agencies. analysis in the surveillance system available, subject to HIPAA privacy and security protections, to the public. The Secretary would be required to report to Congress regarding the system within four years of enactment. The provision would authorize the appropriation of $5 million for each of fiscal years 2016 through 2020. The Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS), established in PHSA Section 228, is a special hiring mechanism used by the HHS Secretary to attract and retain accomplished scientists to work in Public Health Service (PHS) agencies. other HHS employment systems to offset the number of new employees in the Service. The provision would require the Secretary to appoint experts to agencies within HHS, "taking into account the need for the expertise of such expert" It also would authorize the appointment of persons who hold "a master's level degree in engineering, bioinformatics, or a related or emerging field" It would increase the upper pay rate limit to that of the President (currently $400,000 per year) but would eliminate the authority to contribute to a member's preexisting retirement system. would clarify that the Secretary is not required to reduce the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems. The House bill would require the Secretary to report on the HHS website regarding the changes to the Service and whether they "have improved the ability of the [FDA] to hire and retain qualified experts to fulfill obligations specified under user fee agreements" Title 5 of the U.S. Code provides the broad framework of requirements under which many federal employees are hired; however, some subsets of employees are hire under alternative methods. SBRS is not subject to civil service requirements under Title 5 of the U.S. Code. It is distinct from other PHS hiring mechanisms, such as the PHS Commissioned Corps. Currently, SBRS is limited to 500 members, who are accomplished doctoral-level scientists in biomedical research or clinical research evaluation. The rate of pay may not exceed that for Level I of the Executive Schedule (currently about $206,000 per year) unless approved by the President. The Secretary may contribute up to 10% of a Service member's pay. and appoint new members by majority vote, without regard to the balance of expertise and affiliation required by current law. It would limit to 30% of the membership "representatives of the general pharmaceutical, device, food, cosmetic, and biotechnology industries" The obligation to ensure specific expertise among the members would be broadened to rest with all members of the board, not only ex officio appointees. That broader group would also decide other administrative matters. As with the current law, each board member's term of office would last for four years. initially appointed board members' terms would expire on a staggered basis, as determined by the ex officio members. The provision would remove the salary cap of the foundation's Executive Director, which is now set at the compensation of the Commissioner. Also amended would be the language regarding separation of funds. The current requirement is that funds received from the foundation can only be used for the purpose of the board's duties and responsibilities, and not for the benefit of the general public. This provision would add that for the additional board members appointed pursuant to S. 2700 , Section 6, the terms of office for the initially appointed persons can expire onA staggered basis. officio members, nine from candidates provided by the National Academy of Sciences, and five from candidates from advocacy groups. Section 770 specifies the number of members to be appointed representing each type of group and requires that the ex officio members ensure specific expertise among the members. The provision would amend FFDCA Section 770 to change the membership of the Board of Directors to allow the voting members to increase the size of the board and appoint new members by majority vote, without regard to age or gender. animals and make appropriate revisions to reduce administrative burden on investigators. Fifth, the Secretary would be required to clarify the applicability of OMB Uniform Guidance requirements regarding documentation of personnel expenses for entities receiving HHS grants. Finally, within one year of enactment, the OMB Director would be needed to establish a Research Policy Board, consisting of up to10 federal and 9 to 12 non-federal members. The board would have to make recommendations on harmonizing regulations related to federal research requirements. The board would have to make recommendations on harmonizing regulations and policies to minimize administrative burden across federal research agencies. The board would sunset on September 30, 2020. Within four years of enactment, GAO would be required to conduct an evaluation of board activities regarding its purpose and responsibilities. The report would provide recommendations on scientific research policy, including regulatory benefits and burdens. It would also provide a review of the board's activities and provide a report on its effectiveness and effectiveness to Congress and the White House. option to achieve a compelling purpose." Under the Senate provision, if attendance at a scientific meeting is directly related to the professional duties of scientific or medical professionals, then the meetings would not be considered to be conferences. Each HHS operating division would be required to post on their website an annual report on scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year. The Senate bill would also require the Department of Health and Human Services to report on the number of people who attended scientific meetings and the amount they spent on travel. scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year, including details as specified. The NIH travel (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1025) and the enabling FDA scientific engagement provisions in H.R. 6 are comparable to S. 2700. FFDCA Section 770, as added by the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ), created the Reagan-Udall Foundation for the. Research. NIH and FDA participation in or sponsorship of scientific conferences and meetings is essential to the mission of the agencies. the Secretary to provide a public comment period while each institute is being implemented. This provision also would allow the Secretary to terminate any such institute if the Secretary determines that it is no longer benefitting the public health. No comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Following allegations of misspent funds during a 2010 General Services Administration meeting held in Las Vegas, the Office of Management and Budget imposed restrictions on conference travel for federal employees in memorandum M-12-12. The memorandum directed agencies, beginning in FY2013, to spend at least 30% less than what was spent in FY2010 on conferences. least 30% less than what was spent in FY2010 on travel expenses. Senior-level agency approval is required for all conferences sponsored by an agency where the conference expenses to the agency exceed $100,000. Agencies are prohibited from spending more than $500,000 on a single conference. However, this restriction may be waived if the agency head "determines that exceptional circumstances exist whereby spending in excess of $500k is the most cost-effective option to achieve a compelling purpose"

ROUGE-1: 81.13, ROUGE-2: 74.04, ROUGE-L: 21.80
BERTScore: 53.92

==============================================
==================== [85/100] ====================
Summary:
difficult tasks for USDA, such as reengineering business processes and establishing reliable and secure methods of transmitting and storing all electronic records. USDA officials working on these activities believe that these tasks can be accomplished by the December 18 deadline. E-File Act requires USDA to continue providing services in the traditional way to customers who choose not to use the Internet. CBAs must support dual service delivery functions--one electronic and one paper-based. identified how much funding and staff resources will be needed to fully implement the act. Our objective was to review measures being taken by the department to implement the provisions of the Freedom to E-File Act. On November 15, 2000, we briefed your staff on the results of our review up to that point. We performed follow-up work to update USDA’s progress implementing the act through December 31, 2000. The results of all of our work are summarized in this report. We continue to believe that having a senior-level official vested with sufficient accountability and authority is important to the success of the e-file implementation efforts. the e-file effort, was still in production at the end of December 2000. USDA agreed that it had problems meeting the act’s initial December 18, 2000, deadline for deploying electronic forms on the Internet. USDA also stated that successful implementation of the act will require continued funding, along with understanding and support of the USDA's programs or “owners” of the business being transformed. USDA said that it fully supports reproduced in appendix II of the report by the Office of the CIO. critical to help the department achieve a more consistent approach in its entire e-government transformation. To ensure that USDA fully meets its E-File Act mandates, we recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and carrying out implementation. The department also agreed that comprehensive plans must be developed for implementing the Freedom to E- File Act and GPEA. But the department stopped short of describing the extent to which its comprehensive plan will include all the detailed steps we recommended. priorities, and time frames and milestones for their completion. assign task responsibilities to staff and show critical dependencies identify required staff/budget resources for completing the plan. document contingency actions planned to address unforeseen work delays or problems. USDA has not yet developed and documented a comprehensive e-file implementation plan. To ensure that USDA fully meets its E-File Act mandates, the assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and implementing all the separate activities to ensure critical tasks are completed on time and within budget. required staff/budget resources for completing the plan; and document contingency actions planned to address unforeseen work delays or problems. In addition, the comprehensive plan should cover both e-file and GPEA requirements to help better coordinate actions across USDA agencies. The first copy of each GAO report is free. Additional copies of reports are $2 each. A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies are required. the Internet and submitting required reports on initial e-file activities and plans to Congress. However, implementing full e-filing capabilities for all its farm service customers by the deadlines set by the act poses a far more complex and difficult challenge. A component critical to the success of any such initiative is the necessary authority and responsibility to manage it across different departmental entities. No single official has been so designated. Also, a comprehensive implementation plan is critical to help the department achieve a more consistent approach possible. USDA is preparing to implement plans in accordance with the GPEA. To address their e-file requirements, the CBAs had two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s preparing plans. purchased an on-line common forms software tool for selected a total of 219 forms. The report lacked specifics on activities and milestones, dependencies among USDA activities, and needed resources. It also did not assign a senior-level official with overall accountability for managing and ensuring the implementing disparate e- file activities. with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to Representative Eva Clayton, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, Nutrition, and Forestry, House Committee on Agriculture. Senator Richard Lugar, Chairman, and Senator Tom Harkin, Ranking Member, Senate Committee on agriculture. Representative Larry Combest, Chairman,. Representative Charles Stenholm, Ranking minority Member, House committee on Agriculture; Representative Tom Davis, Chairman. Vice Chairwoman, and Representative Jim Turner, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Technology and Procurement Policy, House Committee on Government Reform. We will also send copies to the Honorable Ann M. Veneman, Secretary of Agriculture; the Hon honorable Mitchell E. Daniels, Jr., Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Should you have any questions on matters discussed in this article, please contact us at tips@cnn.com.  Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders by mail: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Orders by visiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using the phone number below. from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Web site: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.htm e-mail: fraudnet@gaO.gov 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) or call the toll-free number at (1-800) 456-6000. two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s December 18, 2000, deadline. CBAs purchased an on-line common forms software tool for creating electronic forms, selected forms to post on the Web, and designed and begun implementing a common Internet Web site. At the time of our November briefing, the CBAs still needed to obtain OMB approval for each electronic form, complete testing of the Web page, train county-based field staff in the new e-file procedures. OMB had not approved these forms because some forms appeared to be for the department’s internal use, did not have clear and user-friendly instructions, or did not include forms instructions. As of December 31, 2000, RD had not resubmitted any of its forms for OMB review. A marketing brochure, being developed by the CBAs to promote public awareness of the e-file effort, was still in production at the end of 2000. The CBAs expected to have deployed on the Web site by the deadline were available. Final OMB approval for each of the contractor testing of the Web page design was scheduled to be completed December 15, the last workday before the deadline. Some key technical staff who were implementing web farm hardware, software, and security had other full-time duties and had no replacements should they be assigned elsewhere. plans still needed to be established to train county-based field office staff in the new e-filing procedures and in available forms. to be done to meet the December 18 deadline. USDA selected 219 forms (57 from FSA, 6 from NRCS, and 156 from RD) to post on the Web. USDA believes customers can complete these on their own with assistance only from form completion instructions. USDA coordinated with OMB to develop a user-friendly format and are working to obtain OMB approval for each new electronic form. Designed and is implementing a common Internet Web site that can utilize a single Internet address to provide user access with common search and retrieval functions. to be done to meet the December 18 deadline. would be required to carry out them out. RMA’s initial efforts focused on establishing and distributing guidelines and policies for crop insurance providers to follow in meeting their e-file responsibilities. USDA has made progress and has partially met initial E-File Act deadlines for providing agricultural producers with access to forms via the Internet. R MA said it expects full implementation, as the act requires, by December 1, 2001. The agency will use the process it will use to ensure that insurance providers comply with the act's e- file requirements. USDA’s CBAs provide services such as farm loans and conservation assistance. Under the E- File Act, these agencies were required to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system by December 18, 2000. RMA is working on a December 1, 2000, plan for allowing agricultural producers the option of obtaining, over the Internet, departmental forms. The E-File Act provides that the Secretary is to reserve, from applicable accounts, not more than $3 million for fiscal year 2001 and $2 million for each subsequent fiscal year. By June 20, 2002, agricultural producers be able to file paperwork electronically with USDA if they choose to do so. RMA administers the federal crop insurance program, which helps protect producers against losses due to drought, flooding, and other unavoidable causes. By December 1, 2000, it was to submit to Congress a plan for enabling producers to obtain forms and information, such as crop insurance applications and production and yield reports, over the Internet. Implementation of the plan is to be completed by December 1,. 2001. NRCS, Rural Development, and County-based Agencies to establish electronic filing and retrieval system. Provides separate requirements for the CBAs and RMA. an Internet-based system enabling agricultural producers to access all forms and shall submit all forms on a request.request. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here.

ROUGE-1: 60.35, ROUGE-2: 55.91, ROUGE-L: 26.02
BERTScore: 64.88

==============================================
==================== [86/100] ====================
Summary:
Advisory committees play an important role in shaping public policy by providing advice on a wide array of issues. Their advice can enhance the quality and credibility of federal decision making. Despite the strengths associated with the federal advisory committees, agencies also need to be careful to maintain their mission to promote the public interest and take measures to safeguard against actual or perceived agency capture by the entities paying the fee. According to a Congressional Research Service report on the FDA prescription drug user fees, some critics said that giving the pharmaceutical industry a fee was a bad idea. fees, some critics said that giving the pharmaceutical industry a role in setting program performance goals creates conflicts of interest. Agencies also need to ensure that all stakeholders are given the opportunity to engage substantively. Some smaller businesses have raised concerns that FAA only consults with selected major airlines and manufacturers, ignoring commuter airlines and smaller businesses also affected by FAA regulations. Many of the stakeholders we spoke with said that although the ad valorem structure of the HMF makes it relatively easy to administer, it raises concerns about equity. User financing is one approach to financing federal programs or activities. User fees assign part or all of the costs of the benefits and services derived from these programs and activities to readily identifiable recipients. Some excise taxes, however, can also be described as a form of user financing. For example, the excise taxes on tobacco products can be used to fund the federal government's health care program for the elderly, the disabled, and the elderly in nursing homes. The federal government can also use excise taxes to fund its health care programs. increased spending on harbors or reduced fee collections would increase the federal deficit, unless spending in other areas was decreased or other collections or revenues were increased. Providing guaranteed funding levels to any one activity in the budget protects that activity from competition with other areas for scarce resources. Given the fiscal pressures imposed by the nation’s large and growing structural deficits, given a reduction in fee receipts or an increase in appropriations—absent offsetting changes elsewhere—will increase theFederal deficit.” a form of user financing. For example, the excise taxes on motor fuels, tires, and heavy vehicles accrue to the Highway Trust Fund, from which Congress appropriates funds for the interstate highway system, mass transit, and transportation projects. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations are funded in part by excise taxes assessed on airline tickets, aviation fuel, and certain cargo. Both the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-25 provide that agencies review their user fees biennially. any needed cost adjustments. If imposing such fees is prohibited or restricted by law, agencies will recommend legislative changes as appropriate. OMB encourages agencies to examine potential effects of design alternatives when reviewing and proposing changes to regulations. The user fees considered in this report, and summarized in table 1, are assessed under specific statutory authority and levied on air and sea passengers, vessel operators, or other users of the government’s services. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Corps prepares an annual report to Congress on the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. The report includes a substantive review of the fee, but does not include information on these costs. The HMTF is not the only fund for which revenues flow in automatically from earmarked taxes or fees and spending must be appropriated. In the 1990s the Highway Trust Fund also built up a surplus. At the time, Congress and the President modified the discretionary spending caps to provide for a separate cap on highway funding. In 1998, Congress specified a more automatic link between spending from the HMTF and highway spending. More automatic link between spending from the Highway Trust Fund and receipts into the Trust Fund. Spending was tied to estimated receipts with a retroactive adjustment. When receipts came in below estimated levels and would have resulted in an automatic cut in highway program funding levels, the cut was overridden. A different mechanism is used for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prescription drug user fee. If actual FDA fee collections are higher than estimated, the fee is not adjusted for inflation. If receipts are lower than expected, the adjustment is not made. prescription drug user fee: if actual FDA fee collections are higher than the amount appropriated, FDA must adjust fee rates in a subsequent year to reduce its anticipated fee collections by that amount. Even if there were a tighter link between collections and expenditures, the HMTF should not necessarily aim for a zero balance. Corps officials and some stakeholders agreed that there are good reasons to consider maintaining a positive balance in the trust fund. Where fees are expected to cover program costs and program costs do not necessarily decline with a drop in fee revenue, a reserve can be used. AQI program’s ability to perform border inspections and that, in fiscal years 2003 through 2005, user fees were not sufficient to cover program costs. In 2007, APHIS and CBP further improved the AQI cost estimates by agreeing on a common set of assumptions used to forecast the cost of AQI activities. In contrast, the customs and immigration inspection fees are structured to recover partial costs. Although CBP includes the MPF in its biennial user fee review, the information provided is not enough to project fee collections or inspection costs.  legacy fees supporting these inspections are still governed by separate, dissimilar authorizing legislation. APHIS uses the federal regulatory process to propose rate increases and invites comments on its proposals and implementing regulations via a public notice and comment in the Federal Register. Although various Congressional committees oversee this process, Congress has delegated to APH IS the authority and responsibility to set and adjust AQI fee rates to match program costs over time. In contrast, both the immigration system and the border control system are overseen by the Department of Homeland Security. match program costs over time. The AQI fee statute grants the Secretary of Agriculture broad discretion to prescribe and collect fees sufficient to cover the cost of providing agricultural quarantine and inspection services. In 2006 we reported that financial management issues at CBP and APHIS adversely affect the AQI program’s ability to perform border inspections and that, in spite of this, the program continues to perform well. In contrast, both the immigration and customs fee rates are set in statute. These fees can only recoup authorized program costs to the extent that total reimbursable program costs do not exceed the rate caps prescribed in statute, we found. DHS recognizes the importance of using cost-effective methods to collect fees. In its oral comments, USDA noted it was impressed with the level of explanatory detail and analysis contained in the report. If USDA believes that the statutory authority does not permit it to cover such indirect and imputed costs, then we believe USDA should seek additional authority from Congress consistent with our recommendation. USDA also noted that it will need to (1) work with DHS to identify DHS’s imputing costs for the AQI program. payments and to support electronic payments, rather than payment by check or cash. Assess interest and penalties on late HMF payments for domestic shipments, shipments into foreign trade zones, and sea passengers. Direct CBP to include in its biennial report on the Merchandise Processing Fee information on total program collections relative to total program costs. In accordance with OMB Circular No. A-25 guidance and U.S. Department of Agriculture policy, include in AQI fees the indirect and imputed costs not considered when setting AQI fee rates. with a drop in fee revenue, a reserve can be important. For example, the AQI fees are maintained with a reserve of approximately 3 months worth of program costs in case of emergency. As with similar situations, deciding whether and how to link HMF collections with expenditures is complicated. On the one hand, aligning collections and expenditures can promote economic efficiency and enhance stakeholder support for the fee. But on the other hand, increased spending on harbors or reduced fee collections would increase. on the customs, immigration, and AQI vessel fees, and the reviews generally do not reflect input from the other. CBP’s review of the MPF does not detail program costs and project fee collections, or provide enough information to determine if the amount, structure, or authorized uses of the fee should be updated. If agencies cannot determine the extent to which these fees are recovering costs, Congress cannot be sure that resources are allocated to the activities it most values. The principles of effective user fee design discussed earlier in this report can both offer a framework for considering the implications of various statutory structures. amount of money available in the HMTF to be appropriated for other purposes. Unless agencies present a comprehensive picture of the customs, immigration, and AQI fees, Congress will continue to lack a complete picture of whether the fees work in concert or conflict with each other. Furthermore, agencies will be less able to develop and maintain the partnerships necessary to collect and distribute the fees as efficiently and effectively as possible. The lack of complete, transparent cost and collections data for the MPF and AQi fees, could hamper oversight. fees contributes to a several month delay between the use of appropriated funds and receipt of reimbursement from the immigration and AQI user fee accounts. To address this challenge, CBP told us it has developed a legislative proposal that would, in part, require monthly instead of quarterly remittance. A representative of a cruise line industry association we spoke with noted that monthly payments would increase the administrative costs to the cruise lines, but that if a steadier supply of funding was provided, it would reduce costs. there are opportunities at the local level for payers to provide input on fees and the services they support. Ineffective communication may reduce stakeholder cooperation and support for the fees, contribute to misunderstandings and confusion. Congress does not have a comprehensive view of the vessel and passenger AQI, customs, and immigration inspection fees and how they are funded. The fees are intended to fund a range of activities, including immigration and customs enforcement. They are not intended to cover all of the costs associated with immigration and Customs Enforcement. information provided is not sufficient to project fee collections or to provide assurance that the amount of the fee is aligned with program costs. CBP cannot reliably project future MPF collections because the agency has not estimated the effects of exemptions, entries made through foreign trade zones, the decline in the constant dollar value of the minimum and maximum fees, or changes in import demographics. Since fiscal year 2004 collections have increased relative to program costs and in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 collections exceeded costs. Since 2003, cost calculations have included activities that are not directly associated with processing cargo or that are covered by other fee programs. and in fiscal years 2006 and 2007 collections exceeded costs by a total of approximately $221 million (see fig. 6). CBP’s most recent biennial report notes that a detailed analysis of the current and projected effects of MPF exemptions and an accurate cost estimate for processing merchandise is needed. CBP officials told us that they plan to conduct a detailed review of the MPF in the second phase of a three-phase review. They said that they estimate beginning the MPf review in early 2008, but the timeline depends on when the first phase is completed. APHIS says fee rates are now set to recover all program costs except for certain indirect and imputed costs, such as the cost of employee retirement benefits. OMB Circular No. A-25 guidance and USDA policy require the inclusion of such costs in setting full-cost recovery fees. APHIS said that because USDA receives appropriations to pay for departmental and staff office costs, it did not have the authority to include those costs in the fee. We interpret the AQI user fee statute, however, as permitting USDA to recovery all costs associated with its program, including imputed and indirect costs. pension liabilities, may be more directly linked to the fee- funded activity and more easily calculated than seeking to allocate departmental and staff office costs. Further, “full cost recovery” should be viewed from a governmentwide perspective. Even though USDA would have to deposit those portions of user fee collections as miscellaneous receipts in the general fund of the Treasury, it would still defray a cost that Congress determined should be paid for by the user fees. If USDA believes that the statutory authority does not permit it to do so, it can ask Congress to change the law. To be reimbursed for time spent on authorized activities for various fees, CBP must track the time spent. The inspection processes have been largely combined but the separate distinct fees supporting these activities are not uniform. At one port, on each shift, a full-time CBP officer was assigned solely to tracking staff time. In general, the three fees are not levied uniformly, and sometimes sometimes the fees can be difficult to figure out, the authors say. The need to separately track three inspections that have largely been consolidated adds complexity and increases the potential for error. For immigration inspections conducted on a Sunday, holiday, or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., CBP must charge a vessel operator, owner, or agent for the overtime cost of the immigration inspections. The statutory authorities governing immigration overtime inspection charges mandate that the amount of the charge be dependent upon the amount paid to the inspector, subject to specified limitations. However, CBP officers are paid under a different statutory scheme, which does not contain the same limitations. According to CBP, the agency cannot automatically bill the vessel operator or shipping agent for immigration overtime services. hours vary by port, the hours during which an inspector might be working overtime vary. In addition, the amount charged depends on the number and pay grade(s) of the officer(s), adding to unpredictability and increasing DHS’s costs to administer the fee. According to CBP officials, collections for reimbursable overtime agriculture inspections total about $1.2 million annually. AQI regulations explicitly prohibit charging for similar overtime inspections of aircraft when passengers have already paid an AQI fee for that flight. increase in the customs vessel inspection fee rate without a corresponding increase in the annual fee cap. Before the fee was raised in April 2007, the annual cap was equal to 15 payments. Because the customs fee was increased but the cap was not, the cap is now equal to approximately 13.6 payments. CBP officers must be aware when processing payments that the 14th payment will be for a different amount than the typical fee rate. The quarterly remittance schedule for the passenger inspection fees contributes to a several months delay between the use of the fees and their payment. General, the three fees are not levied uniformly, and sometimes involve cross-subsidization (see table 2). For example, although air passengers are charged an AQI fee, sea passengers (generally cruise ship passengers) are not. According to APHIS finance officials, the costs of inspecting sea passengers, fee-exempt vessels, and vessels that have met the annual fee cap are spread among all payers of the AQI vessel fees. They said that although although the fee rates. Cruise ships routinely exceed the cap because they arrive in the U.S. far more than 15 times each year. According to CBP data, fiscal year 2006 CBP costs for the AQI commercial vessel inspections were approximately $35 million. About $2.2 million for passenger inspections and about $4 million for inspections of exempt private vessels. The cost data that CBP provides to APHIS does not indicate what portion of the $35million is for passenger and private vessel inspections. In fiscal year 2006, commercial vessel customs inspections fee collections covered about 66 percent of related program costs. DHS does not know the portion of total immigration inspection costs covered by immigration fee collections. Since the fees can pay for only some inspection activities and only under certain circumstances, ensuring proper use of fee collections can require detailed cost data. Collecting these data, however, can be particularly costly given the disparate fee collection rates for vessel inspection and other immigration-related activities. For more information, go to: http://www.dhs.gov/immigration/costs. managed channels are undermaintained. The customs inspection activities and the authorized uses for the customs passenger and vessel fee collections are misaligned. Customs inspection-related activities that occur while a CBP officer is earning overtime or premium pay, or during preclearance, can be funded by the user pay. But the same activities conducted during regular time cannot be funding by the fee. Therefore, not all of the activities that may be funded from the customs fee are associated with conducting customs inspections. Both the immigration and customs statutes contain language that fees equal or be reasonably related to the cost of services. But the two statutes actually prescribe an exact amount in law to be charged for their respective inspection services. The immigration statute makes immigration user fee collections available to refund any appropriation for expenses incurred in providing immigration inspection. The customs statute further restricts cost recovery by limiting the set of activities for which collections may reimburse appropriations. The fees are used to pay for immigration inspection and pre-inspection services as well as for other purposes. committee for a similar program that funds new work construction and rehabilitation on inland waterways. The purpose of this Inland Waterways Users Board is to make recommendations on priorities and spending for inland waterway construction and Rehabilitation projects. CBP’s Airport and Seaport Inspections User Fee Advisory Committee meets biannually to advise the commissioner of CBP on issues related to the performance of airport inspections. Both the customs and immigration passenger inspection fee statutes required the establishment of advisory committees consisting of industry representatives. of CBP on issues related to the performance of airport and seaport agriculture, customs, or immigration inspections. The committee members represent entities subject to the fees, including airlines, airports, cruise lines, and industry associations. We recently reported that stakeholders felt that the advisory committee provided only limited opportunities for substantive two-way communication. As a result, they said they lack data necessary to know whether the passenger inspection fees are set fairly or accurately, or are being spent on the appropriate activities. GAO: Despite integration of the inspection processes for the three sea passenger and vessel fees, the administering agencies report separately on their respective fees. DHS has acknowledged that the challenges described in our previous work extend beyond air passenger inspections to other fees managed by the agency, GAO says. GAO: Agencies with shared responsibilities for common outcomes or related functions should reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through common planning and reporting. The agencies and Congress lack vessel and sea passenger fees and information on the total costs of the combined inspections. The fees vary in the way they are set, collected, used, and reviewed. APHIS does not indicate what portion of the $35 million is associated with inspecting cruise ships that have exceeded the fee cap. As a general rule, the costs of crew inspection are not charged to vessel owner/operators, although they may be charged for overtime immigration inspections of vessel crew at some ports. This makes fees unpredictable. Predictability of inspection fees enables users to plan, charge clients for, and account for related costs. arriving international air passengers. Where appropriate, changes made to one fee should be designed to complement rather than conflict with the other fees. The separate, disparate fees supporting the largely consolidated inspection process appear to aggravate disconnects between the customs passenger and vessel fees and the corresponding inspection activities. Unless remedied, differences such as the way overtime charges are assessed for commercial vessel will continue to be a problem, the report says. The need to address some of the user fee challenges presented in this report may appear obvious, but how to accomplish this is less clear. all ports even if it chooses to change the design of that fee from ad valorem to one based on a ship’s size or draft. Stakeholders expect that inspections will occur in a timely manner. Cruise lines, importers, and ships’ agents all said that delays for passenger and vessel inspections are costly to industry. One agent said that a 1-hour delay can cost a carrier $15,000 in longshoreman labor costs. In some ports, the cargo cannot be unloaded until a ship is cleared. in longshoreman labor costs. Crew changes cannot occur until a vessel has cleared its immigration inspection. During this time, the ship must pay expenses for two crews. Stakeholders told us that when multiple ships arrive at the same time, ships have waited up to 4 hours before being cleared. CBP officials said these types of inspection delays are generally caused by staff shortages, outdated or crowded facilities, clustered arrivals, or some combination of these factors. We recently reported similar findings related to delays for arriving international air passengers. their type and volume of trade and commerce (including cruise lines, container ships, petroleum products, and liquefied natural gas); maintenance dredging needs, and specific issues facing them. We also considered travel costs in selecting the site visits. In light of the significant amount of ongoing audit work in the Gulf region, and because other ports in our selection are representative of important characteristics associated with Gulf ports, we did not include a Gulf port in our Selection so as not to exclude it from the list. include a Gulf port in our selection so as not to unnecessarily burden an area in crisis. The ports we selected include medium and large ports, natural deepwater ports, and those that require frequent dredging. We visited the ports of Boston, Massachusetts; Charleston, South Carolina; Newark, New Jersey/New York, New York; Baltimore, Maryland; Miami, Florida; Port Everglades, Florida. Seattle, Washington; and Los Angeles/Long Beach, California. At each port, we spoke with various stakeholders, including port authority officials, customs brokers, shipping agents. found that the authorized depth was available in the middle of the channel only approximately 35 percent of the time in fiscal year 2005. Although ships continue to use these channels and harbors, not maintaining them to their justified design dimensions can cause problems. For example, according to Corps officials in one port we visited, some vessels are delayed because they have to wait for high tide in order to pass through the channels. They also reported instances where ships skipped a port of call altogether if such a delay was reported. skipped a port of call altogether if such a delay would have caused the ship to miss its scheduled appointment at the Panama Canal. These types of disruptions affect both regional commerce and port profits. A 2007 report by the U.S. Committee on the Marine Transportation System (CMTS) found that vessels often deal with the challenges of poorly dredged and maintained channels and harbors by “light loading,” i.e., loading less cargo than their full capacity. This in turn increases shipping costs. 28,000 tons with a 27-foot channel. They said that this “light-loading” of vessels significantly drives up its operating cost and impacts construction costs. The 2007 CMTS report found that channel limitations may lead to unsafe conditions and interaction with other vessels. A full oil tanker ran aground in East Rockaway, New York, in 2006 due in part to a lack of maintenance. Corps officials said the Corps now uses a performance-based budgeting model to set harbor maintenance priorities. The Corps is developing a national estimate of the cost to make the 59 busiest channels available 95 percent of the time at their full-use dimensions. Without regular, substantive fee reviews, agencies, stakeholders, and Congress lack complete information about changing program costs and whether authorized, reimbursable activities align with program activities. For example, CBP and APHIS report separately on the customs, immigration, and AQI vessel fees, and the Customs and Border Protection agency reports separately on vessel fees. a port is not well maintained, it may lack the capacity to handle increasingly larger vessels and therefore lose business or drive up costs. For example, the authorized depth of the Port of Georgetown is 27 feet, but the channel has silted in to 25 feet on numerous occasions over the past several years. With the channel at only 25 feet, a company bringing in rock for the regional construction industry can only bring in about 24,000 tons per vessel, down from 28,000tons with a 27-foot channel. There is currently no formal vehicle for payers of the HMF and other port stakeholders to provide input to the Corps. The HMF authorizing legislation did not establish an HMF advisory committee, though it did establish an advisory committee for a similar program that funds new work construction.will e-mail the office to find out when highlighted areas will be dredged. Also, several of the CBP field offices. hold regular meetings with port stakeholders. to share information and address stakeholder concerns. method for the Corps to provide information on domestic vessel movements to CBP. Information on CBP’s costs to collect and administer the HMF, for inclusion in the Corps’ annual report to Congress on the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. An annual budget request for CBP-related salaries and expenses equal to, rather than in excess of, CBP's actual costs associated with collecting theHMF. We provided a draft of these proposals to the CBP Office of Regulatory Audit. cruise lines, but that if a steadier supply of funding helped CBP to provide better service, it would be worthwhile. Insufficient coordination between CBP and the Corps inhibits CBP’s ability to ensure that certain HMF payments are properly made. CBP reviewed recent payment history and found that 42 percent of payments were late or improper. The Corps gathers information on domestic vessel movements and could provide this information to CBP. However, CBP does not request and the corps does to establish a receivable and ensure proper payment. CBP does not request and the Corps does not share information with CBP on these types of domestic freight movements. An official from CBP’s Revenue Division said if CBP had information on freight movements it could reconcile them to HMF payments. The Revenue Division receives this type of “front-end reporting” for other, similar fees, the official said. It is one of the best ways to establish a receivable and ensure proper payment, he said. The official said CBP could monitor compliance rather than relying on self-reported payer information. customs, immigration, and agriculture inspections that did not vary by port or the rank of the inspecting CBP officer would increase revenue, decrease administrative costs, and improve CBP’s relations with the trade community. Ineffective and outdated collection methods for vessel inspection fees increase administrative costs for both agencies and payers. A lack of coordination between the Corps and CBP inhibits oversight of HMF payments for passenger vessels, domestic shipments, and shipments into foreign trade zones. Unless CBP automates its collection methods, requires monthly remittance, and aligns fee rate increases with the annual fee caps, CBP will continue to incur unnecessary administrative costs. division has not conducted any audits specific to the HMF since 1996; rather, the fee is audited incidentally during the course of audits related to other fees or duties. CBP accepts electronic payment for these fees along with customs duties, CBP has not requested and the Corps has not offered any HMF-related referrals. In contrast to theHMF collections process for passenger vessels, domestic shippers, and shipments into foreign trade zones,CBP’s collection process for both the MPF and HMF assessed on formal customs entries has several advantages. CBP already values cargo for the assessment of duties, so there is no duplication of effort. CBP also determines if the correct amount was paid for HMF and MPF. Because these are ad valorem fees, if the value of the goods is understated, additional HMF or MPF fees may be due. All of the fees we reviewed suffer from some misalignment—although the nature of that is unclear. The fees are all subject to review by CBP's inspector general. payer misplaces the receipt proving that the vessel has reached the fee cap, the fee must be paid. The payer may request a refund if the receipt is later found, although several stakeholders told us this process is lengthy and burdensome. Some stakeholders and CBP field office staff expressed frustration with the paper-based system. An automated payment and record-keeping system would speed the collection process, reduce the likelihood of payment errors, and reduce administrative costs for both parties, the authors say. Collection methods function best when they minimize administrative costs and maximize compliance. CBP is automating collections for several user fees but to date, the commercial vessel fees may still only be paid in person by check or cash. Payers must retain each paper payment receipt and present them at each entry so that CBP can determine whether that particular vessel has reached the annual fee cap. Treasury’s Financial Management Service has made it a priority to increase the use of electronic collection methods for government collections. accepts electronic payment for these fees along with customs duties, which are typically paid by a customs broker on behalf of an importer. Customs brokers we spoke with said that the system works well, is efficient, and imposes minimal administrative costs. It is less costly for the government and payers of the fee for CBP to collect the fee as part of the formal entry process than it would be for the Corps or another entity to establish a fee collection system of its own. The system allows entry summaries to be electronically transmitted, validated, confirmed, corrected, and paid. reimburse authorized inspection activities conducted at air, sea, or land ports of entry. CBP officials said that since the events of September 11, 2001, the focus of merchandise processing has shifted toward security. They said that certain activities associated with merchandise processing and performed by CBP officers, including screening and inspecting conveyances, are not reimbursable MPF activities. The legislation governing the MPF should be explicitly consistent with the CBP regulations, officials said. The MPF is not required to reimburse CBP for certain activities, they said. $1,000, and quarterly payment is not required if the total value of all shipments for which a fee was assessed for the quarter does not exceed $10,000. No payment is required for imported cargo that is entitled to be entered under informal entry procedures. Jacqueline M. Nowicki (Assistant Director) and Susan E.M. Etzel managed this assignment. Jessica Nierenberg, Kathleen Padulchick, and Amy Rosewarne made key contributions to all aspects of the report. We examined the Harbor Maintenance Fee (HMF), Merchandise Processing Fee (MPF), Customs Inspection Fees, Immigration User Fee, and Agricultural Quarantine Inspection (AQI) User Fees. In examining the fees, we reviewed user fee legislation and guidance, agency documents, and literature on user fee design and implementation characteristics. We interviewed officials responsible for managing the selected user fees at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) GAO consulted with port security experts from within and outside of GAO. We chose ports that varied in their type and volume of trade and commerce. We also consulted with CBP and Corps officials, and with outside stakeholders, in order to choose ports. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) offices in Washington, D.C. administers the MPF and Customs inspection fees, and it collects the HMF on behalf of the Corps. CBP administers Immigration user fees jointly with ICE. The AQI user fees are jointly with APHIS. We recommend that the Secretary of Homeland Security take the following four actions. Develop a legislative proposal, in consultation with Congress, to harmonize the customs, immigration, and agricultural quarantine inspections fees. Establish an advisory committee on the HMF and the activities that it funds, that includes payers of the fee. Increase the cap on customs inspection fees for commercial vessels, in line with the 2007 increase in this fee, so that the fees can be harmonized. The Secretaries of Agriculture and Homeland Security should conduct joint reviews of the fees and consolidate reporting. DHS characterized the report as balanced and accurate and agreed with the overall substance and findings of the report. Of the six recommendations directed at DHS, DHS concurred with five of them and partially concurring with the sixth. DHS concurring in part with our recommendation to automate collections of the customs and AQI fees assessed on commercial vessels. The agency will analyze the feasibility of this approach and work to identify and obtain funding to implement the recommendation if it is deemed cost beneficial. We appreciate that DHS recognizes the importance of using cost-effective methods to collect. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Defense, and to the Acting Secretary of Agriculture for review. DHS characterized the report as balanced and accurate and agreed. We also provided portions of the report to nonfederal stakeholders for their review and made technical corrections as appropriate. We received written comments from Homeland Security (DHS), which are reprinted in appendix III, and oral comments from the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Defense (DOD). In addition, each agency provided technical comments, which we incorporated asappropriate. oral comments, and concurred with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the report related to the Army Corps’ Harbor Maintenance Fee. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretaries of Homeland Security, Agriculture, Army, and Defense and interested Congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me on (202) 512-9142. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. In order to provide context as Congress considers funding options for port programs, we examined what is known about the way selected fees assessed on air and sea port users are set, collected, used, and reviewed. Some Corps and CBP officials have established successful, two-way communication practices at the local level. Some Corps division offices publicly post survey results and maps showing the controlling depth reports for local harbors and channels. One local Corps official said this practice encourages more dialogue with stakeholders, noting that they will e-mail the office to find out when highlighted areas are to be improved. The timeline depends on when the first phase of the project is completed, but agencies can accommodate stakeholder input in various ways. Briones and Carlos Diz provided legal support and Donna Miller developed the report’s graphics. Briones, Diz and Miller also provided legal help for the report. The report's graphics were developed by Donna Miller. The full report is available on CNN.com/soulmatestories and on CNN iReport.com. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. artificially high. On the other hand, applying the fee equally to all eligible ports offers a relatively simple collection mechanism. Congress could decide to impose a uniform fee structure at all ports even if it chooses to change the design. Whether the fee is based on the value of the cargo (ad valorem) or on the size and draft of the ship is a separate decision from whether fees should vary by the dredging needs and condition of a given port. The fee helps to create a level playing field for all ports, which in turn helps minimize competition between individual ports. it relatively easy to administer, it raises concerns about equity. There is no link between the value of their cargo and the depth or width of the harbor needed by the ship on which it is carried. For example, importers of high-value goods, such as natural gas and pharmaceuticals, told us they essentially pay a much greater share of dredging costs. Stakeholders said that a ship’s size and draft combined with harbor conditions drive harbor maintenance costs, and therefore may more closely link benefits received with the cost of providing the benefits. Some stakeholders say the HMF fee structure does not reflect the individual dredging needs of ports. Other stakeholders noted that a benefit of the ad valorem structure is that it may better reflect the users’ ability to pay. The overall cost of moving goods through the nation’s marine transportation system is artificially high. On the other hand, applying the fee equally could reduce the cost of shipping goods through U.S. ports by as much as 50 percent, according to some estimates. Since 2003, HMF collections have significantly exceeded funds appropriated for harbor maintenance. This may be inconsistent with users’ expectations of the fee’s purpose. Congress should consider reviewing the link between the amount of the HMF and the amounts of expenditures for the harbor maintenance program. Such a framework could also provide the basis for future reviews of federal user fees as Congress works to ensure that user fee financing mechanisms remain relevant and up-to-date. It could help clarify and illuminate the tradeoffs associated with various policy choices available to Congress. Not all authorized, reimbursable activities for the sea passenger and vessel inspection customs fees and MPF are associated with conducting inspections. Not all inspection-related activities may be charged to these fees. HMF collections far exceed funds appropriated for harbor maintenance, resulting in a large and growing surplus in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. Corps officials and port stakeholders assert that many federally managed channels are undermaintained. The HMF is not assessed on domestic cargo valued at less than $1,000. There is a backlog of harbor maintenance, which can result in costly delays and more dangerous shipping conditions. A recent Corps analysis of the 59 busiest commercial federal channels in the U.S. found that the authorized depth was available in the middle of the channel. decisions about changing the HMF should consider its continued relevance and relative priority within the context of reexamining the base of all major federal spending and tax programs, the authors say. The authors say the decision should be made in light of the nation's large and growing structural deficits. In 2001 HMF collections exceeded expenditures by about $44 million. By 2007 that gap had grown to over $506 million. Total collections grew 101 percent from $704 million to $1.416 billion from 2001 to 2007. Corps officials told us this was driven by the ad valorem nature of the fee—receipts grow with both volume and value of shipments. Annual expenditures grew from $2.2 billion to $3.4 billion. Annual collections grew from £1.1 billion to £2.6 billion. The gap between collections and expenditures has grown from £44 million in 2001 to £506 million in 2007. grow with both volume and value of shipments. Annual harbor maintenance project expenditures, which are subject to annual appropriation, grew more slowly. The difference between the amount collected and the amount expended has led to a growing balance in the HMTF. Between fiscal years 2001 and 2007, the balance grew from $1.8 billion to $3.4 billion. Corps officials told us they expect it to reach $8 billion in fiscal year 2011 (see fig. 5) and they expect the balance to grow to $10 billion in 2011. reach $8 billion in fiscal year 2011 (see fig. 5). Since 1996, the President has included in his annual budget requests and Congress has appropriated $3 million from the HMTF to compensate CBP for costs associated with collecting the fee. CBP finance officials told us that they estimate the annual cost of collecting the HMF to be approximately $2 million. The extent and nature of the link between HMF collections and expenditures are policy choices only Congress can make. However, vital information about the tradeoffs associated with such a link is lacking. recent payment history and found that 42 percent of payments—representing approximately 18 percent of the total dollar value—were late. According to these officials, they are taking steps to begin collecting interest on past and future late payments. They estimate interest collections for last year to be about $182,000; they do not yet have an estimate for annual penalties. Further, they said that they have begun reviewing the authority related to penalties in order to determine an appropriate dollar threshold that would trigger assessment and collection actions.

ROUGE-1: 82.46, ROUGE-2: 74.42, ROUGE-L: 26.96
BERTScore: 66.10

==============================================
==================== [87/100] ====================
Summary:
Food safety activities are divided into the following program functions. Monitoring/Surveillance: activities related to the monitoring of foodborne illness or disease. Inspection/Enforcement: activities to ensure compliance with agency food safety regulations. Education/Outreach: Activities related to communicating food safety- related information or guidance to the public, industry, or agencies’ other clients. Research: activities relating to the study of foodSafety-related topics, which support agency policy decisions. Risk assessment: activities that evaluate the likelihood and severity of an adverse event (e.g., illness or death) regulatory framework to enhance communication and coordination among the existing agencies. The Grocery Manufacturers of America said that the food safety system must be flexible enough to allow resources to be directed toward identifying and addressing serious food safety problems. Other stakeholders believe that the system needs to be modernized through statutory changes to make it more science and risk based. The Consumer Federation of America believes that a risk-based system should consider not only the risk posed by the food but also the history of the plant. the Future stated that the current food safety laws undermine a successful food safety system. That is, the laws do not build prevention into the farm-to-table continuum and divide responsibility and accountability for food safety among federal agencies. Further, USDA’s carcass-by-carcass organoleptic inspections exemplify the outmoded requirements of the currentFood safety system, the report said. The report added that such inspections waste resources because new technologies are more efficient and effective. resources because new technologies are more efficient and effective. Some stakeholders, including the Institute for Food Technologists, believe that modernizing the food safety system could be accomplished by rewriting food safety statutes. Some of the stakeholders that cited the need for modernization also believe that these changes should be made in a more transparent and accountable way. The Institute for food Technologists is a non-profit organization that promotes food safety in the U.S. and around the world. For more information, go to www.foodtechnologists.org. more effectively and efficiently control current and emerging food safety hazards. The stakeholders we contacted disagree on whether federal agencies’ food safety functions overlap, specifically with regard to inspections. Stakeholders’ views included (1) minor changes to improve coordination among the food safety agencies, (2) statutory changes to make the system more science and risk based, and (3) consolidating federal foodSafety functions into a single agency. Some large industry associations saw the need for only minor changes within the existing regulatory framework. Third, the transition costs to a single agency would be higher in the short term, experts say. Fourth, current agency employees would be concerned that a consolidation would adversely change their working lives. Finally, some stakeholders, including the Consumer Federation of America, said that some congressional committees may be reluctant to lose jurisdiction over food safety functions. The Congress has recognized this possibility in the Bioterrorism Act by authorizing FDA to commission other agencies’ officials to conduct FDA’s food safety inspections. GAO: Federal framework for food safety is based on a patchwork of numerous laws. Table 6 lists the 30 laws that we have identified as the principal federal laws related to food safety. Table does not provide an exhaustive list of all food safety-related laws and amendments, nor does it detail all of the food safety provisions for those laws listed. GAO: We disagree with USDA’s assertion that our report overly simplifies food safety regulatory functions within USDA and FDA and that it exaggerates the extent of regulatory overlap. Many federal agencies, as well as state and local entities, play a part in the U.S. food safety regulatory system. The federal agencies regulate the food production chain from farms to food manufacturers. State and local agencies primarily regulate food safety in retail food establishments. In addition to their established food safety and quality responsibilities, following the events of September 11, 2001, these agencies began to address the potential for deliberate contamination of agriculture and food products. The Department of Homeland Security provides overall coordination on how to prevent deliberate contamination. In commenting on a draft of this report, HHS raised concerns about our terminology regarding overlapping activities. We disagree with HHS comment that our report’s title should substitute the word duplication for overlap. Given the definitions we lay out in the report, if we modified the title as HHS suggests, we would risk implying that the agencies are undertaking many duplicative efforts. We are fully aware that under the current statutory framework the agencies do not exactly replicate food safety activities. The full report is available in appendix V. need for modernization also believe that these changes should be accompanied by consolidation of federal food safety programs into a single agency. Consolidation of functions could allow a single food agency to manage the safety of the whole food chain, not just its parts. Food companies tend to prefer the inspection process that is known to them, according to the Food Marketing Institute. Some industry associations say a transition to asingle agency could create a period of uncertainty, as limited resources are diverted from the existing programs, and could therefore cause vulnerabilities in the food supply. substantial savings in terms of administrative efficiency and overall consistency in the application of policy. The legislative changes needed to accomplish consolidation could also be used as the vehicle for modernizing the food safety statutes. The stakeholders we contacted also identified a number of roadblocks to changing food safety laws and regulations. The Center for Science at the Public Interest and Resources for the Future are two of the groups we spoke to about food safety reform. They are: The Center forScience at the public interest and Resources For The Future, and The Food Marketing Institute. which more than one agency performed similar activities. In some instances, the agencies estimated budget and staffing levels, or they were unable to separate budget data into specific categories. Some agencies did not provide expenditures and staffing data for categories such as administration, food security, and rulemaking. The agencies’ officials explained that these expenditures are distributed among more thanOne of the other categories. To examine the extent to which federal food safety agencies are using interagency agreements to leverage existing resources to reduce any such overlaps, we requested that agencies provide copies of all active interagency deals. that agency may need to coordinate their activities. We believe that some economies of scale would be derived from combining overlapping activities. For example, with a single food safety agency, the federal government would not need to have two separate food inspection workforces or two separate training programs. We acknowledge that some elements of the 1999 interagency agreement on dual jurisdiction establishments have been implemented. However, we continue to believe that the agreement could be better implemented. We further disagree that the report does not mention the need for a single agency. different authorities, the activities they perform under these authorities are similar in nature. We question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, food safety activities. We disagree with USDA’s assertion that the agencies’ inspection activities are vastly different. Our recommendations address specific areas where the agencies could improve coordination to better leverage resources, the authors say. They say the report examines inspection activities, not inspection authorities, and certainly does not identify “significant” overlaps in authorities. To identify overlaps that may exist in the federal food safety system, we collected fiscal year 2003 budget data for food safety-related activities from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. We defined overlaps as similar activities being performed by more than one agency, such as training food inspectors. In contrast, we defined duplication as essentially identical activities performed by many agencies. We used categories of food safety activities contained in the National Academy of Science’s 1998 report Ensuring Safe Food to group the agencies’ foodSafety activities. rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes. While the rulemakings USDA and FDA undertake vary under those statutes, there are some similarities. For example, FDA requires seafood-processing facilities to address contaminants that are likely to be found in seafood, such as Vibrio vulnificus (a bacteria found in raw seafood, particularly in oysters). USDA requires food processors to incorporate certain sanitation processes into their HACCP systems. The rules are based on the same model, though applied to the different food products each agency regulates. modified our report to indicate, as USDA suggests, that FDA currently requires HACCP plans for seafood and juice products only. We disagree that our report oversimplifies or inaccurately describes federal food safety functions at ports of entry. For example, USDA noted that in order for meat and poultry and egg products to be eligible for import to the United States, foreign food safety regulatory systems must employ equivalent sanitary measures that provide the same level of protection against food safety hazards as is achieved domestically under USDA regulations. FDA estimates that it spent between $650,000 and almost $1 million to issue its seafood HACCP rule in 1995. NMFS officials said they spent $5 million to support the FDA rule by developing a model seafood surveillance project. USDA was unable to calculate how much it spent to issue the HAC CP rule. The agency says it has no estimate of how much the rule-making process cost to develop and implement. The rule requires all meat and poultry processing facilities to address contaminants, such as E. coli and salmonella. USDA and FDA inspections. At jointly regulated facilities, USDA and FDA inspectors also verify that HACCP systems are in place. Under the Bioterrorism Act, FDA could allow USDA inspectors, who are present every day at these jointlyregulated facilities, to inspect FDA-regulated food. FDA could reduce overlapping inspections and redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole control. The regulations require the facility to maintain separate HAC CP plans for each product and to develop separate analyses of critical control points. two agencies refers to the fact that both agencies have issued HACCP regulations that are based on a similar model. We have modified our report to indicate that, short of consolidating all inspection functions, consolidating inspections of the similar elements in the agencies’ plans would reduce overlap. We further note that USDA’s HAC CP rule applies to both meat and poultry products, although these products present different hazards. We believe it is possible to issue broad regulations based on common principles that can then be applied to specific products. daily presence at hundreds of these facilities. FDA could make more effective use of its resources if it redirected its inspectors to other facilities for which FDA has sole jurisdiction. We continue to believe that USDA and FDA could consolidate HACCP-based inspections at these jointly regulated facilities. To provide further clarification on what commodities are currently subject to HAC CP regulations, we modified our report to indicate, as USDA suggests, that FDA should focus its inspections on those facilities that are not subject to the regulations. not provide for exchanges of funds. FDA refers to agreements that involve exchanges of money, personnel, or property as interagency agreements. We did not consider this type of agreement in our analysis. HACCP plans are different as they address different risks associated with different products (i.e., seafood, juice, meat, or poultry). Our report’s identification of HAC CP requirements as another area of overlap between the two agencies refers to the fact that both agencies have both agencies. We have made minor modifications in the report to avoid confusion regarding HACCP principles and HAC CP plans. We indicate that different risks are associated with different food products and, therefore, require different HACC plans.products. In addition to those named above Lawrence J. Dyckman, Katheryn Hubbell, Jane Kim, Sara Margraf, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, Michele Fejfar, Amy Webbink, and Katherine Raheb made key contributions to this report. conduct inspections by entering into an agreement with the Department of Homeland Security’s Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Under the Meat and Poultry Products Inspection Acts, the Secretary of Agriculture is required to certify that countries exporting meat and poultry to the United States have equivalent food safety systems. FDA officials said these agencies do not share information from their overseas visits because their different statutory responsibilities make such information of little advantage. Both agencies train inspectors on sanitation requirements, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP. FDA should commission USDA inspectors to carry out FDA’s inspection responsibilities for food establishments that are under the jurisdiction of both agencies. To better use FDA's limited inspection resources and leverage NMFS's resources, we recommend that the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration and the Under Secretary of NMFS enter into an agreement. If appropriate and cost effective, the agreement could be implemented by the end of the year. If you or a family member have been affected by foodborne illness, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. USDA and FDA spent $884 million in fiscal year 2003 on inspection and enforcement activities. Neither USDA nor FDA has estimated the total costs associated with inspecting jointly regulated facilities. FDA spends about 7 times as much on import inspections because it is responsible for about 80 percent of the U.S. food supply, including imports from about 250 countries. USDA’s responsibility for inspecting imports that come from 34 countries is less than half that of FDA. Both agencies are not leveraging inspection resources at these ports of entry. USDA and FDA each visited Brazil, Costa Rica, Germany, Hungary, Mexico, and Canada last year. USDA spent almost $500,000, and FDA spent nearly $5 million, on its foreign country visits in fiscal year 2003. USDA and FDA officials said these agencies do not share information from each other. For example, FDA at times conducts inspections in the same countries that USDA has evaluated. The agency does not use that information when deciding which countries to visit, officials said. For more information, go to CNN.com/Heroes. would risk implying that the agencies are literally duplicating efforts in every instance. We disagree with HHS’s efficient use of both agencies’ resources—has not been maximized. We further disagree that our report inaccurately characterizes the Bioterrorism Act. As we state in the report, FDA is authorized under the act to enter into an agreement to commission other agency officials, including USDA officials, to carry out inspections on its behalf—for FDA-regulated foods. It also makes it clear that USDA and FDA inspections vary depending on whether the product is a USDA- or FDA- regulated food product. USDA and FDA are not making better use of each other’s inspection resources, authors say. The agreement was to reduce overlap and duplication of effort, they say. Depending on the type and layout of the inspection facilities, the amount of overlap can be much higher, they write. The authors conclude that the agreement has not been maximized to improve public health protection, they add. It was signed after the 2003 discovery of a cow infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) USDA appears to have misinterpreted the focus of this report, and we disagree with USDA’s characterization. This report examines overlapping activities rather than the regulatory framework that allows these activities. While we recognize that the agencies operate under different authorities, the activities they perform under these authorities are similar in nature, leading us to question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, activities. The report contains a clear and accurate acknowledgment that the agency operate under a statutory framework that gives them different authorities. agencies’ split jurisdiction, they are each responsible for inspecting different food products at jointly regulated facilities. As a result, both agencies send inspectors into these facilities—USDA on a daily basis and FDA less regularly. USDA maintains a daily presence at hundreds of these facilities, FDA could make a significant savings by not sending inspectors there as often. We agree with USDA that the number of jointly regulated establishments may be a relatively small portion of all regulated food establishments, but USDA and FDA had great difficulty identifying the current number. The magnitude of potential savings is difficult to calculate. develop consumer guidance on chemical food contaminants such as pesticides, dioxin, and mercury. In some cases, the agencies collaborate in the early stages of rulemaking. For example, USDA and FDA participated in a joint Listeria monocytogenes (listeria) risk analysis of ready-to-eat foods. But the agencies will promulgate separate listeria rules for the products under their jurisdiction. The principal food safety agencies have entered into 71 interagency agreements to coordinate the full range of their food safety activities. Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere identify and inventory all active interagency food safety-related evaluate the need for these agreements and, where necessary, update the agreements. We provided USDA, HHS, EPA, and NOAA with a draft of this report for their review and comment. USDA expressed serious reservations about the report, asserting that it oversimplifies food safety regulatory functions within USDA and EPA. We received written comments on the report and its recommendations from USDA and HHS. EPA provided minor technical comments. The agencies’ food safety authorities stem from 30 principal laws related to food safety. As a result of this division of responsibility, the federal food safety system is fragmented. Both USDA and FDA inspect food-processing facilities that produce foods under the regulatory responsibility of each agency, referred to as dual jurisdiction establishments (DJE) DJEs are those that manufacture or process food products that contain ingredients regulated by more than one federal agency. The frequency of their inspections varies, but generally, USDA inspectors have a more regular presence at DJEs. To obtain the views of regulated industry and other stakeholders regarding opportunities to reduce overlap by consolidating federal food safety functions, we contacted a total of 35 stakeholders from food industry associations, food manufacturers, consumer groups, and academic experts. We conducted our review from May 2004 through March 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We asked agencies within USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS to provide all expenditures and staffing levels, in FTEs, for each facility. In selecting which food manufacturers to interview, we used Food Processing’s Top 100 Companies to identify the largest food manufacturers. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS are involved in key program functions related to food safety. Examples of activities include inspecting domestic food-processing facilities and imported food items at U.S. ports of entry. Industry associations, food- processing companies, consumer groups, and academic experts disagree on the significance of overlapping activities. Most of these stakeholders agree that the laws and regulations governing the system should be modernized so that science and technological advancements can be used to more effectively and efficiently control current and emerging food safety issues. The majority of stakeholders we contacted said they believed that the federal food safety system needs to be modernized. The quality assurance manager at a dual jurisdiction establishment with whom we spoke said he liked having a “second pair of eyes” inspecting the facilities for food safety. The company produces smoked salmon, a high-risk food, and the manager noted that having inspections by FDA and NMFS helps to ensure that products are safe and of high quality. It is unclear what direction this modernization will take. Because of their split jurisdiction, each agency is responsible for inspecting different food products at these facilities. The agencies’ inspections have common key elements, including verifying the facilities’ compliance with sanitation standards and good manufacturing practices. Figure 5 summarizes some of the common elements of USDA and FDA inspections. At jointly regulated facilities, USDA and of paperwork for each food that the company processes in order to meet USDA and FAA HACCP and sanitation requirements.and poultry. If the facility also produces canned soups containing beans or seafood, FDA inspects it every 1 to 5 years. FDA has the authority to commission federal officials to conduct inspections at jointly regulated facilities. In 2003, FDA exercised this authority by entering into an agreement with the Department of Agriculture. USDA inspectors have no authority to inspect FDA-regulated products, although USDA inspectors are present at these ports more often than FDA inspectors. As a result, some FDA- regulated products may remain at the facility for some time awaiting inspection. The agencies are not leveraging inspection resources atThese ports. USDA officials told us that FDA- unregulated, imported foods are sometimes stored in USDA- approved inspection facilities. FDA regulates an egg farm as a “food factory” within its area of jurisdiction. USDA regulates plants that process eggs into products such as powdered eggs. FDA’s inspections place more responsibility for food safety on the company, a plant manager says. The most effective inspection strategy would be to combine elements of both agencies’ inspections into a single inspection program, the authors say. They say this would be the most cost-effective way to ensure food safety in the U.S. Safety of food and therefore are not significant. Other stakeholders, including the U.S. Tuna Foundation and the American Meat Institute, reported that they do not think the federal agencies’ programs overlap because USDA and FDA have specific, defined areas of responsibility for their industries. The U.s. Poultry and Egg Association added that the regulatory delineations do not always make sense, citing the split jurisdiction between USDA and FAA over the regulation of eggs. The USDA inspects fruits and vegetables to be included in school lunches; and the companies, already subject to FDA inspections, incur additional. conduct risk assessments of foodborne pathogens that can contaminate food products under their respective jurisdictions. The agencies also conduct joint risk assessments when addressing the same pathogen or the same food product. In the case of eggs, regulatory responsibility shifts as eggs make their way from the farm to the table. In 2004, FDA issued a proposed rule that would require shell egg producers to implement measures to help prevent salmonella from contaminating eggs on the farm. However, the agencies have not issued a joint rule to help eliminate foodborne illnesses caused by salmonellas in eggs. USDA and FDA developed the “Fight Bac’ program to educate the public about safe food handling. FDA and EPA issued a joint consumer advisory about mercury in fish and shellfish for the first time in 2004. However, the joint advisory recommends different consumption levels, depending on whether the mercury is in the fish or the shellfish. and industry representatives to their consumer hotline about FDA-regulated food products. These agencies have made some efforts to reduce overlaps in their consumer education activities. Joint advisory recommends different consumption levels, depending on whether the fish is commercially caught (regulated by FDA) or recreationally caught. EPA said that the consumption guidance differs due to different mercury levels in recreationally and commercially caught fish. For fish purchased from a store, the guidance recommends up to 12 ounces per week. However, if the fish was caught recreationally, EPA recommends that women consume up to 6 ounces perweek. The FDA and USDA engage in rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes. Center for Toxicological Research, and Office of Regulatory Affairs provided data. EPA’s Office of Pesticide Prevention, Office of Water, as well as the NMFS’S Seafood Inspection Program also provided information. To assess the reliability of the staffing and expenditure data, we questioned knowledgeable agency officials and reviewed existing documentation regarding the data and the systems that produced them. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of identifying overlaps, and contacted agency officials to determine what activities were linked to the expenditure and staffing. NMFS to provide all expenditures and staffing levels, in FTEs, related to food safety activities they conducted in fiscal year 2003. As table 3 shows, inspection and enforcement-related spending accounts for most of these expenditures. Most agencies were able to identify expenditures and. staffing levels related to inspection and. enforcement, research, risk assessment, education and. outreach, and monitoring and surveillance. Many were unable to provide expenditures linked to rulemaking and. standard setting, food security, and administration. determine what activities were linked to the expenditure and staffing data. We categorized expenditures and staffing and asked agency officials if they considered our categorizations to be appropriate. We adjusted our categorization when agency officials told us it was inaccurate. In some cases, the agencies’ preferred categorization of the same activity varied. For example, FDA considered inspector training as an education/outreach activity, whereas USDA considered it an inspection- related activity. These discrepancies are noted in appendix II. After we categorized the budget and staffing level data, we identified cases in which more than one agency performed similar activities. USDA and FDA are responsible for most federal food safety resources. In fiscal year 2003, the four federal agencies spent nearly $1.7 billion on food safety-related activities. The agencies’ expenditures vary by program function (as shown in fig. 3). For example, USDA’s inspection/enforcement expenditures made up almost three-quarters of the total spent by these agencies for that program function. In contrast, FDA accounts for more than half of the agencies' expenditures for food safety education/outreach programs. As a result of the multiple laws and regulations governing food safety, several federal agencies conduct activities that can serve overlapping, if not identical, purposes. During fiscal year 2003, the agencies spent over $245 million on these types of activities. In some cases, these efforts target the same food safety topic. For example, USDA, FDA, and EPA each develop consumer guidance on chemical food contaminants such as pesticides, and spent more than $107 million on education and outreach on food safety in 2003. safety policy decisions, development of regulations, and administration of regulatory review processes. We obtained actual expenditures and staffing level data in full- time equivalents (FTE) from the following USDA units: Agricultural Marketing Service, Agricultural Research Service, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service. We also obtained data from theFollowing FDA units: Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for Veterinary Medicine, National Center for Toxicological Research, and Office of Regulatory Affairs. FDA data to inform EPA’s risk assessments on human exposure to pesticides. In 2003, FDA analyzed 11,331 food samples for pesticides and chemical contaminants to help estimate the dietary intake of pesticide residues. According to EPA officials, USDA data are their primary source of information. However, FDA provides additional information on a greater range of foods and chemicals that EPA also uses to form its decisions. USDA and FDA also both conduct risk assessments of foodborne pathogens that can contaminate food. The overlap in data collection and analysis adds value. until 30 days from the report date. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Agriculture, the Acting Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, and the Acting Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. If you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report, I can be reached at (202) 512-3841, or robinsonr@gao,gov. FDA officials said they do not rely on NMFS inspections for two reasons. FDA officials believe that NMFS has a potential conflict of interest because companies pay NMFS for these inspections. NMFS officials disagree with FDA’s viewpoint, stating that their fee-for-service structure does not affect their ability to conduct objective inspections. If FDA were to recognize the results of NMFS inspection findings in targeting its resources, it could decrease or eliminate inspections at facilities NMFS inspectors find are in compliance with sanitation and reasons. FDA rarely provides notification of seizure actions it takes against NMFS-inspected plants. NMFS communicates its inspection results to FDA, but FDA does not share its results with NMFS. FDA has not used NMFS inspection resources under the terms of the fishery products agreement, nor has the agency used its authority under the Bioterrorism Act to commission NMFS officials. FDA officials said the agency has not yet considered using the act to enter into similar agreements with other federal agencies.  NMFS officials disagreed with FDA’s reasons for not using NMFS inspection results. FDA collects product samples for testing, it does not report test results in a timely fashion. According to the manager, NMFS inspections are preferable because the agency is able to provide test results more rapidly. The American Frozen Food Institute noted that USDA and FDA inspections and their complementary expertise provide value to the industry. on November 14, 2005, at 10:30 a.m. ET, CNN.com will feature a look at some of the activities of the FDA and NMFS in the U.S. Food Inspection Service. FDA and NMFS may meet periodically and, when appropriate, with industry to promote better communication and understanding of regulations, policy, 2005. NMFS readily provided us with a list of the firms it was inspecting when we spoke with officials during the course of our review. FDA is not implementing the agreement, but the agency has recognized the potential benefits of working with NMFS to leverage resources. The then-Commissioner of Food and Drugs proposed ways that the two agencies could enhance coordination, including commissioning NMFS inspectors. minimum training on seafood temperature controls, he could inspect this section of the plant as well. USDA officials at headquarters said the agency's inspectors are capable of taking on FDA’s inspection responsibilities at jointly regulated facilities. A 1974 agreement between FDA and NMFS recognizes the two agencies’ related responsibilities for inspecting seafood facilities and standardization activities. If either agency believes that a particular violation is occurring in several seafood- processing plants, it may request a meeting with the other agency to consider investigative steps.  NMFS currently inspects approximately 275 domestic seafood facilities that FDA also inspects. NMFS inspectors verify sanitation procedures, HACCP compliance, and good manufacturing practices. FDA is to (1) request information about NMFS-inspected products when FDA is considering an enforcement action, and (2) provide timely notification to NMFS of any products seized from NM FS-inspected plants. FDA does not take into account whether NMFS has already inspected a particular facility in its inspections. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with the report’s recommendations that pertain to NMFS. NOAA also commented that our report does a fair and thorough job of describing the food safety activities of NM FS. NOAA stated that the positions expressed in GAO's previous work continue to be germane to the issue of coordination with FDA on inspections of seafood. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly release the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. not want the company to paint its sterilization equipment because they determined that paint chips could contaminate the food. FDA inspector said it would be easier to identify sanitation problems on lightly painted equipment than on the dark-colored metal. The manager of the facility said the company had to paint and then remove the paint from equipment in order to satisfy both the USDA and FDA inspectors. In addition, at a seafood-processing plant that is inspected by both NMFS and FDA, the manager said that when FDA HHS agreed with three of the report’s seven recommendations. HHS disagreed with our recommendation regarding joint training of USDA and FDA food inspectors. HHS took no position on our recommendation for using the Bioterrorism Act authorities by more than one agency. We also disagree with HHS’S comment that our report overstates similarities in USDA and. FDA inspections vary, depending on whether the product is a USDA- or FDA- regulated food product, the report says. The training programs are vastly different. designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing resources, and enhance coordination efforts among the principal federal food safety agencies. We recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture and the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration work together to ensure the implementation of the interagency agreement. Despite HHS’s disagreement with our recommendation that the agencies examine the feasibility of establishing a joint training program for food inspectors, we continue to believe that such an examination has merit. In its comments, USDA agreed that there is merit in examining the viability of conducting joint training activities when commonalities can be found. The agreement has helped agency coordination and communication, officials say. USDA and FDA held 28 joint training sessions during the first year of the agreement’s implementation. No additional training has been provided since then, the report says. The report highlights several deficiencies, even as it gives the agencies credit for improved communication in times of crisis, such as during major recalls. inspectors are often the first agency staff to become aware of deficiencies at a plant. effective sharing of this type of information depends upon those inspectors being adequately trained. leverage inspection resources, as we are recommending. USDA’s comment that it shares the results of its overseas equivalency determinations contradicts what USDA and FDA officials told us during the course of our review. Any successful consolidation of inspectors’ training would of course require work. However, we continue to believe that there is merit in examining the feasibility of conducting joint training activities when workable commonalities can be found. Our findings are consistent with those of the Food and Drug Administration and the European Food Safety Authority. USDA spent $7.8 million, while FDA spent about $1.5 million, during fiscal year 2003 to train their food inspection personnel. FDA’s comparatively lower training costs reflect a contractual agreement with a private firm that has produced an online curriculum. This curriculum includes over 106 courses that address topics common to both USDA and FDA—ranging from foodborne pathogens, HACCP requirements, and good manufacturing practices, to courses that are specific to each agency. The training programs have a common foundation but there are differences, as each agency applies these principles to the specific foods it regulates. The USDA estimates that it spends an average of about $900,000 per year on training-related travel. A joint USDA-FDA training program could reduce duplication in developing training materials and in providing instruction. Other federal agencies have consolidated training activities that have a common purpose and similar content. For example, in 1970, the Consolidated Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (the Center) brought together the training programs of 75 federal law enforcement agencies. The Center is still in existence today and provides training for food inspectors. NMFS uses 74 of these online courses to train its own seafood inspectors. USDA officials said they are exploring the possibility of entering into an agreement with the company that developed FDA’s online curriculum. In addition to the costs associated with developing inspector training programs, USDA estimates that it costs about $1 million a year to run the training programs. The training includes courses that are specific to FDA's regulations and enforcement authorities.and good manufacturing practices, to courses that were developed for the FDA. The Center provides standardized programs for criminal investigators and uniformed police officers across the federal government. While standardizing basic training, the Center also offers specialized courses for individual agencies to address their particular needs. In addition, according to the Center, the interaction with students from other agencies promotes greater understanding of other agencies’ missions and duties, and therefore provides for a more cooperative federal law enforcement system. We identified overlapping activities in the areas of food safety research and risk assessment, consumer and food safety. Exchange of information will permit more efficient use of both agencies’ resources. The agreement was to be the first step toward allowing USDA’s FSIS inspectors to conduct FDA's inspections at DJEs. In 2000, USDA and FDA evaluated the agreement and concluded that the experience had been largely successful because the agencies learned about each other's operations. However, the evaluation also included recommendations to maximize use of federal resources without loss of inspection coverage for FSIS-regulated foods. It was developed in response to a 1997 report by the President's Food Safety Council, which recommended increased cooperation. redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole jurisdiction. FDA officials said that the savings would be somewhat offset because FDA would likely have to reimburse USDA for the costs of those inspections. USDA officials commented that their inspectors are fully occupied and that they would need to be redirected to other areas of the FDA's portfolio. FDA said that they do not currently plan to pursue this option and have not conducted any analyses of the costs or savings associated with authorizing USDA officials to conduct FDA inspections at these facilities. cooperate more effectively. However, the evaluation also included recommendations to strengthen, clarify, or otherwise improve the agreement’s implementation. The evaluation cited the potential for significant resource savings over time as the agreement is implemented. Since the 2000 evaluation, officials at USDA and FDA said they have not again monitored the agreement's effectiveness, nor have they implemented their recommendations. The agreement is expected to be in place by the end of the first quarter of this year, according to the evaluation. It is not clear when the agreement will be fully implemented. their counterpart district offices and for the agency receiving a finding of noncompliance to track and use that information in its program evaluation, work planning, and consideration of whether action against the facility is warranted. The agreement also calls for the receiving agency to inform the notifying agency of the disposition of the notification, including any actions that it plans or takes, within 30 days. We conducted site visits to three USDA and FDA field offices to obtain information related to implementation of the agreements. The site visits included USDA district offices in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Boulder, Colorado. headquarters officials identified instances of major enforcement actions. FDA investigators learned that a sample of chicken salad tested positive for listeria and alerted USDA, resulting in a voluntary recall. In a second case, USDA and FDA exchanged information on a severe rodent infestation at a DJE. The seizure of millions of pounds of USDA- and FDA-regulated product led to the recall of beef and beef products, the agency said in a statement. The FDA and USDA were able to assist each other during the recall, the statement said. FDA field inspection personnel are not routinely communicating these findings of mutual concern. Because FDA inspectors visit DJEs less frequently than USDA inspectors, we believe that FDA staff could benefit from the compliance information that USDA inspectors collect. Third, the agreement calls for the agencies to explore the feasibility of granting each other access to appropriate computer-monitoring systems. However, the inspectors with whom we spoke continue to be largely unaware of a facility’s past history of compliance with inspection rules, the authors say. work or Internet searches. USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service maintained a database that allowed it to readily identify all the agreements it was party to. The other agencies did not have such databases. EPA officials said that, without such tools, they had difficulty identifying the agreements they have entered into. Officials also said they are planning to develop an electronic system to identify and track these agreements. If developed, this system could offer one means of identifying and tracking these agreements, EPA said. again monitored the agreement’s effectiveness, nor have they implemented their own recommendations to realize resource savings. We found that the agencies are not systematically exchanging information about DJEs, as called for in the agreement. As a result, the agencies had great difficulty identifying the current number of DJEs to which this agreement pertains. In December 2004, FDA headquarters officials provided us a list of 1,451 known DJEs and the agency is verifying approximately 400 establishments that may be added to the list. largely unaware of a facility's past history of compliance with the other agency's regulations. Fourth, the agreement calls for the agencies to develop and provide appropriate training in the inspectional techniques and processes of each agency. In addition, the 2000 evaluation found that more training was needed, particularly at the field level, to achieve the results of the agreement. Although the agreement was signed in 2000, it has not yet been implemented in the U.S. because of a lack of congressional support. on inspection findings between agencies’ inspection personnel. Lack of a system to track and exchange information when each agency finds instances of noncompliance. Agency efforts to develop and provide training on each other’s inspection techniques and processes did not continue past the first year of the agreement. We continue to believe that the stated purpose of. the agreement—to facilitate an exchange of information permitting more efficient use of. both agencies' resources—has not been maximized. We also found that the agencies' efforts to. develop and provided training onEach other”s inspection methods and processes didn’t continue after the first. year. agreements have ceased to exist because of internal reorganizations. Agencies may not be actively monitoring the status and relevance of these agreements. Some agreements have not been updated to account for changes in a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. For example, NMFS and FDA on education programs to assist livestock and poultry producers in using animal drugs has not been modified to reflect the fact that USDA’S Science and Education Administration no longer exists. The agreement was signed in 1978. better implemented. We disagree that the report does not identify the distinct difference between FDA interagency agreements and memoranda of understanding. The report includes a footnote to indicate that FDA makes a distinction, which the other agencies do not. The footnote explains that, according to FDA, FDA memoranda. of understanding do not provide for exchanges of funds. FDA refers to agreements, while the report refers to memoranda, which are not interagency. agreements but are part of the same process. We acknowledge that, as used in our report, the term interagency agreement refers generally to Memoranda of Understanding, memoranda Of Agreement, and inter Agency Agreements. If developed, this system could offer one means of tracking and managing information related to, and contained in, interagency agreements. The weaknesses in tracking agreements may also affect the agencies’ ability to determine whether these agreements are still needed and whether specific provisions are still in effect. About one-third of the agreements we identified were created decades ago and may no longer be relevant to current needs. Technological and scientific advances have made some provisions of these agreements obsolete. Some agencies that were party to the agreements have ceased to exist. position on our recommendation for using the Bioterrorism Act authorities. HHS partially concurred with two other recommendations dealing with the implementation of two interagency agreements. EPA did not provide official comments, but it provided minor technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with our recommendation on the use of the Bipartisan Policy Center’s information technology resources. NOAA also provided technical comments which we incorporated in our report, as appropriate, and our detailed response is contained in appendix VI. Of the 71 interagency agreements we identified, the largest proportion (43 percent) reflect the agencies agreement to increase cooperation on inspection and enforcement activities. Other agreements address activities such as education/outreach, food security, and monitoring/surveillance related to food safety and quality. 24 agreements specifically highlight the need to reduce duplication of effort by clarifying responsibilities, reducing overlaps, and/or making efficient and effective use of resources. In some instances, the agencies entered into multiple agreements to coordinate and ensure the safety of a single type of food. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS do not have adequate mechanisms to track interagency food safety agreements. Agency officials did not agree on the number of food safety-related agreements they have entered into. Only 7 of the 71 agreements that we ultimately compiled were identified by all signatory agencies. Forty-one additional agreements were identified to us by only one of the multiple signatories. In addition, we found three agreements—through our prior work or Internet searches—that none of the agencies had identified. identified seven agreements that focus on seafood inspection and enforcement activities. Signatories to one or more of these agreements include USDA, FDA, NMFS, the Department of Defense, and the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference. Agency officials also noted that they informally cooperate and a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. To strengthen management controls and maximize the effectiveness of interagency agreements, we recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere identify and inventory all active agreements. In 1999, USDA and FDA signed an interagency agreement to facilitate the exchange of information about food-processing facilities that they both inspect. The agreement stated that the exchange will permit more efficient use of agency resources. We categorize the agreements according to primary program function. We also independently categorized the agreements using information from their introduction and/or background to ensure consistent categorization across the agencies. If the agencies’ categorization differed with ours, we considered their rationale and changed the categorization as appropriate. authorizing FDA to commission other agencies’ officials to conduct FDA’s inspection activities. Other avenues are open to the agencies as well. For example, the two interagency agreements that we examined in detail, could address problems in duplicative inspections if they were more effectively implemented. We are making seven recommendations designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing agreements and make the system more efficient and effective. For more information, go to FDA.gov/Inspections.

ROUGE-1: 73.24, ROUGE-2: 66.27, ROUGE-L: 19.38
BERTScore: 58.02

==============================================
==================== [88/100] ====================
Summary:
OMB M-04-04, E-Authentication Guidance for Federal Agencies, addresses federal government services accomplished using the Internet, instead of on paper. This guidance established four levels of identity assurance for electronic transactions requiring authentication. Each level describes the agency’s degree of certainty that a user has presented an identifier that refers to his or her identity. NIST Special Publication 800-63-2, Electronic Authentication Guideline, provides technical guidelines for federal agencies implementing electronic authentication. Successful authentication occurs when an individual proves through the means of authentication that he or she possesses and controls the token. The cryptographic methods used at this level may still allow someone with malicious intent to intercept the transmission of a password through eavesdropping and crack it using a dictionary attack. Approved cryptographic methods should be strong enough to protect against impersonation of the verifying entity. Level 4: Is intended to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance, requiring at least two authentication factors. It would not allow the type of eavesdropping attack that is possible at Level 1. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from the government. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. “debilitating impact” systems; developing, issuing, and overseeing the implementation of binding operational directives to agencies. operating the federal information security incident center (the U.S Computer Emergency Readiness Team or US-CERT); deploying technology to continuously diagnose and mitigate threats. In May 2015 DHS issued its first directive, which required all departments and agencies to review and mitigate all critical vulnerabilities on their Internet-facing systems. DHS identifies these critical vulnerabilities in the form of “vulnerabilities’ on the Internet. all critical vulnerabilities on their Internet-facing systems. DHS identifies these vulnerabilities using scanning tools and reports the results to agencies on a weekly basis. Agencies are then required to mitigate the DHS-identified vulnerabilities within 30 days of the report. DHS has also supplied agencies with tools and technologies to assist in protecting against cyber threats and vulnerabilities. For example: Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation Program: Since fiscal year 2013, DHS has provided agencies with the opportunity to use a suite of tools and capabilities. Risks to cyber-based assets can originate from unintentional or intentional threats. Unintentional threats can be caused by natural disasters, defective computer or network equipment, software coding errors, and the actions of careless or poorly trained employees. Intentional threats include targeted and untargeted attacks from criminal groups, hackers, disgruntled employees, foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare, and terrorists. These adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities, willingness to act, and motives. These threat sources make use of various techniques—or exploits—that may adversely affect federal information. various techniques—or exploits—that may adversely affect federal information, computers, software, networks, and operations. These exploits are carried out through various conduits, including websites, e-mails, wireless and cellular communications, Internet protocols, portable media, and social media. Further, adversaries can leverage common computer software programs as a means by which to deliver a threat by embedding exploits within software files that can be activated when a user opens a file within its corresponding program. The number of information security incidents affecting systems supporting the federal government is increasing. the opportunity to use a suite of tools and capabilities to identify cybersecurity risks on an ongoing basis. National Cybersecurity Protection System: NCPS is an integrated system-of-systems intended to deliver a range of capabilities for intrusion detection, intrusion prevention, analytics, and information sharing. When deployed on an agency’s connection to the Internet, the system monitors inbound and outbound traffic for malicious activity. In summary, while IRS has made progress in implementing information security controls, it needs to continue to address weaknesses in the system. benefits, and risks of its authentication options. IRS officials told us that this office plans to complete a strategic plan for taxpayer authentication across the agency in September 2016. Under FISMA, the Director of OMB is responsible for developing and overseeing the implementation of policies, principles, standards, and regulations. Until it completes these steps, IRS will lack key information to make decisions about whether and how much to invest in authentication options, officials said. The IRS will not be able to make a decision until it has these steps completed. benefits, and risks of alternatives for better authenticating taxpayers who access its systems. strengthening the security posture of IRS—and other agencies— also depends on the key roles played by OMB, NIST, and DHS in providing oversight and guidance from a government-wide perspective. I would be happy to answer any questions you have. If you have any questions regarding this statement, please contact Gregory C. Wilshusen at (202) 512-6244 or wilshuseng@gao.gov. Federal law gives OMB the power of enforcement and accountability related to evaluating agencies’ management of their information resources. OMB is empowered to recommend reductions or increases in an agency’s budget and restrict the availability of funds for information resources, among other things. In fiscal year 2015, OMB established the OMB Cyber and National Security Unit (OMB Cyber) within the Office of the Secretary of the Treasury. More details on OMB's budgeting and accountability powers are below. National Security Unit (OMB Cyber) within the Office of the Federal Chief Information Officer. This unit is responsible for strengthening federal cybersecurity through oversight of agency and government-wide programs. OMB has also established the “CyberStat Review” process, which involves evidence-based meetings led by OMB. As required by FISMA, OMB reports annually to Congress on the effectiveness of the CyberStat Review process. The process aims to ensure agencies are accountable for their cybersecurity posture, while assisting them in developing targeted, tactical actions. Federal agencies are to develop, document, and implement an agency-wide information security program. The head of each agency is responsible for ensuring that senior agency officials carry out their information security responsibilities. The act also assigned OMB and the Department of Homeland information security incidents, and guidelines for identifying an information system as a national security system. OMB reports annually to Congress on the effectiveness of information security policies and practices at executive branch agencies during the preceding year and a summary of evaluations conducted by agency inspectors general. The act also assigned OMB and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) oversight responsibilities to assist agencies in effectively implementing information security protections. NIST is responsible for developing standards and guidelines that include minimum information security requirements. IRS's mission is to provide America’s taxpayers top-quality service by helping them to understand and meet their tax responsibilities and to enforce the law with integrity and fairness to all. In carrying out its mission, IRS relies extensively on computerized information systems, which it must effectively secure. to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance, requiring the proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol. At this level in-person identity proofing is required. It is otherwise similar to Level 3, except with stronger cryptographic methods in place. Federal law also gives OMB and DHS responsibility and authority for oversight of operational aspects of federal information security. In particular, the OMB Director is charged with overseeing and enforcing agency compliance with information security requirements by taking certain actions authorized by relevant federal law. developing and overseeing the implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines on information security in federal agencies. The director is also responsible for coordinating the development of standards and guidelines by NIST. For its part, NIST is responsible under FISMA for developing security standards for agencies. NIST, Federal Information Processing Standard 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems, requires agencies to categorize their information systems as low-impact, moderate-impact or high-impact. process for selecting the security controls necessary to satisfy these requirements. NIST Special Publication 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, provides a catalog of security and privacy controls for federal information systems and organizations. OMB and NIST also have provided guidance to agencies on procedures for authenticating users to federal systems and websites, including the following: OMB M-15-13, Policy to Require Secure Connections across Federal Websites and Web Services, which requires all publicly accessible federal websites and web services to provide service through a secure connection. As technology has advanced, the federal government has become increasingly dependent on computerized information systems. Federal agencies rely on such systems to process, maintain, and report large volumes of sensitive data, such as personal information. Ineffective protection of these systems and information can impair delivery of vital services and result in loss or theft of computer resources, assets, and funds. It can also undermine of agency missions due to embarrassing incidents that erode the public’s confidence in government, the report says. to embarrassing incidents that erode the public’s confidence in government; damage to networks and equipment; and high costs for remediation. Federal law includes requirements intended to improve the protection of government information and systems. These laws include the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, which among other things, requires the head of each agency to provide information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction. The IRS collects and maintains a significant amount of personal and financial information on each U.S. taxpayer. The size and complexity of the IRS add unique operational challenges. The Commissioner of Internal Revenue has overall responsibility for ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the information and systems that support the agency and its operations. Within IRS, the senior agency official responsible for information security is the Associate CIO, who heads the IRS Information Technology department. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. IRS estimated that it prevented or recovered $22.5 billion in fraudulent IDT refunds in filing season 2014. IRS has taken steps to address IDT refund fraud; however, it remains a persistent and evolving threat. In 2015, IRS reported allocating more than 4,000 full-time equivalent staff and spending $470 million on refund fraud and IDT activities. In addition, IRS received an additional $290 million for fiscal year 2016 to improve customer service, IDT identification and prevention, and cybersecurity. the number of affected individuals as a factor when determining if affected individuals should be notified of a suspected breach. IRS did not document lessons learned from periodic analyses of its breach response efforts. We recommended that IRS correct these weaknesses, but the agency has yet to fully address them. The importance of protecting taxpayer information is further highlighted by the billions of dollars that have been lost to IDT refund fraud, which continues to be an evolving threat, the authors say. They say IRS should develop estimates of the extent of IDt refund fraud to help direct its efforts to identify fraudsters. Fraudsters continue to adapt their schemes to identify weaknesses in IDT defense. IRS officials say fraudsters can create historically consistent returns that are hard to distinguish from one filed by a legitimate taxpayer. IRS can take steps to, among other things, better authenticate the identity of taxpayers before issuing refunds. In January 2015 we reported that taxpayers can obtain an e-file PIN by providing their name, Social Security number, date of birth, address, and filing status for IRS’s e- file PIN application. IRS temporarily suspended the Identity Protection Personal Identification Number (IP PIN) service on IRS.gov. The IP PIN is a single-use identification number provided to taxpayers who are victims of identity theft (IDT) The service allowed taxpayers to retrieve their IP PINs online by passing IRS’s authentication checks. As of April 7, the online service was still suspended. The IRS stated that it was conducting further review of the IP PIN service and is looking at further strengthening the security features. integrity of transmitted or stored data. IRS policies require the use of encryption, and the agency continued to expand its use of encrypting sensitive data. Key systems we reviewed had not been configured to encrypt sensitive user authentication data. Audit and monitoring is the regular collection, review, and analysis of events on systems and networks in order to detect, respond to, and investigate unusual activity. IRS established policies and procedures for auditing and monitoring its systems and continued to enhance its capability by, for example, implementing an automated mechanism to log user activity on its access request. automated mechanism to log user activity on its access request and approval system. IRS had not established logging for two key applications used to support the transfer of financial data and access and manage taxpayer accounts. Physical security controls, such as physical access cards, limit access to an organization’s overall facility and areas housing sensitive IT components. IRS established policies for physically protecting its computer resources and physical security controls at its enterprise computer centers. The agency was not consistently maintaining key system and application audit plans. Identifying and authenticating users provides the basis for establishing accountability and controlling access to a system. IRS established policies for identification and authentication, including requiring multifactor authentication for local and network access accounts. IRS used easily guessable passwords on servers supporting key systems. IRS continued to expand the use of two- factor access to its network. But IRS had not fully implemented unique user identification and. authentication or remote electronic authentication that complies with federal requirements, the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration said. “least privilege,” granting users the least amount of rights and privileges necessary to perform their duties. IRS established policies for authorizing access to its systems, but continued to permit excessive access in some cases. For example, users were granted rights and permissions in excess of what they needed to do their jobs. Cryptography controls protect sensitive data and computer programs by rendering data unintelligible to unauthorized users and protecting the integrity of transmitted or stored data. IRS policies require the use of encryption to protect data. incidents reported by federal agencies to the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) increased from 5,503 in fiscal year 2006 to 67,168 in 2014. According to OMB, agencies reported 77,183 incidents in fiscalyear 2015. For fiscal year 2015, OMB reported that federal agencies spent about $13.1 billion on cybersecurity, and agencies budgeted about $14 billion for cybersecurity for fiscal year 2016. Similarly, the number of incidents involving PII reported byFederal agencies has more than doubled in recent years. budgeted about $14 billion for cybersecurity for fiscal year 2016. This amount may increase significantly, as the president’s fiscal year 2017 budget proposes investing over $19 billion in resources for cybersecurity. Cyber incidents can adversely affect national security, damage public health and safety, and compromise sensitive information. In June 2015, the Commissioner of the IRS testified that unauthorized third parties had gained access to taxpayer information from its Get Transcript application. According to officials, criminals used taxpayer- specific data acquired from non-agency sources to gain access. During fiscal year 2015, IRS collected more than $3.3 trillion; processed more than 243 million tax returns and other forms. IRS employs about 90,000 people in its Washington, D.C., headquarters and at more than 550 offices in all 50 states, U.S. territories, and some embassies and consulates. To manage its data and information, the agency operates two enterprise computing centers. It also collects and maintains a significant amount of personal and financial data for the collection of taxes. used taxpayer- specific data acquired from non-agency sources to gain unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax accounts. These data included Social Security information, dates of birth, and street addresses. In an August 2015 update, IRS reported this number to be about 114,000. In a February 2016 update, the agency reported that an additional 390,000 accounts had been accessed. The online Get Transcript service has been unavailable since May 2015. In March 2016, IRS stated that as part of its ongoing addition to the 49 outstanding recommendations from previous audits—will help IRS improve its controls for identifying and authenticating users. Table 1 below provides the number of our prior recommendations to IRS that were not implemented at the beginning of our fiscal year 2015 audit. How many were resolved by the end of the audit, new recommendations, and the total number of outstanding recommendations at the start of the fiscal year 2016 audit are listed in the bottom of the page. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. recommendations, and the total number of outstanding recommendations at the conclusion of the audit. In commenting on drafts of the reports presenting the results of our fiscal year 2015 audit, the IRS Commissioner stated that while the agency agreed with our new recommendations, it will review them to ensure that its actions include sustainable fixes. We have also previously reported that IRS can take steps to improve its response to data breaches involving the inappropriate disclosure—or potential disclosure—of personally identifiable information. In December 2013 we reported a dedicated guard force at each of its computer centers. The agency had yet to address weaknesses in its review of access lists for both employees and visitors to sensitive areas. IRS also had weaknesses in configuration management controls, which are intended to prevent unauthorized changes to information system resources. It did not, for example, ensure security patch updates were applied in a timely manner to the agency's IT systems, the report said. The IRS developed policies for managing the configuration of its IT systems and improved some configuration controls. governance of IRS and therefore represented a significant deficiency in IRS’s internal control over financial reporting systems as of September 30, 2015. To assist IRS in fully implementing its agency-wide information security program, we made two new recommendations to more effectively implement security-related policies and plans. We made 43 technical recommendations in a separate report with limited distribution to address 26 new weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. Implementing these recommendations—in addition to the 49 outstanding recommendations from previous audits—will help. backup procedures. The agency established a comprehensive framework for its program, including assessing risk for its systems. However, IRS had not updated key mainframe policies and procedures to address issues such as comprehensively auditing and monitoring access. In addition, the agency had not fully mitigated the risk of unauthorized access to the agency’s mainframe systems, the report says. It says IRS had documented and tested contingency plans for its system and improved continuity of operations controls for several systems. Nevertheless, the control weaknesses can be attributed in part to IRS's inconsistent implementation of elements of its agency-wide information security program. monitoring access. The agency had not fully mitigated previously identified deficiencies or ensured that its corrective actions were effective. IRS told us it had completed corrective actions for 28 of our prior recommendations; however, we determined that 9 of these had not been effectively implemented. The collective effect of the deficiencies in information security from prior years that continued to exist in fiscal year 2015, along with the new deficiencies we identified, are serious enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance of IRS and therefore represented a significant deficiency in IRS governance. In December 2013 we reported on the extent to which data breach policies at eight agencies, including IRS, adhered to requirements and guidance set forth by OMB and NIST. While the agencies in our review generally had policies and procedures in place that reflected the major elements of an effective data breach response program, implementation of these policies was not consistent. With respect to IRS, we determined that its policies and Procedures generally reflected key practices, although the agency did not require considering the number of affected individuals as a factor when determining disclosure. The IRS needs to continue to address weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. IRS also needs to assess the costs, benefits, and risks of alternatives for better authenticating taxpayers who are at risk. Fully implementing key elements of a breach response program will help ensure that when breaches of sensitive data do occur, their impact on affected individuals will be minimized. The risks IRS is exposed to have been illustrated by recent incidents involving public-facing applications, highlighting the importance of securing systems that contain sensitive taxpayer and financial data. security patch updates were applied in a timely manner to databases supporting two key systems we reviewed, including a patch that had been available since August 2012. IRS had established policies for developing contingency plans for its information systems and for testing those plans, as well as for implementing and enforcing backup procedures. The agency had documented and tested contingency plans and backup procedures, the review found. The review also found that the IRS had implemented and enforced backup procedures as required by law, and that information resources were protected.

ROUGE-1: 82.75, ROUGE-2: 73.89, ROUGE-L: 24.02
BERTScore: 52.70

==============================================
==================== [89/100] ====================
Summary:
Baghdad owed Moscow $7-$8billion for Soviet-era arms sales during the Iran-Iraq War. Adjusted for inflation, this debt may total $10-12 billiontoday. Russian oil companies have contracts that could beworth as much as $30 billion over 20 years to develop Iraqi oil fields. In addition, Russian firms have contractsworth billions to helpmodernize Iraq's economic infrastructure. In the 1990s, Russia regularly took Iraq's side in U.N. debates over liftingsanctions. assessment. Russia's economic interests in Iraq will receive due consideration. However, Iraq owes money to manycountries. Its debtto Russia ought not be put in a special category in preference to all others. U.S. oil companies, among others,have been shut out ofIraq for years. Why should Russian firms be guaranteed a special privileged place in post-Saddam Iraq, possiblyat the expense ofU.S.-based firms? Contrary to persistent Russian belief, the United States does not control the price of oil. firms have contractsworth billions to helpmodernize Iraq's economic infrastructure. In August 2002, Iraq announced that Russian firms would receivecontracts worth $40billion over 5 years. Another Russian interest is the price of oil. In 2000,Russia's oil exports earned $25.3 billion. The price ofoil peaked near $40per barrel ($/bbl) in early March 2003. Russia profits greatly from high oil prices, the biggest single factor behindRussian economicgrowth today. But Russian leaders don't want to see the country lose its oil wealth. reassessed its Iraq policy. Iraq's announcement (August 16, 2002) of the $40 billion agreement for Russian firms to modernize Iraq'sinfrastructure may have been an attempt to ensure Russian political support. However, in December 2002, Iraqi authorities cancelled a $3.7billion contract with Lukoil, Russia's largest oil company to develop the huge West Qurna oil. (5) These discussions werereported in the Russian and U.S. press and undoubtedly were detected in Baghdad. Most discussions of Russian interests in Iraq focus on economic factors. Moscow has cultivated friendly relations with Baghdad since the 1960s. U.S.R. was Saddam's main arms supplier during Iraq's 1980-1988 war with Iran. Russia stillperceives itself ashaving strategic interests and an historic role in that region and does not want to be seen as betraying a long-timefriend. Back to Mail Online home. Backto the page you came from. Back To The page you come from. largest oil company to develop the huge West Qurna oil field. Many analysts viewed this asretaliation againstLukoil, whose CEO, Vagit Alekperov, reportedly held discussions with U.S. Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham. Moscow can also be seen trying to balance its interest in preserving a major role for itself in a multi-polar world in cooperation withFrance, Germany, and China, on one hand, against its desire to avoid conflict with the United States on an issueWashington views as vital. Russian leaders fear that a post-Saddam Iraq mightmaximize its oil output, dramatically driving down the price of oil. A sharper price drop, below $18/bbl, would severely impact Moscow's ability to pay salaries and pensions and to fund its already meagersocial expenditures. With a Duma (lower legislative chamber) election in December 2003 and Putin expected to seek reelection in March 2004, such adevelopment could be in jeopardy. Some analysts estimated that a $6/ bbl fall couldcut Russia's projected economic growth in 2003 in half. as the majority of the national security establishment were hostile to the prospect of a U.S.war in Iraq. Over90% of Russians also strongly opposed the war. Putin may feel that he cannot appear completely to ignore the opinions of hisgenerals and diplomats, the political establishment, and the voters. By early April, the demonstration - yet again - of America's unrivaled military capability must have been very disturbing to manyRussians, especially in view of Moscow's miserable experiences in Chechnya. Russia may have an interest inprinciple in opposing "unilateral" U.S. military action in Iraq. Putin does not seek to project Russia into theforefront of ananti-American coalition. He seeks, in cooperation with traditional U.s. allies France and Germany as well as withRussian partnerssuch as China. Against Russia's economic interests in Iraq and its interest in restraining American global domination, is the strategic decision Putinmade in 2001 to reorient Russia. The decision to change the way Russia sees the world was made in 2001. domination, is the strategic decision Putinmade in 2001 to reorient Russian foreign and defense policy toward broad cooperation with the United States. Putin sees Russia'seconomic reconstruction and revitalization proceeding from its integration in the global economic system dominated by the advancedindustrial democracies. Putin therefore shifted Russian national security policy toward integration with the Westand cooperation withthe United States in 2003. Most observers believe thisremains the basis of Putin's nationalSecurity policy. By February 2003, Russian experts concluded that war in Iraq was virtually inevitable and Russia began. Many observers believe that Russian policy is also motivated by a desire to restrain U.S. global domination. The idea of a multi-polar world not totallydominated by asingle "hyper-power" still has strong appeal in Russia. Although Putin hasadopted a generally cooperative stance toward the United States, he does not want to be perceived at home as anAmerican "vassal"nor to give the Bush Administration a free pass on its foreign policy. (2) Such adevelopment is dreaded in the Kremlin and Putin is expected to seek reelection in March 2004. Russian public opinion overwhelminglyopposed whatmost Russians saw as U.S. aggression. There were large anti-war rallies in major cities and spontaneousmanifestations ofanti-Americanism. InRussia, however,the Kremlin exercises very strong influence over the media, especially TV. "There is something slightly alarming in Russia's new, more hard-line stance toward the United States over Iraq," observed the Moscow Times editorial page on February 27. "President Vladimir Putin changed the tone ... when hewarned of the dangers of U.s.and British warmongering," the paper said. the military to be ready to defend Russia's interests. Then ... Russia, whichhad beenstraddling both sides, jumped firmly into the French and German camp." Moscow's shift suggests two questions: why the more hard-line stance toward U.S. policy on Iraq; and has Putin irrevocably "jumpedinto the French or German camp"? There are probably multiple factors behind Putin's more hard line stance toward the United States. There is Russia's interest inpromoting a "multi-polar world" and bolstering the stature and authority of the U.N. vis-a-vis the United states. 6, the Senate unanimously approved the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty. On March 10, SenLugar introduced a bill ( S. 580 ) to exempt Russia from the provisions of the Jackson-Vanik amendment. None of thesemoves are directly related to Iraq, except perhaps in their timing. U.S. Ambassador to Russia Alexander Vershbow reportedly toldRussian reporters on March 12 that a Russian veto of the U.s.-backed Security Council resolution on Iraq woulddamage bilateralrelations. domestically popularopposition to theUnited States against the costs of incurring the enmity of the Bush Administration. The two presidents spoke by telephone on March 18 and reportedly agreed that despitedifferences on Iraq,bilateral cooperation on other issues would be increased. On March 20, Putin criticized the U.S. attack as a"political blunder" thatcould jeopardize the international security system. Other Russian officials emphasized theimportance ofminimizing the damage in bilateral relations. 20,also said thatU.S.-Russian tension over Iraq would soon pass. The Russian Duma postponed action on the Strategic OffensiveReductions Treaty,citing the Iraq conflict. Several legislative leaders close to Putin, however, criticized this action as against Russianinterests andpredicted Russian approval of the treaty soon. (18), 20, also said that U.S-Russian tensions over Iraq will soon pass, and that the Russian government would approve the treaty in the near future. that war in Iraq was virtually inevitable and Russia began evacuating its citizens. Although Russia opposed U.S. military action, it hoped to prevent this disagreement from damaging broaderbilateral relations. On March 12, Deputy Foreign Minister Georgi Mamedov said that if war erupts, Russia "will cooperate with the UnitedStates for anearly resolution" of the conflict. "We will strive to minimize negative effects and bring the situation back topolitical and diplomaticarenas," he said. (4) interfere with thedomestic affairs of any country in order to change its regime. (15) On March10, Foreign Minister Ivanov declared that if the U.S.-backed resolutionauthorizing war was submitted to the UNSC, Russia would vote against it. Putin called the attack "a big mistake," "unjustified," and insistedthat military action be ended quickly. Russian media, like that in many other European countries, took a generallynegative attitudetoward coalition military action. and the spaceprogram as areasthat could be adversely affected by a Russian veto of the resolution. In February 2003, Putin traveled to Berlin and Parisand joined French President Chirac and German Chancellor Schroeder in a joint declaration. On March 2, Putin rejected regime change as a legitimate goal in Iraq. "[T]he international community cannot interfere with thedomestic affairs of any country in order to order to go to war," he said. He also said that Russia, France, and Germany were determined to work together to complete disarmament in Iraqpeacefully. was demonstrated in the negotiations leading up the U.N. Security Council's (UNSC)approval of Resolution1441 (November 8, 2002), in which France took the lead in pressing the United States for concessions. Many observers believed that the conclusion of Putin's balancing act would be a deal with Washington whereby Russia would agreenot to use its UNSC veto in return for U.S. guarantees of Russian economic interests in Iraq. A Russian parliamentary leader close to Putin suggested such a deal in October 2002. Premier and now leader of a liberalpolitical party, wrote that, "If the Americans and British can reassure Moscow that a future Iraqi regime will not beprejudicial toRussian economic interests, they will be better placed to secure its acquiescence" Putin sent his chief of staff, Aleksandr Voloshin,to Washington (February 24-25, 2003), where he met with the President, Secretary of State, and National Security Advisor. TheRussian press reported his trip as, "an attempt to seal concrete economic deals in return for Russia's support orabstention on theSecurity Council" U.S. sources made a similar assessment. Russian belief, the United States does not control the price of oil and cannotguarantee specificprice levels. U.S. officials reportedly suggested an informal "gentleman's agreement" to respect Russian economic interests in Iraq. (10) Russiawanted concrete, unequivocal guarantees. On February 28, 2003, the State Department designated three Chechen groups with alleged links to Al Qaeda as terroristorganizations. On March 6, the Senate unanimously approved the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty.

ROUGE-1: 85.14, ROUGE-2: 77.10, ROUGE-L: 34.11
BERTScore: 74.34

==============================================
==================== [90/100] ====================
Summary:
Federal standards for internal control specify that agencies should assess the risks the agency faces. In USPTO’s 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, the agency indicated its intent to evaluate changes to the its system for evaluating if examiners are completing office actions in the time needed. In addition to providing personnel with the right incentives for the job, internal control standards note that an agency’’ success requires providing people with theright incentives for their jobs’ ’”‘‘I’m not at all confident to somewhat confident.’ We conducted this performance audit from November 2014 to June 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. USPTO’s Manual of Patent Examining Procedure is available on its website at: http://www.uspto.org/patent-examining-procedures/manual-of-patents-examiners. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.  OPQA made changes to its review processes that should allow the office to perform about 12,000 audits in 2016. In 2015, USPTO drafted a master review form that could standardize OPQa and supervisory examiner reviews with a single, consistent approach and documentation. As of March 2016,USPTO had not made a decision on the master review.unit level, according to agency officials. The agency began using a draft version of the form in November 2015, and began to pilot the form with some supervisory patent examiners in 2016, officials said. USPTO developed a human capital strategy, its 2015-2018 People Plan, which replaced its 2011-2015 Strategic Human Capital Plan. The agency also identified the role of patent examiner as a mission- critical occupation and identified the competencies needed to fulfill that role. USPTO has a workforce with the skills required to achieve organizational goals, according to the plan. The plan is expected to be implemented by the end of the year, the agency said in a press release. The 2015- 2018 People Plan will be implemented over the course of the next three years. Internal control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. These activities are an integral part of an agency’s planning to achieve effective results and efficiently manage government resources. Because information technology changes rapidly, the internal control standards note that controls must evolve to remain effective. These standards also highlight the importance of clearly documenting internal controls. Without a documented, periodically updated strategy to manage information technology, the agency's controls will not be effective. The U.S. Patent Classification system became outdated following budget constraints in the early 2000s. USPTO partnered with EPO to create a new system to be jointly used by both offices. CPC gives examiners greater access to foreign patent literature compared to the prior system and can be expanded more easily to include new technologies, USPto officials say. The potential benefits of adopting the new classification system may be reduced as inconsistently classified patents make it more difficult for examiners to identify relevant literature. System’s usefulness to examiners depends, in part, on the consistency with which the system is applied by its users. Inconsistently applying the classification system to applications undermines its usefulness. USPTO provided examiners and classification contractors with training on how to classify applications and how to search for references using the CPC system. The agency has not identified specific reasons that account for differences between its classifications and EPO's. However, USpTO is updating its contract for the contract with EPO. USPTO is updating its contract for initial classification services to require a higher level of expertise. The agreement between USPTO and EPO that supports the CPC system commits both offices to exchange best practices on classifications and aim for a high level of consistency. As of March 2016, EPO and USPPO had not agreed upon a measure of consistency between the offices. Establishing agreement with EPO on a target of consistency and a plan for monitoring consistency would help to implement this practice. the Department concurred with our recommendations. USPTO provided additional technical comments that we incorporated, as appropriate. We also provided a draft of this report to EPO and JPO for their views and comment. EPO indicated it had no comments on the draft; JPO provided technical comments. In its written comments, the Department concurring with our recommendation to work with EPO to identify a target level of consistency for CPC decisions and develop a plan to monitor consistency. The Department noted ongoing efforts to work to develop objective metrics. USPTO should develop and periodically update a documented strategy to identify key sources of nonpatent literature for individual technology centers. To improve its monitoring with EPO and other patent offices to develop objective metrics to measure the level of consistency. If finalized, such metrics and a plan to monitor consistency could allow USPTO to more fully benefit from adopting the new CPC system. The Department concurred and stated that US PTO’s STIC analyzes nonPatent literature sources used by examiners and assesses them for incorporation into USP TO’S search system. While we did not receive evidence of such assessments, they may be a useful step. wide array of nonpatent literature sources. As of March 2016, USPTO had not established a documented strategy to identify and assess new sources. The agency does not currently have specific plans to add additional nonpatents literature sources to its new system because of its initial focus on developing parity with the existing system. In addition, as of March 2015, the agency had not determined the most optimal means of providing access to the new Patents End-to-End system. The new system can be expanded in the future to include additionalNonpatent. wide array of nonpatent literature sources. EPO’s primary search tool allows examiners to use a single interface to search through all of EPO's internal databases as well as some external databases of prior art. The system also incorporates features that make it user-friendly, such as grouping documents to avoid examiners facing dozens of copies of the same article from different sources.EPO officials identified their search engine and the large number of indexed prior art resources available within the search engine as strengths of the office. worksharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished applications at other offices. These search reports may include prior art relevant to similar applications filed with EPO. EPO and JPO incorporate specific nonpatent literature resources into their offices’ main search tools. Using classification systems to help examiners narrow their searches and find relevant patent literature even if the patent application uses inconsistent terms or is written in a foreign language.. JPO’s internal databases include JPO patent literature, some foreign patent USPTO examiners use two systems, the Examiner’s Automated Search Tool (EAST) and the Web-Based Examiner Search Tool. Examiners may access additional foreign patent documents through other web-based tools. STIC also provides subscriptions to various web- based sources of nonpatent literature. The time it takes examiners to search the large and increasing volume of nonPatent literature and the inefficiency of having to search many different sources individually may lead to less thorough searches. Patent literature consists of previously issued U.S. or foreign patents and published patent applications. Nonpatent literature can include product manuals, standards established by international organizations, textbooks, periodicals, or conference presentations. Both patent and nonpatent Literature may be written in a language other than English, referred to as foreign-language art. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners requires them to conduct a thorough prior art search and directs them to consider U.s. patents, foreign patents, and other documents. USPTO examiners we surveyed also reported difficulties obtaining relevant prior art. Difficulties obtaining certain types of prior art may influence how often patent examiners search for them. 8 of the 18 experts we interviewed suggested that examiners focus on searching patent literature and may not thoroughly search nonpatent literature. More examiners also find that foreign patents and foreign-language nonpatENT literature are difficult to obtain, compared to those that find U.S. patent literature difficult to get. According to most of the experts we interviews and examiners, we potentially missing relevantPrior art. surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art references provided by applicants. According to information from USPTO, third parties submitted prior art for less than 1 percent of the approximately 600,000 patent applications received per year since third-party submissions began in 2012. By potentially reducing the need to search for this prior art, these submissions may address challenges related to the quantity and availability of prior Art. USPto reviewed approximately 2,500 submissions of nonpatent literature prior art it received since September 2012, and found 753 unique, English- language documents. USPTO has taken steps to allow third parties to more easily monitor published applications. The agency created a subscription service, whereby users will be notified when applications are published that contain user-chosen keywords. USPTO also considered expanding use of third-party submissions of prior art by allowing examiners to use crowdsourcing to solicit such art for specific applications or topics. However, the agency decided not to pursue this option, at least in part, because the agency is uncertain about its legal authority to do so. monitoring consistency would help to implement this practice and would establish an internal control to support the reliability and usefulness of the CPC system. Since 2012, USPTO has had authority to receive submissions from third parties that may help identify potentially relevant prior art for published patent applications. This process, sometimes described as crowdsourcing, allows experts and other interested parties to share documents that they believe will aid USPto’s examination of an application. Prior art submitted by third parties can help identify prior art that is not immediately available to examiners. using keyword searches will not identify documents that use a different term. Issues with the clarity of the application make it more difficult to complete thorough prior art searches in the time allotted. Examiners may face difficulties associated with applications that have been translated from a foreign language. Issued patents and publications containing these for specific terms or concepts from an unpublished application may put the confidentiality of theApplication at risk. Examiners also requested improvements to USPTO’s current translation capabilities. For example, “translation quality is often poor, and claims routinely contain non-standard industry terms.” subscriptions to various web-based sources of nonpatent literature. USPTO’s current search tools do not provide examiners with immediate access to computer-generated translations, known as machine translations. examiners can request human and machine translation services from STIC and three contracted translation vendors that currently cover 35 languages. As of May 2015, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office had nearly 8,300 patent examiners across the eight technology centers we reviewed (see fig. 2). USPTO anticipates that a pilot system will be available to a limited number of examiners. The new system could expand upon the capabilities of a currently available system. USPTO uses the current system to perform searches for about one-tenth of the agency’s incoming applications, whereas USPto expects to use the new system for every application. The Patent Linguistic Utility Service has been in use for 20 years and has limitations that prevent it from meeting the agency's search needs. USPTO is in the process of a major, multiyear $405 million effort to upgrade its information technology tools. The new system, called Patents End-to-End, will replace nearly 20 systems currently used to search patent applications. 52 percent of examiners expect that an automated pre-examination search would make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted, according to USPTO’s Strategic Information Technology Plan for fiscal years 2015 through 2018. and interviewed USPTO officials; a group of four supervisory patent examiners; officials of the examiners’ union, the Patent Office Professional Association. We also conducted semistructured interviews with subject matter experts (experts) active in the intellectual property field and knowledgeable about the subject of prior art. We selected and interviewed 18 experts to obtain views of different stakeholder communities, including four academic experts and four patent holders from the following technology fields: chemical technologies, electrical and others. patent holders from the following technology fields: chemical technologies, electrical technologies, and mechanical technologies, based on data from USPTO. Five attorneys based on their leadership (e.g., as chairs or co-chairs) of patent-related committees or sections of various bar associations. Three nongovernmental organizations we identified during background research that had activities or publications related to patents. Two patent data experts who were listed in a 2015 US PTO analysis evaluating search technologies. In addition, we conducted a web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336. surveyed a generalizable stratified random sample of examiners, our results provide estimates for each technology center included in our study. See the related e-supplement, GAO-16-478SP, for the original survey language and more detailed results. In addition to the contact named above, Chris Murray (Assistant Director), Tind Shepper Ryen, Krista Breen Anderson, Hilary Benedict, Richard Burkard, John Delicath, Alice Feldesman, Armetha Liles, Rebecca Makar, Rob Marek, Eleni Orphanides, Kelly Rubin. Litigation Could Help Improve Patent Quality. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: Hiring Efforts Are Not Sufficient to Reduce the Patent Application Backlog. USPTO Has Made Progress in Hiring Examiners, but Challenges to Retention Remain. US PTO: Improvements Needed to Better Manage Patent Office Automation and Address Workforce Needing to Better. Manage patent office Automation. GAO-05-1008T. Washington, D.C.: September 8, 2005. will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the USPTO, the Commissioner for Patents, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or neumannj@GAo. Department of Commerce. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Examiners at the GS-14 level or above (44 percent of the examiners in the technology centers we reviewed, as shown in fig. 3) are generally primary examiners. Primary examiners may accept or reject a patent application without additional review. This level of authority is in contrast to junior examiners, whose work must first be reviewed by a primary examiner before an office action can be sent to the applicant. Some examiners are in the process of becoming primary examiner. Supervisory patent examiners are at the GS-15 level and are responsible for the day-to-day management of examiners. In addition to applying for a patent from USPTO, an inventor may also seek patent protection in other countries for the same invention by filing in multiple patent offices. Such interrelated patent applications are described as a patent family. The World Intellectual Property Organization has estimated that approximately half of all applications worldwide are repetitive filings in a patentfamily. The rest are initial filings. 2.2 million applications were filed with patent offices in the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, and Europe in 2014. EPO issues patents that cover 42 countries, most of which are member countries that are party to the European Patent Convention. Applicants may apply to national patent offices or apply through EPO for coverage in some or all of these countries. These five offices, including EPO and JPO, each receive hundreds of thousands of patent applications each year.are initial filings. According to the World Intellectual Property Organization, around 2.7 million patent applications were filing worldwide in 2014, of which 2.1 million were filed in the U.S. through EPO for coverage in some or all of these 42 countries. EPO has three official languages, one of which must be used for processing an application. These three languages are English (about 80 percent of applications), French (about 5 percent), and German (about 15 percent) EPO and JPO have about one-half and one-fifth as many examiners as USPTO, respectively. According to JPO officials, there is a limit on the number of federal employees JPO can have. EPO and JPO classify applications and patents into groups that describe specific components of the invention. Examiners may then look at other applications and patent within the same group to find similar inventions. A system that has more groups allows for finer distinctions, and prior art searches within a class will produce fewer, more focused results. According to EPO officials, this can be particularly helpful for finding documents in Asian languages that are otherwise difficult for EPO examiners to search. It facilitates searches that are less dependent on the examiner’s choice of keywords. EPO and JPO have systems to share search and examination results. The exchange of prior art searches or patent examination results among patent offices is known as worksharing. Worksharing is the main tool for addressing an increasing number of patent applications, according to foreign officials. About half of all patent applications worldwide are part of patent families filed in a multilateral forum of the five largest patent offices, the report says. The EPO says worksh sharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished patent literature. examination policies, search tools, and human capital management. In some cases, these actions are coordinated with, similar to, or could be informed by approaches taken by EPO or JPO. USPTO is collaborating with foreign patent offices to give examiners access to examination files from those offices. By allowing examiners to review prior art that examiners from other offices found useful in examining patent applications, these systems may help address the challenges related to managing the large quantity of patent applications. The agency is working with EPO on a new patent classification system. We reviewed information identifying the world’s five largest patent offices. From the list of the other four offices similar in size to USPTO, we selected the European Patent Office and the Japan Patent Office. We performed these tests on responses overall as well as conditional on the examiners’ technology center. We conducted site visits with EPO and JPO, during which we interviewed officials from these offices and reviewed documents they produced. The study was published in the online edition of the journal Science.literature. patent applications worldwide are part of patent families filed in multiple offices. To gain patent protection in multiple countries, inventors may file applications for the same invention in several different offices. Because the underlying invention is the same, the search and examination results at one office may be useful to examiners in another office. Worksharing can ameliorate the challenges posed by the quantity of potential prior art that examiners must search and the time pressure examiners face by allowing patent offices to leverage others’ work and knowledge. results from foreign patent offices available to examiners and the public. One system, the Common Citation Document, provides bibliographic information of patent and nonpatent prior art citations. Another system, Global Dossier, provides access to the examination history of applications, such as office actions and other correspondence. USPTO examiners gained access to Global D dossier in 2015, and have been using it since 2011, officials say. The system is free and available to the public, with no annual fee. USPTO has entered into two pilot programs to jointly examine certain applications. Applicants who file related patent applications with USPTO and either JPO or the Korean Intellectual Property Office may request to enter the pilot. These collaborative efforts could improve searches for patent and nonpatent literature in foreign languages, as examiners from multiple countries will perform searches in their native languages and share the results. The pilot programs were designed and implemented in collaboration with EPO, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. that share published information among patent offices; (2) engaged in pilot programs to collaborate with other offices during search and examination of related patent applications; and (3) adopted a new, joint classification system with EPO. These efforts may help address several of the challenges relating to prior art and applications, including the large quantity of art available and the availability of prior art, particularly foreign patents and art written in foreign languages. According to USPTO officials, the U.S. Patent Classification system allows examiners to conduct prior art searches independent of an application's language and wording. neither completed the survey nor told us that they were no longer examiners. To adjust the sampling weight for potential nonresponse bias, we used standard weighting class adjustments based on the sampling strata and the examiners’ years of experience at USPTO. The weighted response rate was also 80 percent. In this report and in the related e-supplement, we present the survey results using the nonresponse adjusted version of the survey. We also analyzed nonresponse biases to assess whether any factors were associated with examiners' propensity to respond. e-supplement, we present the survey results using the nonresponse adjusted weights, which are generalizable to the eligible population of examiners. We analyzed the responses to the survey for all examiners, as well as responses by technology center and by the General Schedule (GS) level of the examiner. We selected three categories of GS levels because examiners at these levels have different responsibilities and authorities when examining patent applications. Most examiners below the GS-14 level or above generally may grant a patent or reject a patent application without additional review. To minimize nonresponse error, we made a variety of contacts with the sample of examiners during the survey. We used survey software in our analyses to produce appropriate estimates and confidence intervals. The programs we used to process and analyze the survey data were independently verified to ensure the accuracy of this work. In addition, from October 20 through 23, 2015, we attempted to follow up via telephone calls to all 1,102 examiners who had neither completed the survey nor told us that they were. totaling 7,825 eligible examiners. From this list, we drew our stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible USPTO patent examiners for an 80 percent response rate. Because we used a probability procedure based on random selections, our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we might have drawn. Since each sample could have provided different estimates, we quantified the sampling error and express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample’s results at a 95 percent confidence interval. In developing the survey, we worked with our survey professionals to draft questions that were clear and unbiased. Using a web-based survey provided several advantages, including allowing examiners to enter their responses into an electronic instrument that created an automatic record for each respondent. This eliminated the potential for errors that could have resulted if we had used a manual process to enter respondents’ data from paper surveys. In addition, to account for the complex sample design, we used a separate GAO survey methodologist. technology center 2100 has a 95 percent confidence interval of within +/- 18 percent of the estimate itself. For some other survey questions, we also reviewed examiners’ open- ended responses on selected topics. We selected those topics based on our interviews with experts and USPTO officials. We also selected the questions for which examiners' responses most frequently included keywords we identified for each topic.. An analyst conducted a keyword search of all responses to the selected open-ended questions. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. the keywords. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. Examiners’ responses to open-ended questions are not generalizable to other examiners. Because we did not conduct a systematic review, we do not report the exact number of examiners who provided responses on the topics we reviewed. In addition, we conducted statistical tests of association on the results of certain survey questions; all tests were independently verified to ensure their accuracy. All tests of associations were carried out. provide a range, such as “5 to 10,’ while others provided a single number for hours spent per application on prior art searches. Some examiners also provided responses that did not clearly indicate the approximate hours per application spent on priorArt searches in the past quarter. Where possible, we coded responses to reflect a range of numbers by assigning a low and a high value. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of the answers. analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of results overall, within strata, and within GS level categories. Results were not statistically different when using the low value, midpoint (average between low and high values), or high value of a range. As a result, we present results for question 3 based on the midpoint. The 95 percent confidence intervals for these results are within +/- 10 percent of the estimates themselves, except for the estimate for technology center 2100 (Computer Architecture, Software, and Information Security) is the interval that would contain the actual population value for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn. Within each stratum and overall, the confidence intervals for survey results for percentages are generally within +/- 5 percentage points. The only estimates for which the confidence interval exceed 5percentage points are certain results for the business methods stratum. In these instances, theconfidence intervals are from 5 to 6percent points. In this report, our figures containing survey results show the upper and lower bounds for estimates at the 95 percent confidence interval. the 95 percent confidence interval. For other estimates in the report, we have not provided the upper and lower bounds in the text or tables. Details for all survey results are available in the e- supplement related to this report. The quality of survey data can also be affected by nonsampling error. This includes variations in how respondents interpret questions, respondents’ willingness to offer accurate responses, nonresponse errors, and data collection and processing errors. We took several steps in developing the survey and in collecting and analyzing survey data. ensure their accuracy. All tests of association were carried out at the 5 percent level of significance and were Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) Chi- square tests of general association. The testing was carried out in SUDAAN, which is statistical software appropriate for the analysis of survey data. The null hypothesis was that there is no association between the two tested variables. When the association between two variables, conditional on a third variable, is of interest, this is referred to as the stratum-adjusted CMH test. JPO officials reported taking steps to ensure that the patents it issues are of high quality. These steps include a director quality check, consultations with other examiners, and quality audits of a sample of examinations. USPTO has taken or begun planning various actions that may help address challenges in identifying relevant prior art, but some of these actions have limitations that may have limitations. According to JPO officials, the office has randomly selected applications. The number of audits is not large enough to allow tracking of individual examiner performance. at least a master’s degree and almost all JPO examiners join the office after graduate school. At EPO, examiners must also meet a requirement that they understand English, German, and French. EPO examiners spend their first 2 years in training, alternating periods of classroom training with periods of on-the-job training. JPO officials identified the longevity of examiners as a strength, stating that examiners are well trained and have experience that may enhance the quality of patent application examinations. examiner may not have initially considered. Another EPO tool provides examiners with the results of an automated search based on the concepts and words drawn from the claims in applications. The results are in the form of a ranked list of potentially related documents, which provides a starting point for examiners before they begin a manual search. EPO and JPO have procedures to review examiners’ work before issuing or denying a patent. At EPO, applications are examined by a panel of three examiners: a first examiner, second examiner, and chair. EPO and JPO examiners use classification and keyword searches instead of more complex search tools. EPO uses some automated tools that assist in keyword-based searches or provide automated search results. One EPO tool provides recommended search terms in its three official languages to examiners, based on a database of examiners’ past searches. This tool can improve search efficiency by providing additional search terms, such as synonyms or translations, that the examiner may not have initially considered. Another EPOtool provides additional search term suggestions based on the examiner’s previous searches. USPTO does not have a process to assess and measure each technology center’s progress toward closing any gaps in examiners’ technical knowledge and skills. USPTO officials told on closing competency/skill gaps for mission-critical occupations. Without monitoring and examiners, the agency cannot ensure that it has appropriate strategies, such as training or other efforts, to close any gaps, the authors say. The 2015-2018 People Plan, however, does not include measures for monitoring progress in closing gaps. as a mission- critical occupation and identified the competencies needed for this occupation. These competencies include technical work experience/education and technical competence. USPTO defines technical competence as the ability to analyze and interpret written technical materials, rules, regulations, instructions, and reports. Specific technical competencies vary depending on the technology examined by each technology center and art unit, according to USPTA officials. The agency has further documented specific technical competency for examiners in a series of “job analysis worksheets,” which describe the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed for examiner positions. Technology center ranging from an estimated 10 percent to 34 percent of examiners. EPO and JPO use several approaches that may help their examiners address challenges in identifying prior art. These approaches include worksharing, creating and abilities needed for examiner positions. Agency officials said these were based on the hiring needs derived from a hiring model created by senior management. The extent to which examiners participated in this technical training program varied by technology center, from a low of 48 percent to a high of 74 percent. following 3 technology centers: We excluded the Designs technology center because these examiners work on design patents instead of utility patents. We excluded examiners who perform “reexamination’ work and not initial patent examinations. We then defined nine strata by technology center, with one technology center separated into two. We included examiners employed at USPTO for less than 1 year and those in a 12-month training program. We exclude examiners in the patent training academy because they are recent hires. one technology center or art unit to another during their careers. According to USPTO officials, there are also times when patent examiners are ultimately assigned to a different technology center upon completion of their initial training than the assignment given to them when they were hired. In addition, examiner attrition has increased over the past 5 years. Historically, attrition has been highest amongst examiners at USPto for less than 5 years, according to the agency’s 2015-2018 People Plan. The agency�s ability to retain experienced and high-performing employees may prove difficult with continued improvements to the economy. art search in the time allotted for applications with a subject matter in which they have knowledge of existing prior art based on their education or previous work experience. As of May 2015, approximately 39 percent of all examiners in the technology centers we reviewed had been at the agency for less than 5 years. USPTO officials told us that the agency has aimed to match new hires’ previous work experiences and educational backgrounds to technology centers. The training examiners receive may also affect their ability to maintain the technical competence they need to identify relevant prior art. As of May 2016, USPTO had not clarified the extent to which this evaluation will specifically consider the time needed for a thorough prior art search for different technologies. Without this information, the agency does not know if it is allotting examiners appropriate amounts of time to complete their work. Based on our survey, most examiners find that they do not have sufficient time for thorough prior. art searches, and many were not confident in their ability to identify the most relevant prior art without working voluntary overtime. The time allotted for each individual technology was determined when the examiner performance and production system was first created in the 1970s or when subsequent art units were added. USPTO adjusted the time allotted to examiners between fiscal years 2010 and 2012 and gave all patent examiners a total of 2.5 additional hours per application. The agency has not identified plans to assess the amount of time examiners in different technologies need to perform thorough prior art searches. The time pressures created by the system for determining allotted examination time have important evaluating if examiners are completing office actions. be allotted about 32 hours for an application related to data processing, such as database and file management. Examiners have minimum production goals, based on the time allotted, for the number of office actions they must complete. USPTO uses several different information technology systems to assist examiners in conducting prior art searches. For example, to search U.S. patent literature, examiners use two systems, the Examiner’s Automated Search and the Patent Search Engine (PSE) search in some technologies. We continue to believe that the agency should review the time allotted for all technologies, and not only those identified through feedback related to CPC. The Department concurred with our recommendation to assess whether the technical competence of examiners in each technology center matches those necessary and develop strategies to address gaps if identified. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary. In analyzing our survey results, we found that how often examiners searched for foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations, or foreign-language nonpatent literature was statistically associated with their description of the sufficiency of time they had to complete a thorough prior art search. Further, we asked examiners about overtime worked to meet their minimum production goals. A majority of examiners (an estimated 72 percent) worked voluntary/uncompensated overtime in the past 6 months to met their goals. past 6 months to meet their goals, as shown in figure 6. An estimated 30 percent of examiners worked an average of more than 10 hours of voluntary/uncompensated overtime per biweekly period. However, on the basis of our survey, an estimated 56 percent of Examiners experience no pressure to work overtime. In a 2007 report on USPTO’s efforts to hire and retain an adequate workforce, we found that an estimated 70 percent of examsiners worked voluntary/Uncompensate overtime in the previous year. Less than half of the examiners were moderately or very confident that they found the most relevant prior art during the time allotted. When they included their additional voluntary overtime, the number of examiners who were moderately and very confident increased to an estimated 69 percent. Even with the inclusion of their overtime, an estimated 23 percent remained not at all confident to somewhat confident. Federal standards for prior art search could have important implications for examiners' prior art searches. For more information, visit the U.S. National Gallery of Art. Examiners are expected to complete their examination of an application in a certain number of hours. The time allotted varies depending on factors such as the technology and the seniority of the examiner. An estimated 80 percent of examiners spent, on average, from 6 to 20 hours initially examining patent applications and completing a first office action. If examiners feel pressure to finish their examinations quickly rather than thoroughly, it could have important implications. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is a not-for-profit organization. patent application without additional review. Most examiners below the GS-14 level must have their actions reviewed by a more senior examiner. Examiners provided a variety of open-ended responses. Some respondents chose to provide a range, such as “5 to 10,” while others others said “10 to 15.” Some respondents are in the process of becoming GS-13 examiners. The survey asked examiners approximately how many hours they spent per application on prior art searches in the past quarter. other GS levels. Tables 8 through 15 provide information related to the effects of the quantity of prior art, how often examiners search for certain types of prior. art and how difficult they find it to obtain relevant art from certain types. Tables 9 and 10 show the sufficiency of examiners’ time to complete a thorough prior art search, average time examiners spent on prior art searching and each First Action on the Merits. Tables 11 and 12 show the number of times examiners encountered misclassified patent applications, and continuing education provided by USPTO. Misclassification occurs when an application is not classified into the group most closely associated with the invention. This can result in applications being routed to the wrong USPTO technology center or art unit for examination. An estimated 75 percent of examiners encountered misclassified applications sometimes, often, or always in the past quarter, and an estimated 76 percent find that the misclassification of patent applications makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted, according to our survey. The effect of unclear applications may be exacerbated by USPTO’s practice that examiners should attempt to identify all applicable grounds for rejecting a claim or claims during their first review. The practice aims to avoid unnecessary delays. In our patent quality report (GAO-16-490), we provide additional information on how the clarity of applications affects patent quality. “Issued patents and publications containing these non-standard terms also make searching in foreign collections exceptionally challenging because it is not possible to anticipate which synonyms to use.”  compact prosecution may discourage examiners from resolving any issues of clarity or ambiguity before conducting their initial searches for relevant prior art. In order to follow the compact prosecution practice, an examiner must guess what unclear claims mean in order to search for prior art related to the claims. If examiners do not have a clear understanding of the scope of the claims, they may not be able to conduct a proper search for the prior art that is relevant to the claim. Such delays could be caused by examiners waiting to continue examining an application until previously identified issues are resolved. Excessive references make it more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search. Excessive references can be particularly challenging for examiners. Applicants are generally not required to explain the relevance of the references or to point examiners to the particular portions of references that are relevant. One examiner recalled often receiving information disclosure statements from applicants with numerous prior art references, of which only a handful were relevant, according to the survey. The survey found that 88 percent of examiners sometimes, often, or always encountered applications with irrelevant references. examiners in identifying relevant prior art. Expert: Large volume of prior art available from multiple sources makes searching for relevant priorArt challenging. Expert said certain general types of prior Art are more difficult to obtain. Some relevant prior Art may require a fee to access, may not be in a text- searchable format, or may otherwise be difficult to access. The amount of patents, publications, and other nonpatent literature has grown exponentially, making it harder to find relevantPriorArt in time allotted. certain general types of prior art are more difficult to find, such as nonpatent literature overall and software-related prior art (most experts) and foreign-language prior art. Prior art related to computer technologies has also been difficult to finding, according to one expert we interviewed. Specific types of nonpatents literature that experts identified as hard to find include product documentation and summaries, product databases, and user manuals; offers for sale and public use; and information from standards-setting organizations. to most of the experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed, the clarity of applications can pose a challenge to finding relevant prior art. For example, as one expert noted, there often are no standard terms to describe technologies. Inconsistent terminology can make it more difficult for examiners to findrelevant prior art because searching for one term using keyword searches is one common method of searching for prior art, experts say. According to four of theExperts we interviewed, the absence of standard terms is particularly a challenge for software-related applications. our survey. On the basis of survey responses from our random probability sample of examiners, we found that some examiners find that the CPC classifications make it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. In response to an open- ended survey question, one examiner described their difficulty, saying that proper classification of prior art is essential to quality and efficiency of examination. Many CPC categories still contain large amounts of prior Art despite having more detailed classification methods. commonly known in this field but may not be found by searching a public database. One expert suggested that prior art from before the mid-1970s is difficult to find because patents issued before then have not been fully digitized. This is a particularly challenging issue for examiners in the mechanical technology centers because those examiners tend to use older art more often than other examiners. USPTO examiners we surveyed also reported difficulties obtaining prior art in the 1990s and early 2000s. to subsequently use as prior art in later examinations. This is because misclassified applications may be difficult to find when examiners search for patent literature using technology-specific patent classification categories. Ensuring examiners’ technical competence. According to most experts we interviewed, ensuring that examiners have sufficient and appropriate technical backgrounds, knowledge, or skills for conducting thorough prior art searches is also a challenge. The role of patent examiner is a difficult one that can take years to learn, and examiners with less education or work experience, or who are not abreast of advances in a particular technology area. 45 percent of all examiners in the eight technology centers we reviewed find that the large quantity of art makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. Fewer examiners—34 percent—find that the quantity makes it slightly or much easier. responses varied among technology centers, as shown in appendix III. Examiners we surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art.art in theTime allotted. Amount and relevanceof prior art cited by applicants. Time pressures may reduce examiners’ ability to conduct thorough prior art searches. USPTO’s system for allotting an expected amount of time for examiners to complete an examination. One expert noted that the time examiners are allotted decreases as they become more experienced. As figure 5 shows, we estimate on the basis of our survey that 67 percent of examiners find they have somewhat or much less time than needed to complete thoroughPrior art searches given a typical workload. Our survey also found that examiners' perception of the sufficiency of time varies by technology center. by technology center, with one technology center separated into two strata, as described in table 6. Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License and Review technology center includes a diverse set of technologies. In our review, we separated the art units—subunits of a technology center—focused on electronic commerce and business methods. This resulted in nine strata with a target survey population totaling 7,825 eligible examiners. From this list, we drew our technology center. Experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed had mixed opinions on USPTO’s search tools. Of the 18 experts, 10 agreed that the search tools and capabilities available to examiners create challenges to conducting thorough prior art searches. Expert suggested that US PTO needs more comprehensive databases of prior art. We estimate that 82 percent of examiners find it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough priorArt search in the time allotted for applications with a definition of what constitutes a thoroughPriorArt search. make prior art searches somewhat or much easier, including a search engine that can automatically search for concepts and synonyms related to the search terms entered by the examiner. In addition, a group of four supervisory patent examiners we interviewed said that it would be more efficient to search for prior art in one tool, with a single search method that covered multiple sources of prior art, including the internet. We interviewed patent examiner who said they would like to see a tool that could search for multiple sources, without keyword entry. The Department said it would ensure adequate search data are collected to assess the quality of searches at the technology center level. The Department would investigate using audits and reviews to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches over time. USPTO’s recent effort to improve the consistency of these reviews is an important step to address this issue, the Department said in its written comments to the Department of the Treasury. It added that a great deal of information on examiners' prior art searched is potentially available from records and reviews. examiner’s search. If a reviewer finds that the examiner should have made a rejection but did not, the form asks the reviewer to identify the source of prior art needed for the missed rejection. The March 2016 draft of the form does not include, as an October 2015 draft we reviewed did, questions assessing if search queries were likely to result in identification of the inventor. The form asks if the examiner (1) searched for prior art associated with the inventor's name, (2) searched with classification results for the application, and (3) recorded his or her search strategy. USPTO has not documented technology-specific guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search. As of March 2016, USPTO’s draft of the new master review form did not require OPQA or supervisory examiners to evaluate the thoroughness of an examiners’ search. Instead, the form asks if the examiner (1) should consider nonpatent literature as well as the sources of prior art the examiner should consider. In regard to our recommendations to ensure that reviews of examiner’ prior art searches collect sufficient information, we adjusted our report to acknowledge the information USPto provides on these suggested search areas. prior art searches specific to individual technology centers and monitor search thoroughness over time. USPTO uses two methods to review examinations, which may help the agency monitor the effects of the challenges described above as well as the thoroughness of searches. In recent years, the number and consistency of OPQA staff and supervisory patent examiners’ reviews of examiners' prior art searches have not been sufficient to examine trends at the technology center or art unit level, the agency says. Limits to USPTO’s ability to monitor examiners’ prior art searches at a technology center or art unit level may hinder the agency's ability to identify and address issues. Federal standards for internal control state that agencies’ monitoring of their internal controls should assess the quality of performance over time. Without greater clarity on what constitutes a thorough prior art search, the agency cannot address issues that are more prevalent in certain technology centers or art areas. Without consistently collecting the information needed to assess the thoroughness of priorArt searches and monitoring at a Technology Center or Art Unit level, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office may not be able to identify issues. Examiners face a number of challenges in their efforts to search for prior art. USPTO should assess whether the technical competencies of examiners in each technology center match those necessary. The Department of Commerce concurred with our recommendations. We provided a draft of this report to the Department of commerce for its review and comment, reproduced in appendix IV, the Department concurred in the report's recommendations and provided additional technical assistance. The report was published on October 31, 2013. It is published by request of the US Patent and Trademark Office. field of search, the appropriate tools, and a search strategy. It also requires examiners to consider U.S. patents, foreign patents, and nonpatent literature. While USPTO has taken steps to improve the quality of prior art searches, the agency has not yet established performance goals and indicators for improving priorArt searches. To improve its monitoring of prior Art searches, USPPO should take the following three actions: Develop written guidance on what constitutes a thorough prior art search within each technology field, technology center, art area, or art unit. USPTO is taking steps to strengthen monitoring of examiners’ work. These efforts may not provide USPTO with adequate data to identify and address shortcomings. Without a documented, periodically updated strategy to evaluate new sources of prior art to include in the Patents End-to-End system, USPPO will not have the assurance that it is taking full advantage of its information technology investment. Developing and periodically updating such a strategy could help USpTO take full advantage. of its new information technology tools to address some of the challenges examiners face. greater clarity on what constitutes a thorough prior art search in different technologies. USPTO plans to evaluate changes to the agency’s system for determining the number of applications a patent examiner is expected to review. Use the audits and supervisory reviews to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches and improvements over time, the authors say. It is essential that examiners have sufficient time to perform high-quality work, they say. The Department concurred and stated that USPto intends to further investigate the time needed. USPTO examiners face a variety of challenges in identifying relevant prior art during patent examination. USPTO’s actions span the following areas: leveraging the work of foreign patent offices, encouraging submission of prior art from third parties, improving prior art search tools, monitoring examiners’ prior art searches, and strengthening the technical competence of the examiner corps. These actions may help address challenges related to prior art and applications, but some of these actions have limitations that may hinder their effectiveness. A web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible USPTO patent examiners from across 8 of the 11 technology-based subject matter groups (referred to as technology centers) The survey was designed to collect information on challenges UPTO faces in finding relevant prior art. The extent of the challenges may vary by technology center or examiners’ GS level (see app. III). We excluded the Designs technology center, the examiner workforce, human capital management efforts, training practices, and international cooperation. The focus of patent examination is to determine whether the invention in a patent application satisfies the legal requirements for a patent, including that the invention be novel and not obvious. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners establishes certain requirements and processes that examiners must follow in examining patent applications. There are generally two types of prior art—patent literature or provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Based on our survey results, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office examiners in some technology centers or at some General Schedule (GS) levels face certain challenges in identifying relevant prior art. USPTO requested information on a search system that uses the claims and specification within a patent application to search for patent and nonpatent literature automatically, without human involvement. Such a system could improve the search tools available to examiners and help address the the time available toSearch for relevant prior art, among others. USPTO has not developed a strategy to assess incorporating new sources of art into these tools over time. Some of these challenges may reinforce one another or affect examiners in some technology centers more than others. enhance accurate and consistent results in examination quality. USPTO’s goals for patent quality in the strategic plan and for the quality initiative do not currently include goals or indicators assessing the thoroughness of prior art searches. We have previously reported that establishing program goals and associated indicators constitutes a leading practice for planning within federal agencies. Among other things, the Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 is aimed at improving the quality of federal government programs and services. It is not required to establish goals for improving prior art search quality.

ROUGE-1: 66.72, ROUGE-2: 61.36, ROUGE-L: 19.34
BERTScore: 55.32

==============================================
==================== [91/100] ====================
Summary:
DOD has made significant investments in its military prepositioning programs. The services have collectively used an average of over $1 billion each year to operate and maintain these assets. Prepositioned assets have been used extensively to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army spent $386.1 million in fiscal year 2005 for storage and maintenance of prepositioned. assets, including $76.5 million for assets in South Korea and $38.3 million for. assets in Southwest Asia. The military services store stocks of equipment and supplies at several land sites and aboard prepositioning ships around the world. The Air Force prepositions stocks to meet initial contingency requirements and to sustain early deploying forces. The Navy’s prepositioned war reserve stocks include bare base sets; vehicles; munitions; and a variety of consumable supplies, such as rations, fuel, support equipment, aircraft accessories, and medical supplies. Figure 1 shows the major locations ofprepositioned stocks. The military services have prepositioning programs to store combat or support equipment and supplies near areas with a high potential for conflict. The Army’s program involves three primary categories of stocks: combat brigade sets, operational projects, and war reserve sustainment stocks. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix III. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. At (202) 512- 8365. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Temporary shelters are available in a range of sizes, materials, and features. They can be acquired faster than permanent facilities, which may take several years to plan, fund, and build. The military services have made prior use of temporary shelters in several locations, for both prepositioned and non-prepositioned equipment. For example, the Marine Corps uses temporary humidity-controlled facilities in Florida to store some of its prepositioning assets awaiting maintenance and upload.tested every 30 months, vehicles stored without humidity control require exercising every 12 months. One of the benefits of humidity control is avoiding or at least minimizing these increased maintenance requirements. The Army National Guard estimates that it will have achieved a total of over $1.2 billion in cost savings by fiscal year 2010. Most of the projected savings is based on having to perform less maintenance on equipment that is using corrosion data regarding non-prepositioning programs. Guard officials told us that they collected and analyzed an extensive amount of information on corrosion and its cost impacts on selected pieces of equipment. They estimated that a significant amount of corrosion-related costs could be avoided by using humidity-controlled storage facilities. The humidity-controlled sheltering program includes combat vehicles, trailers, radar systems, and other equipment located at Guard facilities in 45 states and U.S. territories. According to Army storage and maintenance guidelines, storage of equipment in facilities without humidity control invites greater and more rapid deterioration because of corrosion. For example, whereas combat vehicles in humidity- controlled facilities need to be exercised and road tested every 30 months, vehicles stored without humiditycontrol require only once a year. The Army says it will have to perform less maintenance on equipment that is being preserved better in humid conditions. all of its prepositioned assets (numbering about 11,000 items) in Southwest Asia. At the Army’s prepositioning facility in Goose Creek, South Carolina, equipment is stored outside during the time it is not undergoing maintenance because of a lack of storage facilities. For example, 44 M1A1 tanks and 10 fuel tankers sat outdoors for more than a year after undergoing maintenance and experienced a total of $1.2 million in corrosion-related costs. The amount of time equipment is storage outside ranges, on average, from 1 month to more than 3 months. storage facilities. In South Korea, Army officials told us the lack of available land limits their ability to construct new, or expand existing, facilities. Estimated storage needs is difficult because of uncertainties regarding the consolidation and reconfiguration of U.S. Forces Korea facilities. Army prepositioning afloat officials said that the Goose Creek facility primarily is a maintenance facility and is not meant for the storage of equipment. Although building additional storage will require Army investment, the use of humidity-controlled storage is possible. Army and Marine Corps have taken some measures to reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets. Army could increase its use of storage facilities for land-based assets, authors say. Most of the equipment drawn for military operations in Iraq during 2003 had been stored in humidity-controlled facilities. Army officials told us that the use of humidity- controlled facilities is effective at minimizing equipment corrosion and maintaining high readiness levels, they say. The Army is currently storing a substantial amount of equipment in such facilities. The Army and Marine Corps consider collection of corrosion data on prepositioned assets to be a low priority and, consequently, do not systematically collect them. Sheltering assets, especially sheltering in humidity-controlled facilities, is a key anticorrosion practice. Without such data, the services may may may not be able to achieve long-term costs savings through corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. This practice is wasteful given the large investment in acquiring the equipment and the annual costs of maintaining it. The collection of such data could provide additional information to identify the underlying causes of maintenance problems. The Army is currently storing a substantial portion of its prepositioned equipment outdoors. Temporary shelters may be a feasible option to address immediate storage needs. Army officials from the 3rd Infantry Division have stated that with the exception of rubber seals on some vehicles, prepositioning equipment entering Southwest Asia was in good shape and had minimal, if any, corrosion. These officials said they did not see any signs of corrosion on the equipment entering the region during the 2003 invasion of Iraq. It was reported to be in good working condition and was not degraded by corrosion. As of April 2006, the Army was storing outside nearly all of its prepositioned assets (numbering about 11,000 items) in maintenance and experienced a total of $1.2 million in corrosion-related damage. Army officials in South Korea noted that it costs more to maintain equipment that is stored outside in part because the equipment needs to be inspected three times more often than equipment in humidity-controlled storage. In Kuwait, Army officials said that even with the additional planned storage facilities, substantial amounts of equipment will still be stored outdoors. The Army is storing a significant amount of land-based prepositioned assets outdoors without adequate sheltering. At these locations, assets are left relatively unprotected from moisture, sand, and other elements that contribute to corrosion. At Camp Carroll in South Korea, about 30 percent of the Army’s Heavy Brigade Combat Team equipment is stored outdoors in an often damp and humid region. Army officials told us that the equipment had been poorly maintained and, as a result, experienced many significant defects and readiness shortfalls. exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good operating condition it was when first uploaded about 2 years previously. With the exception of minor hydraulic leaks and o-ring deterioration, the equipment was generally free of corrosion problems. The primary measure to reduce corrosion of Army and Marine Corps prepositioned assets has been the use of humidity-controlled storage facilities. Most of the prepositioning equipment has been moved to a new location in the South Korean port city of Pusan, where it will be used for military exercises. Army and Marine Corps policies require that repaired equipment be restored to good condition. Army maintenance regulations require prepositioned equipment to be maintained at “10/20” standards. Marine Corps policy indicates that all equipment generally will be in “Code A” condition at the time it is placed in storage. equipment meeting this standard would have little to no corrosion, Marine Corps officials said. For equipment stored on theprepositioned ships, inspections are conducted on a periodic basis. had minimal, if any, corrosion. These officials said they did not experience any corrosion that affected their ability to perform operations. Officials with the 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force said the equipment on the prepositioning ship USNS Lummus that was used in a 2004 training exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good condition as it was in 2004. The equipment was in a high state of readiness and could not recall any instance where corrosion affected their. ability to do their jobs. Collection of corrosion data for prepositioned equipment could better enable the Army and Marine Corps to support similar corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts in their prepositioning programs. Without such data, the services may lack the incentive to support efforts to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion and achieve long-term cost savings. Effectively addressing corrosion onprepositioned stocks of equipment can enable the services to achieve significant cost savings and increase readiness and safety for rapidly fielding combat-ready forces around the world.its $3.2 billion overall life cycle savings to the Hellfire corrosion prevention measures. percent of the $110,000 needed, on average, to repair motorized lighterage prepositioned equipment. Corrosion prevention measures may reduce the amount of maintenance needed, thereby extending the availability of equipment items over their life cycle. The Army has had previous success using corrosion data regarding non-prepositioning programs to support corrosion prevention, according to the Army’s website. The information could be used to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion and achieve long-term cost savings. and these services provided most of the equipment used in current operations in Southeast Asia. To assess the measures taken by the Army and Marine Corps to reduce the impact that corrosion has on prepositioned assets, we met with DOD and service command officials. In addition, we visited selected prepositioning locations and maintenance facilities, including the Army’s facilities in Goose Creek, South Carolina, and Camp Carroll, South Korea. We also discussed additional actions that could be taken to further prevent and mitigate corrosion. Long-term deployments of U.S. troops in Southwest Asia are likely to magnify the effects of corrosion on military equipment, including prepositioned assets. Higher rates of corrosion result in increased repairs and replacements, drive up costs, and take critical systems out of action, reducing mission readiness. Corrosion can also reduce the safety of equipment items. Although reliable cost data are not available, it is estimated that corrosion costs in the military are in excess of $1 billion a year. The Army and Marine Corps are not collecting data about the current costs to prevent and mitigate corrosion of prepositioned assets. The military services have estimated that at least 25 percent of overall maintenance costs are corrosion related. The Army determined that about $8.7 million (31 percent) of the estimated $28 million spent to restore this equipment to serviceable condition was used to address corrosion-related problems. Marine Corps officials estimated that corrosion costs make up at least 50 percent of the $110,000 needed to repair motorized equipment. We reviewed a wide range of reports and other documentation on Army and Marine Corps prepositioned equipment and found these to be almost devoid of corrosion-related data. In almost every instance, this corrosion information was not available. Army officials said most of those responsible for documenting the maintenance action do not want to take the extra time to include corrosion information because they see it as having low priority. We discussed the barriers that exist to identifying and quantifying the impact of corrosion on prepostioned assets’ maintenance costs and material condition. Corrosion-related data that could enhance efforts to prevent and mitigate corrosion of prepositioned assets is unavailable. Army and Marine Corps consider collection of this information to be a low priority and, consequently, do not systematically collect it. Marine Corps officials said that the desire for the collection of corrosion information applies to all Marine Corps activities, including prepositioning programs. The mission of the Marine Corps’ Corrosion Prevention and Control Program is to reduce maintenance requirements and costs associated with corrosion. Officials from both the Army and the Marine Corps said that corrosion is routinely treated as part of the overall maintenance process. For example, Army officials at Camp Carroll, South Korea, told us that corrosion observed on the engine blocks in 5-ton trucks would be repaired during maintenance performed on the entire engine and would not be noted in the maintenance logs. According to Marine Corps officials, corrosion information has value but not enough to be included with more critical information, such as the amount of corrosion on equipment. on prepositioned assets and support additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. DOD concurred with our recommendations that the Army consider the feasibility of using temporary shelters, including humidity-controlled facilities. DOD did not provide specific information on planned actions, milestones, and resources for implementing the recommendations. With respect to the Marine Corps, DOD stated that collection of adequate data is not a matter of ‘if’ but ‘when’ The Army and Marine Corps should collect and use corrosion-related data to support additional. corrosion Prevention and Mitigation efforts. Having corrosion data helps the department learn what works so it can be more effective in reducing corrosion. Defense Science Board in 2004 stated that “accurate and objective corrosion data collection and new incentives to reward life-cycle cost reduction efforts must be implemented” As noted in our report, we were told by Marine Corps officials that collection of these data has been a low priority. We believe that funding and priorities should be aligned to the greatest extent possible to provide greater assurance that the department’s resources are being used prudently. of equipment items. Estimates of corrosion costs DOD-wide have ranged from $10 billion to $20 billion annually. DOD and the military services did not have an effective management approach to mitigate and prevent corrosion, authors say. We recommended that DOD develop a departmentwide strategic plan with clearly defined goals, measurable outcome-oriented objectives, and performance measures. DOD concurred and in December 2003 issued its corrosion strategy. According to DOD’s corrosion strategy, knowing the costs of corrosion is essential to adequately implementing the strategy. information systems needed to better collect, track, report, and manage efforts to prevent and mitigate corrosion. We interviewed officials and obtained documentation at the following locations: Office of the Secretary of Defense Corrosion Policy and Oversight Office Headquarters, Department of the Army U.S. Army Materiel Command, Fort Belvoir, Virginia Tank-Automotive and Armaments Command, Warren, Michigan, and Rock Island, Illinois. U.s. III Army Corps, Fort Hood, Texas. preservation effort will save a total of about $1.2 billion through fiscal year 2010. Army officials cited similar results after collecting corrosion data on Hellfire missile launchers. The types and areas of the launchers that were most prone to corrosion were identified and documented. Based on this research, maintenance technicians knew better to look for corrosion and how to control it before it worsened. The Army Missile Command’s tactical missile program executive office attributed a large portion of its $3.2billion overall long-term life cycle savings to the effort. Battalion Afloat, Goose Creek, South U.S. Forces Korea, Yongsan Garrison, South Korea. Field Support Battalion Far East, Camp Carroll, Materiel Support Center Korea. 19th Theater Support Command, Camp Walker, Daegu, South Korean. U.s. Army Pacific, Fort Shafter, Hawaii. Marine Corps Headquarters, Quantico, Virginia. Blount Island Command, Jacksonville, Florida. Office of the Inspector, Jacksonville,. Florida. The Marine Corps Logistics Command, Albany, Georgia. Georgia Blount Island Command, Jacksonville, Florida Office of the Inspector General of the Marine Corps Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Naval Facilities Engineering Command CNA Corporation, Alexandria, Virginia U.S. Navy Inspector General Naval Air Systems Command, Fort Detrick, Maryland. Navy Expeditionary Medical Command, Cheatham Annex, Headquarters, Seventh Air Force, South Korea. United States Pacific Command United States Forces Korea. We conducted our work from May 2005 through February 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. reviewed available data for inconsistencies and discussed the data with DOD and service officials. We determined that the data used for our review were sufficiently reliable for our purposes. The report is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions, please contact me at (202) 512- 8365.. The GAO is sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the. Secretary of the Army, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from across the U.S. and around the world. Click here for more travel snapshots from around the country and the world, and click here for a gallery of photos from around Europe and the Middle East, as well as a selection of images from CNN iReporters around the globe. To see more iReport snapshots, visit CNN.gov/Travel.

ROUGE-1: 68.19, ROUGE-2: 62.14, ROUGE-L: 29.22
BERTScore: 65.19

==============================================
==================== [92/100] ====================
Summary:
government’s nearly 7,000 investments were spending all of their funds on O&M activities. This is a little more than three times the amount spent on DME activities. Over the past 7 fiscal years, O&m spending has increased, while the amount invested in developing new systems has decreased by about $7.3 billion since fiscal year 2010. In fiscal year 2017, agencies plan to spend 77 percent of their IT funds onO&M, according to the IT Dashboard. 15 of the 26 agencies have increased their spending on O&M from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2015. The spending changes per agency range from an approximately $4 billion increase (HHS) to a decrease of $600 million (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) The percentage of total IT spending onO&M ranges from a 20 percent increase (Department of Education) to 16 percent decrease (Office of Personnel Management) Appendix II provides detailed information on agency spending on operations and maintenance. development activities and began O&M activities. Rising costs to maintain legacy IT infrastructure, such as those that use older programming languages. OMB officials: Agencies tend to categorize investments as O &M because they attract less oversight, require reduced reduced costs. In situations where agencies are not sure whether to report costs as O&m or DME, agencies default to reporting as O andM.. In several situations, OMB: In several cases, in areas where agencies aren't sure if they should report as DME or O&C, they default to O &C. spending on DME include the size and mission of the bureau. Several bureaus have recently completed major DME work that is now in the O&M phase. One bureau had no actual IT systems in its budget, as its IT has been absorbed by headquarters. OMB staff in the Office of E-Government and Information Technology have recognized the upward trend of O&m spending and identified several contributing factors, they say. The agency's DME spending is now at an all-time high, the OMB says. but now that the major parts of the agency are established, the funding has shifted to O&M. DHS officials stated that they anticipate future increases in DME funding as prioritized IT modernization efforts are approved and funded. An official in Department of State’s (State) Bureau of Information Resource Management stated that the increase is largely due to increased costs of maintaining the infrastructure, including meeting security requirements. VA officials said updates to its technology are the primary reason for the increase in spending. HHS’s Office of the CIO stated that the increased spending on O&M was largely due to grants to states and local entities for new programs, such as the Affordable Care Act. Conversely, several agencies have decreased spending onO&M. For example, as we have previously reported, the Department of Energy (Energy) reduced spending by approximately $300 million, which it attributed to the reclassification of high performance computers from the IT portfolio to facilities. Similarly, the Dept. of Commerce (Commerce) reduced Spending by about $100 million. Federal agencies reported spending $55 billion—69 percent of total IT spending—on non-provisioned O&M in fiscal year 2015. OMB has not identified an associated goal with its non- provisioned IT measure that is part of PortfolioStat process. An OMB official within the Office of E-Government and Information Technology stated that the aim is for the amount of spending on DME and provisioning IT services to rise, thus reducing the percent of to evaluate proposals for modernization. Federal agencies reported spending the majority of their fiscal year 2015 IT funds on operating and maintaining a large number of legacy investments. 26 federal agencies spent about $61 billion on O&M, more than three-quarters of the total amount spent. 5,233 of the government’s nearly 7,000 investments were spending all of their funds in 2015. Three of the agencies agreed with our recommendations; two partially agreed; and two agencies had no comments. All of the OMB factors were considered. To assess the extent to which federal agencies have invested in operating and maintaining existing IT, we reviewed data reported to OMB as part of the budget process. We also compared OMB’s associated performance measure on driving value in federal IT investments to federal best practices. To assess the of Veterans Affairs, and Social Security Administration, we focused on the 12 agencies with the highest planned IT spending for fiscal year 2015, given that these agencies make up over 90 percent of reported federal IT spending. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Table 8 provides the reported spending by agency on operations and maintenance (O&M) and the percentage of IT spending on O&M for fiscal years 2010 and 2015. Table 9 lists the 51 federal bureaus which reported spending less than 10 percent of their IT funds on development, modernization, and enhancement for fiscal year 2015. 5 of the 26 agencies that report to the IT Dashboard reported spending less than 10 percent on DME activities in fiscal year 2015. 34 percent of bureaus (i.e., 51 of the 151) spent less than ten percent on the DME. According to agency officials, reasons for low DME spending include the size and mission of the agency. The agency’s maintenance costs are reducing its flexibility and the agency or bureau is unable to innovate, the report says. on IT investments. OMB directs agencies to break down IT investment costs into two categories: (1) O&M and (2) development, modernization, and enhancement (DME) DME costs refers to those projects and activities that lead to new IT assets/systems, or change or modify existing IT assets to substantively improve capability or performance. Beginning in 2014, OMB directed agencies to further break down their O &M and D ME costs to identify provisioned IT service costs. The O&M phase is often the longest phase of an investment and can consume more than 80 percent of the total lifecycle costs. OMB and agencies will be limited in their ability to evaluate progress that has been made and whether or not they are achieving their goals to increase the amount spent on development activities and provisioned IT services. To help them do so, OMB requires that CIOs submit information on how to measure non- provisioned services to the OMB for evaluation. 8.5 percent of federal agencies’ planned spending for fiscal year 2016 has gone toward provisioned IT services. The vast majority of spending going toward IT that is non-provisioned. Examples of provisionedIT service could include cloud services or shared services from another federal agency or a private service provider. Figure 1 shows the breakdown in planned Spending for Fiscal Year 2016. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2016/01/30/technology/top-10-federal-agencies-spending-fiscal-year-2016.  legacy federal IT investments are becoming obsolete. Several aging investments are using unsupported components, many of which did not have specific plans for modernization or replacement. This is contrary to OMB’s draft initiative, which calls for agencies to analyze and review O&M investments. Until this policy is finalized and implemented, the federal government runs the risk of continuing to maintain investments that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources (DME) activities or provisioned O &M services. The government's oversight of such investments will be impaired and its spending could be wasteful. of federal IT. To select systems or investments to profile, we identified agencies’ existing investments in O&M that were rated as medium or high risk. We then interviewed agency officials to confirm and obtain additional information on the systems. From the resulting list of systems and investments, we created a list of the agency-identified oldest systems. We also used the list of agency- identified oldest systems or Investments to identify the oldest investments in the federal IT system. The list of oldest systems and Investments was then used to select the agencies to profile. CIOs from 12 selected agencies reported that 23 of their 187 major IT O&M investments were moderate to high risk as of August 2015. Of the 23 investments, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 19 investments. Most investments did not have specific plans with time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. agencies did not consistently perform required analysis on at-risk investments. Until agencies fully implement cloud and shared services, OMB and agencies will be constrained in their ability to evaluate progress. those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. OMB directs agencies to monitor O&M investments through operational analyses, which should be performed annually. In instances where investments experience problems, agencies can perform a TechStat, a face-to-face meeting to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or not producing results. Although not required, agencies had performed TechStats on only five of the at-risk investments. Agencies provided several reasons for not conducting TechStats. Several of the investments’ risk levels were reduced to low or moderately-low risk in the months since the IT Dashboard had been publicly updated. It should be noted that recent legislation requires agencies to perform a review of each major IT investment that receives a high-risk rating for 4 consecutive quarters. In addition, operational analyses were not conducted for four at-risk investments. These investments were: Commerce’s Enterprise Cyber Security Monitoring and Operations, DHS’S Integrated Fixed Towers, Treasury’'s Departmental Offices IT Infrastructure Mainframes and Servers Services and Support. had performed an internal “health assessment” on its Integrated Fixed Towers investment, understood the issues it was facing, and decided that a TechStat was not necessary. An official from HHS’s Office of the CIO stated that, at the time it was evaluated, its Trusted Internet Connection Investment did not meet its internal TechStat criteria of having cost variance over 10 percent. The program was required to work on a corrective action plan and has since been upgraded from high to moderate. Over the past several years, we have made over 20 recommendations to help improve the accuracy and reliability of the information on the IT Dashboard. Most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comment. In January 2010, the Federal CIO began leading TechStat sessions to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or are not producing results. These meetings involve OMB and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and accountability for agency IT investments. The CIO’s best judgement of the level of risk facing the investment.(low risk and green) based on the CIO's best judgement. and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and improve performance. OMB also empowered agency CIOs to begin to hold their own TechStat sessions within their respective agencies by June 2012. In June 2013, we reported that OMB and selected agencies held multiple TechStats, but additional OMB oversight was needed to ensure that these meetings were having the appropriate impact on underperforming projects and that resulting cost savings were valid. As of October 28, 2015, OMB had only held one TechStat. bodies, and the general public to hold the government agencies accountable for results and progress. Among other things, agencies are to submit ratings from their Chief Information Officers (CIO), which, according to OMB’s instructions, should reflect the level of risk facing an investment. To do so, each agency CIO is to assess his or her IT investments against a set of six pre-established evaluation factors identified by OMB and then assign a rating of 1 (high risk and red) to 5 (low risk and green) OMB guidance called for agencies to develop an operational analysis policy and perform such analyses annually. DHS plans to perform the analysis on the investment in August 2017. Performing the analysis once the investment is operational will enable DHS to determine whether it is meeting the needs of the agency and delivering the expected value. Until agencies ensure that their O&M investments are fully reviewed, the report recommends that agencies develop operational analysis policies, annually perform operational analyses on all investments, and ensure only become operational in October 2015. Of the top 10 investments with the largest spending in O&M, only the DHS investment underwent an operational analysis. The remaining agencies did not assess their investments, which accounted for $7.4 billion. Agency officials cited several reasons for not doing so, including relying on budget submission and related management reviews that measure performance. OMB has noted that these are not a substitute for an Operational Analysis of Spending (OMB) of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) DHS officials attributed this to the department still being in the process of implementing its new operational analysis policy. OMB has developed guidance that calls for agencies to develop an operational analysis policy for examining the ongoing performance of existing legacy IT investments. OMB issued guidance in August 2012 directing agencies to report operational analysis results along with their fiscal year 2014 budget submission documentation (e.g., exhibit 300) to OMB. The strategy calls for migrating to a shared environment, as described in the strategy, include software licenses, e-mail systems, and human resource systems. We have previously reported on legacy IT and the need for the government to improve its oversight of such investments. provisioned IT services to rise, thus reducing the percent of spending on non- provisioned IT. This official also stated that OMB has not identified a specific goal for the measure because it would be ever changing. While goals for performance measures may change over time, it is still important for OMB to set a target by which agencies can measure their progress in meeting this measure. Without links to outcomes and goals, organizations are not able to effectively measure progress toward those goals, the official said. OMB’s 25-Point IT Reform Plan included a “Cloud First’ policy that required each agency CIO to implement cloud-based solutions whenever a secure, reliable, and cost-effective cloud option exists. In February 2011, OMB issued the Federal Cloud Computing Strategy, which provided definitions of cloud computing services. In April 2016, we reported, among other things, that we had identified 10 key practices that if included in cloud service agreements can help agencies ensure services are performed effectively, efficiently and securely. investments as O&M because they attract less oversight, require reduced documentation, and have a lower risk of losing funding. OMB encourages agencies to adopt provisioned IT services, such as cloud computing and shared services, to make IT more efficient and agile, and enable innovation. It provides an approach for agencies to implement cloud-based solutions whenever a secure, reliable, and cost-effective cloud option exists and to use shared services for IT service delivery in order to increase return on investment, eliminate waste and duplication. of legacy systems. OMB has implemented a series of initiatives to improve the oversight of underperforming investments and more effectively manage IT. These efforts include the following: IT Dashboard. The recently-enacted statutory requirements promoting IT acquisition reform, as well as implementing our previous recommendations. In the last 6 years, we have made approximately 800 recommendations to OMB and multiple agencies to improve effective and efficient investment in IT. As of October 2015, about 32 percent of these recommendations had been implemented. OMB include all 10 key practices in future guidance. PortfolioStat initiative requires agencies to conduct an annual, agency-wide IT portfolio review. In 2013 and 2015 we reported that agencies had the potential to save at least $3.8 billion through this initiative. However, we noted that weaknesses existed in agencies’ implementation of the initiative; therefore, we made more than 60 recommendations to OMB and OMB made all 10 recommendations to agencies in a letter to the agency on Monday. In May 2012, OMB released its Federal IT Shared Services Strategy. The strategy requires agencies to use shared services for IT service delivery. OMB partially agreed with our recommendations, and responses from 21 of the agencies varied, with some agreeing and others not. We made more than 60 recommendations to OMB and agencies to help agencies migrate to a shared IT system. The recommendations were based on a review of OMB's strategy and the responses of 21 agencies from May 2012 to May 2013. For more information, visit OMB’s website. We selected one system or investment per agency using the following factors: investment type (major or non-major), system or Investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. We also reviewed agency documentation and interviewed agency officials on those profiled systems or investments. To assess the reliability of the OMB budget data and IT Dashboard data, we reviewed related related documents and interviewed related officials. We sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non- major investment types; a range of ages; and aRange of risk ratings. OMB budget data and IT Dashboard data, we reviewed related documentation. We corroborated with each agency that the data downloaded were accurate and reflected the data it had reported to OMB. We determined that the budget and ITDashboard data were reliable for our purposes of reporting IT O&M spending and related information. We conducted this performance audit from April 2015 to May 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit, and we conducted the audit. GAO review included the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the 26 agencies that report to OMB’s IT Dashboard. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix XIV. Our objectives were to assess the extent to which federal agencies have invested in operating and maintaining existing information technology (IT) and assess the age and obsolescence of federal IT. For all three objectives, to identify ways in which agencies.effectively manage IT. incomplete information on IT investments, OMB increases the risk of not fulfilling its oversight responsibilities. We recommended that Energy and Commerce appropriately categorize their IT investments. Both agencies disagreed. A policy analyst within OMB’s Office of E-Government and Information Technology expressed concern when agencies, or their bureaus, spend a low percentage of their IT funds on DME. The analyst further stated that this could indicate that the agency's maintenance costs are reducing its flexibility and ability to innovate. OMB uses several data collection mechanisms to oversee federal IT spending. Agencies are required to provide information on each major investment’s cost, schedule, and performance. The purpose of the IT portfolio summary is to identify all IT investments and their associated costs within a federal organization. This information is designed, in part, to help OMB better understand what agencies are spending on IT investments. OMB directs agencies to break down IT spending into major and minor projects, as well as smaller projects. Congress has enacted several laws to assist agencies and the federal government in managing IT investments. The Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 requires OMB to establish processes to analyze, track, and evaluate the risks and results of major capital investments in information systems. Most recently, in December 2014, Congress enacted IT acquisition reform legislation (commonly referred to as the Federal Information Technology Act of 2014) The bill requires agencies to report to Congress on the net program performance benefits achieved as a result of these investments. Department of Commerce (Commerce) reduced spending by approximately $110 million. Commerce attributed it to the reclassification of satellite ground systems from its IT portfolio. We disagreed with these reclassifications, and reported that they run contrary to the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996. Further, we reported that by gathering incomplete information on IT investments, OMB increases the risk of mismanaging IT investments. The report was published in the online edition of the magazine, ‘The Next Web’. Energy partially concurred with our recommendation to address obsolete IT investments. Since OMB’s draft guidance has not yet been issued, Energy could not concur with this part of the recommendation, but plans to review and consider implementation of such guidance. HHS said it is working to identify and plan to modernize or replace IT systems. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. The report is available in full in appendix VII and VIII, and in its entirety in appendix IX. identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems as needed and consistent with OMB’s draft guidance. Eight agencies (USDA, Commerce, HHS, DHS, State, Transportation, VA, and SSA) and OMB agreed with our recommendations, Defense and Energy partially agreed, and Justice and the Treasury stated they had no comment on the recommendations. In comments provided via e-mail on our report, the other 12 agencies agreed with the recommendations, but not all of them. State agreed with the recommendation and noted that it is currently awaiting final modernization guidance from OMB. Upon publication of OMB’s guidance, it plans to work with OMB to develop detailed plans for modernization. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In comments provided, State stated that it had no comment on the recommendation but plans to follow OMB's guidance once it is formally issued. The comments are reprinted in appendix XI of the report. In comments provided via e-mail on May 12, 2016, an official from OMB’s Office of E-Government and Technology stated that it concurred with our recommendations. The agency also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, Commerce concurring with both of its recommendations. Regarding the recommendation that the department ensure that required analyses are performed on investments in the O&M, Commerce agreed with our recommendation. We have incorporated these comments into the report.in more detail below. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, DHS stated that it concurred with its recommendation and that the department plans to establish a framework for identifying and replacing or modernizing legacy systems after receipt of the finalized guidance. DHS’s comments are reprinted in appendix X. In comments provided via e-mail on May 11, 2016, an official from Justice's audit liaison group, speaking on behalf of the department, said it had no comment. have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, VA concurred with our recommendation and stated that it launched a new office in April 2016 that will provide lifecycle management oversight for portfolios of systems. In comments provided via e-mail on May 6, 2016, an official from Transportation’s Office of the Secretary stated that the department concurring with the draft findings and recommendations and had no additional comments on the report. On May 12, 2015, a Treasury official said the department had no comment on the draft report. the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs; the U.S. Attorney General of the Department of Justice; the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration; the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and other interested parties. This report will also be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9286. OMB has created draft guidance that will require agencies to identify and prioritize legacy information systems that are in need of replacement. Agencies are, in part, maintaining obsolete investments because they are not required to identify, evaluate, and prioritize their O&M investments to determine whether they should be kept as-is, modernized, replaced, or retired. To monitor whether existing investments are meeting the needs of their agencies, OMB staff recommend that the Director of OMB identify and publish a specific goal associated with its non-provisioned spending measure. that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. Further, there were no plans to replace or modernize 1 investment. The profiles of these systems and investments are summarized in table 7 and can be found in appendix V. We have previously provided guidance that organizations should periodically identify, evaluate, and prioritize their investments, including those that are in O&M; at, near, or exceeding their planned life cycles; and/or are based on technology that is now obsolete. that required analyses are performed on investments in the O&M phase, the department concurred and stated that it will reiterate and expand the department’s existing policies requiring such analyses. The department also concurred with the recommendation to identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems and stated it is already appropriately replacing and modernizing systems as needed within budget constraints. The Department of Commerce provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, Defense partially concurring with our recommendation to address obsolete IT investments in need. The draft guidance includes time frames for the efforts regarding developing criteria, identifying and prioritizing systems, and planning for modernization. OMB did not commit to a firm time frame for when the policy would be issued. The department has modernized, upgraded, or retired hundreds of systems in the last several years through an investment review process. Defense’s plan to be consistent with OMB’S guidance to the extent practicable is consistent with the intent of our recommendation, the department said. cost overruns and schedule slippages while contributing little to mission-related outcomes. The federal government has spent billions of dollars on failed and poorly performing IT investments. In February 2015, we introduced a new government-wide high-risk area, Improving the Management of IT Acquisitions and Operations. This area highlights several critical IT initiatives underway, including reviews of troubled projects, an emphasis on incremental development, a key transparency website, data center consolidation, and the O&M of legacy systems. In April 2016, the IT Modernization Act was introduced into the U.S. House of Representatives. If enacted, it would establish a revolving fund of $3 billion that could be used to retire, replace, or upgrade legacy IT systems to transition to new, more secure, efficient, modern IT systems. It also would establish processes to evaluate proposals for modernization submitted by agencies and monitor.issued. The federal government runs the risk of continuing to maintain investments that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources. agencies ensure that their O&M investments are fully reviewed. The government’s oversight of old and vulnerable investments will be impaired and the associated spending could be wasteful. Several agencies, such as the Department of Justice (Justice), DHS, HHS, Treasury, USDA, and VA, reported using Common Business Oriented Language (COBOL)—a programming language developed in the late 1950s and early 1960s. It is widely known that agencies need to move to COBOL.  legacy systems may become increasingly more expensive as agencies have to deal with the previously mentioned issues. Agencies may pay a premium to hire staff or contractors with the knowledge to maintain outdated systems. One agency (SSA) reported re-hiring retired employees to maintain its COBOL systems. Selected agencies reported that they continue to maintain old investments in O&M. For example, Treasury reported systems that were about 56 years old. Table 6 shows the 10 oldest investments and/or systems, as reported by selected agencies. that will provide lifecycle management oversight for portfolios of systems. In written comments, SSA stated that it agreed with our recommendation and that it has already initiated numerous activities to modernize or replace legacy systems. SSA’s comments are reprinted in appendix XIII. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees; the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human, and the Department of Justice. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-government-secretaries-top-stories. It is widely known that agencies need to move to more modern, maintainable languages. In addition, some legacy systems may use parts that are obsolete and more difficult to find. For instance, Defense is still using 8-inch floppy disks in a legacy system that coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces. For example, the Gartner Group, a leading IT research and advisory company, has reported that organizations using COBOL should consider replacing the language and in 2010 noted that there should be a shift in focus to using more modern languages for new products. whether existing investments are meeting the needs of their agencies. The Secretaries of Commerce and the Treasury direct the respective agency CIO to ensure that required analyses are performed on investments in the operations and maintenance phase. The Secretary of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs; the Attorney General; and the Commissioner of Social Security should identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems as well as obsolete IT investments. agency chief information officer (CIO) We reviewed agency documentation such as TechStat documentation and operational analyses that had been performed on the investments, as available. In addition, we interviewed agency officials to determine plans for replacing or modernizing the investments. We also requested that agencies provide a list of their three oldest systems. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not track their oldest systems, and that they have no plans to replace or modernize any of the oldest systems that are still in use. Departmental Offices IT Infrastructure Mainframes and Servers Services and Support, and Treasury’s IT Infrastructure End User Systems and Support. National Weather Service (the responsible bureau) reviews the status of the previous month's activities for the development, integration, modification, and procurement to report issues to management. The Integrated Fixed Towers Program Manager stated that since the investment had only become operational in October 2015, an operational analysis was not required for the project. The Department of Commerce does not include all of the key elements of an operationalAnalysis. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not track the ages of individual systems. In those cases, we requested that the agencies provide their three oldest IT investments. Agencies noted that these systems and investments may have components that are newer than their operational age. We selected one system or investment per agency using a combination of factors including investment type (major or non-major), system and investment. We then interviewed agency officials to confirm percent of their IT funds on development, modernization, and enhancement in fiscal year 2015. plans to modernize or replace each of these investments and systems. The plans for five of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specific time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. Separately, we profiled one system or investment from each of the 12 selected agencies. The selected systems and investments range from 11 to approximately 56 years old, and serve a variety of purposes. For a full list of the agencies’ reported oldest systems, see appendix IV. example, Treasury’s Individual Master File was first initiated about 56 years ago. Of the 12 investments or systems, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 11 of these. However, the plans for 3 of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, the report said. The report also looked at the impact of changes on the federal government’S ability to track and respond to hazardous materials incidents in the U.S. and abroad. The DVIS interface software, PowerBuilder, is no longer supported by the vendor. According to State officials, the main challenges in maintaining DVIS’s aging technology are related to information security and infrastructure concerns. In 2013, State initiated an effort to replace numerous legacy systems, including DVIS. As a part of this effort, State plans to replace DVIS with ConsularOne at an unknown time. The project is expected to cost about $2.4 million over its life-cycle. State plans to replace DVIS’s functionality with a project called ConsularOne. The replacement effort is to begin in October 2018 and they plan to retire DVIS when appropriate. In the meantime, the department plans to upgrade the unsupported software to a new version, which is also not supported. Department of Transportation—Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration Number of users: 250 federal users, 547,000 active hazardous materials facilities, 10,000 pipeline operators, and several million potential facilities. Investment anticipated end date: 2018 Fiscal year. Diversity Visa Information System (DVIS) is an electronic case management system used by approximately 30 federal employees and contractor staff working at the Department of State’s (State) Kentucky Consular Center. DVIS is used to track and validate application information submitted by foreign nationals under the Diversity Visa immigration program. System start date: early 1990s Age: Approximately 26 years System anticipated end date: 2020. Fiscal year 2016 funding: about $164,000. Total funding for DVIS: $1.2 billion. and use a relational database and both COBOL and Java programming languages. The bureau has plans for updating the user interface and integrating the data through September 2016. According to agency officials, there are no plans to replace Sentry, as the system is the main system used by the bureau. Department of Defense—Air Force Number of users: 175 users across command functions for intercontinental ballistic missiles, bombers, tankers, munitions sites, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance platforms. Fiscal year 2016 funding: $5.6 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: $135 million through The Strategic Automated Command and Control System is the Department of Defense’s (Defense) dedicated high-speed data transmission, processing, and display system. The system coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces, such as intercontinental ballistic missiles, nuclear bombers, and tanker support aircrafts, among others. Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. For those in the nuclear command area, the system is also used by the U.S. Air Force. Bureau of Prisons Sentry is a real-time information system comprised of various modules that are to enable the agency to maintain proper custody. The system has a life-cycle cost of $571.5 million. Plans for retirement or modernization: Plans to update the user interface and integrate system data through September 2016. There are no plans for continuous modernization of the Sentry system, which has been in place since 1981. The agency has a budget of $40.4 million for fiscal year 2016. The Department of Transportation’s (DOT) Hazardous Materials Information System maintains and provides access to comprehensive information on hazardous materials incidents. The system consists of five modules that register carriers. Developing a new system to replace legacy modules, and plan to retire the legacy modules by the end of fiscal year 2018. In fiscal year 2016, the DOT spent $6.7 million to develop the system and $38.0 million to fund its development and operations. In Fiscal year 2015, the department spent $8.3 million on the system's development and maintenance. The new system’s modules are intended to be integrated, automated, and improve efficiency, effectiveness, and data quality. While DOT does not have dates for when individual legacy modules will be retired, officials stated that they plan to have all the legacy modules retired by the end of fiscal year 2018. Further, the unsupported application is planned to be eliminated. The new system is expected to be fully operational by 2019. It is intended to replace the current system, which has been in use since the 1960s. is currently planning to complete parts of this phase well into 2020. As a result, the agency will continue to maintain two separate systems until the replacement is complete. Fiscal year 2016 funding: $6.7 million. Total estimated life-cycle costs (through fiscal year 2017): $99.6 million. Operations and maintenance costs: $79.0 million. Plans for retirement or modernization: The agency has general plans to continuously update the system. The agency plans to continue updating the system until the end of the next decade. to continuously update the system, but they too are contingent on receiving funding. The agency plans to retire the system in fiscal year 2017 and replace it with a new system. The system is used by thousands of users across the federal, state, and local levels, in addition to those in the international and academic communities. It has a life-cycle cost of $282.8 million and is expected to be replaced by a new, state-of-the-art system by the end of 2017. U.S. Department of Homeland Security will continue to maintain and use the system. There is no projected end of life date, and they plan to continue to use it. The last allowed the retirement of 16 associated legacy applications in 2011 and retired two mainframe systems. The system is used by 14,000 Coast Guard users and also services the Transportation Security Administration and the National Transportation Safety Board. It is estimated to cost $543.2 million over its life-cycle. It was built in 1998 and has been in use since. Services general public, 1,300+ field offices with 50,000 to 60,000 employees. System start date: 1985 Age: 31 years Investment anticipated end date: None Fiscal year 2016 funding: $9.6 million Total estimated life-cycle costs (through fiscal year 2017): $519.8 million Development costs: $235.7 million Operations and maintenance costs: £284.1 million Plans for retirement or modernization: Agency has ongoing modernization efforts. The Social Security Administration’s (SSA) Title II investment includes the Title II system which determines retirement benefits eligibility and amounts. IMF was written in an outdated assembly language code and operates on a 2010 IBM z196/2817-m32 mainframe. This has resulted in difficulty delivering technical capabilities addressing identify theft and refund fraud, among other things. IRS plans to address these issues by replacing IMF with the Customer Account Data Engine 2 (CADE 2) IMF will be re-engineered by applying modern programming languages, establishing CADE 2 as the authoritative data source, and implementing functionality to address the IRS financial material weakness. The Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS), Individual Master File (IMF) is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer accounts. Within IMF, accounts are updated, taxes are assessed, and refunds are generated as required during each tax filing period. IMF was written in an outdated assembly. Will be replaced by Customer Account Data Engine 2 at an unknown date. 2016 funding: $13.6 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: $135.4 million Development Costs: $38.8 million Operations and maintenance costs:  $96.6million When Sentry was first deployed over 30 years ago, it was comprised of approximately 700 program routines written in COBOL. It became increasingly more difficult and expensive to maintain complex, highly-customized systems written in older programming languages. Sentry is used to process inmates at all phases of incarceration, including release, transfer, and sentence computation. It provides information regarding security and custody levels, inmate program and work assignments, and other pertinent information about the inmate population. The bureau migrated the older database, merged the legacy data into the newer database platform, and modified theCOBOL programs to ensure compatibility with the new software and database. In 2013, the agency upgraded its hardware and software to Power7 IBM servers and Unix operating systems. NWSTG still lacks full backup capability for 26 percent of its functions. In fiscal year 2013, a major rearchitecture and redesign effort began which, according to Department of Commerce officials, will result in a new system in 2014. The new system will affect a wide range of economic and emergency management decisions, officials say. The system will also be used to support future data volume collection and dissemination. Began which, according to Department of Commerce officials, will result in an entirely new dissemination architecture. Will replace the NWSTG with an integrated system that is more capable, more reliable, and have 100 percent backup capability. The PAID system automates time and attendance for employees, timekeepers, payroll, and supervisors in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) The PAIDs software has three major modules: Time and Attendance, Employee, and Payroll. According to officials, a detailed project plan to rearchitecture NWstG is now being carried out and is scheduled to replace theNWSTG in early fiscal year 2017. year 2017 and replace it with a new system. The National Weather Service Telecommunication Gateway (NWSTG) system is operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. It is the nation’s hub for the collection and distribution of weather data and products and provides national and global real-time exchange services. Thousands of customers worldwide use data distributed by the NWSTG and these data affect a wide range of economic and emergency management decisions. For more information, visit the Weather Service's website. that coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces. Further, in some cases, the vendors no longer provide support for hardware or software, creating security vulnerabilities and additional costs. For example, each of the 12 selected agencies reported using unsupported operating systems and components in their fiscal year 2014 reports. Commerce, Defense, DOT, HHS, and VA reported using 1980s and 1990s Microsoft operating systems that stopped being supported by the vendor more than a decade ago. Lastly, legacy systems may become increasingly more expensive as The system is made up of technologies and equipment that are at the end of their useful lives. For those in the nuclear command area, the system’s primary function is to send and receive emergency action messages to nuclear forces. Replacement parts for the system are difficult to find because it is written in assembly language code. It also uses 8-inch floppy disks, which are a 1970s-era storage device; and assembly programming code typically used in mainframes.among others. The system is still running on an IBM Series/1 Computer, which is a 70s computing system. Replacement parts for the system are difficult to find because they are now obsolete. As of March 2016, Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. There is a plan underway to replace the floppy disks with secure digital cards. This effort is underway and is expected to be complete in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017. Social Security Administration Number of users: Services general public, 1,300+ field offices with 50,000 to 60,000. The system runs on a Solaris 10 operating system, last updated in February 2016. It uses commercial off-the-shelf systems for case management and reporting. The system is to provide the capability to report on appeals data and enable more accurate and expedient responses to Congressional questions. The agency has general plans to continuously update the system. It is to facilitate maintenance and transfer of case specific data with regard to Medicare appeals through multiple levels of the appeal process. It was designed to provide more accurate, expedient and timely responses to congressional questions. The system has faced challenges due to the rapid growth in appeals processed each year, expanded use of settlements, and the increased interest in appeals data. This has resulted in an increased need for infrastructure changes, such as more storage, licenses, and processing capacity. Agency officials stated that they do not have any plans to address these gaps and that doing so is contingent on funding. They also noted general plans to continuously update the system, but they too are contingent on funds. The system is still supported by the vendors. The system consists of five modules that register carriers and shippers, document incidents involving hazardous materials and issue special permits. Officials from Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety’s Office of the Chief Information Officer stated that software applications and processes used by the system have become outdated and costly to maintain. For example, the system uses Microsoft.NET and Classic Active Server Pages. Officials stated that costs have increased due to maintaining the personnel with the knowledge to use these older applications. In particular, the costly applications include those for scanning, officials said. The system uses Kofax Indicius software to perform optical character recognition on scanned hazardous materials incident reports. The software was no longer supported by the vendor, as of December 2014. DOT is in the process of updating the functions performed by the system. The new system’s modules are intended to be fully integrated and fully available by the end of the year. The system is not available to the public at this time, but DOT is working on a software update that will make the system available for the public. SSA does not have plans to retire the Title II system. Rather, the agency plans to continue to eliminate and replace Title II’s older and more costly subsystems. SSA officials stated that most of the employees who developed these systems are ready to retire and the agency will lose their collective knowledge. Officials further stated that training new employees to maintain the older systems takes a lot of time.the volume of data needed. In addition, SSA currently is planning to retire four Title II subsystems, including a claims control system, and one that processes changes in earnings transactions. SSA has rehired retirees to work on the legacy systems. SSA has other efforts to modernize or consolidate Title II systems, such as its database management systems.and one that processes changes in earnings transactions. In addition to the contact name above, individuals making contributions to this report included Gary Mountjoy, Kevin Walsh, Scott Borre, Rebecca Eyler, Bradley Roach, Tina Torabi, and Jessica Waselkow. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. SSA officials: Title II investment accomplished its goal to improve service delivery by eliminating antiquated Title II programs. Title II is comprised of 162 subsystems and some are still written in COBOL. These systems were also built in a compartmentalized structure by SSA, rather than contractors, because the agency determined that there were not commercial programs that could satisfy the agency’s business needs and the volume of data needed. SSA officials stated that most of the smaller IT improvement initiatives and projects. The Core Accounting System (CAS) Suite is the primary financial management system for the U.S. Coast Guard. CAS is a set of several applications that assist the agencies in several areas, including accounts receivable, accounts payable, purchasing, asset management, procurement, and document imaging and processing. According to the investment’s operational analysis document, CAS is expected to be retired or modernization in fiscal year 2018. The agency plans to transition to federal shared services in fiscalyear 2018. The agencies agreed to a staggered transition of these services, with DNDO transitioning in fiscal year 2016, TSA in 2017, and USCG in 2018. Until the migration is complete and CAS can be decommissioned, USCG plans to resolve emergent issues and maintain applications. In the meantime, due to the costs associated with implementing a full fix and the impending transition to shared services,. USCG has accepted the security risks and will continue to use CAS until the transition is complete. The transition will take place in fiscal years 2016-17 and 2017-18. CAS uses a version of Oracle Federal Financials software that was first available in 2004. The extended vendor support for the software ended in November 2013. The agency plans to pursue using other shared services to provide its financial management services and, therefore, began the Financial Management Service Improvement Initiative to migrate the services.and processing. It relies on Windows 2003 servers and any changes would require recoding of many functions within the CAS suite. It also relies on Microsoft Office 365 and Microsoft Office 2010 software. The U.S Forest Service’s Resource Ordering and Status System (ROSS) is used to mobilize and deploy a multitude of resources to fight wildland fires. The system supports the basic needs of the first responders and support personnel at an incident location by processing orders and replenishing supplies. According to the Forest Service, the technology used by ROSS is on the verge of technical obsolescence. One of the applications ROSS uses is no longer supported by the vendor, creating vulnerability issues. supported by the vendor, creating vulnerability issues. In order to use the system, users must download client software onto their local computers, as opposed to accessing the system through the web. In September 2015, the U.S. Forest Service issued a request for information for services to develop ROSS’s replacement. Agency officials estimated that this effort will cost $14 million through fiscal year 2019 and the solution will go live in 2018. Bureau of Justice—Bureau of Prisons Number of users: 38,000. PAID software has three major modules: Time and Attendance, Employee Master Record Downloads, and Education Tracking. System start date: 1963 Age: 53 years System anticipated end date: 2017 Fiscal year 2016 funding: $6.7 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: n/a, not tracked by system. Plans for retirement or modernization: The system will mostly be replaced by the Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center, which will consolidate several IT services to provide a single IT service. PAID is a 50-year old COBOL-based system at the end of its life span. The system runs on IBM mainframes and uses an IBM database. Officials stated the system is not user friendly and requires extensive training in order to use the system successfully. VA officials stated that PAID is intended to be mostly replaced by Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center in 2017.Service Center, which will consolidate several IT services to provide core human resources- related functions. The cost of maintaining the personnel to manage theSystem is high. Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center in 2017 is to consolidate human resources IT functions and services. However, the target solution is experiencing cost overruns of $14.8 million and VA officials stated that they will not be able to replace all of PAID’s functions. The agency is currently working on a transition plan and will determine whether VA should find another solution for the missing functionality or continue to keep PAID running indefinitely. The U.S. Department of Agriculture”s (USDA) U.s. Forest Service’S Resource Ordering and Status System is being replaced by PAID. factors including investment type (major or non-major), system or investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. The Contractor Business Financial and Administrative Systems investment is intended to provide business and administrative systems for the Department of Energy’s (Energy) Savannah River Site. The site security contractor to manage human resources (including payroll, benefits, and retirement for 13,000 employees and pensioners) is also part of the investment. In particular, we sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non- major investment types, a range of ages, and aRange of risk ratings. The investment is a commercial off-the-shelf system that runs on Windows and Unix servers using Oracle’s PeopleSoft applications. According to an agency official in Savannah River Operations, the vendors still support all of the hardware and software used by this investment. The agency is not currently planning future modernization activity because the investment has gone through several updates in the past, with the last allowing the retirement of 13,000 employees and pensioners. The investment uses the PeopleSoft Supply Chain Management and PeopleSoft Financials modules.

ROUGE-1: 84.09, ROUGE-2: 74.70, ROUGE-L: 27.10
BERTScore: 56.69

==============================================
==================== [93/100] ====================
Summary:
We performed our audit in Washington, D.C., and the bureau’s headquarters in Suitland, Maryland, between May 2001 and April 2002. Accurate census results are critical because the data are used to reapportion seats in the House of Representatives and for congressional redistricting. The Secretary of Commerce forwarded written comments from the Bureau of the Census on a draft of this report (see app. II). The bureau concurred with all of our recommendations and had no comments on them. but Census Bureau Should Evaluate Lessons Learned. U.S. General Accounting Office. 2000 Census: Coverage Evaluation Interviewing Overcame Challenges, but Further Research Needed. GAO/GGD-00-127R. Washington, D.C.: June 7, 2000. USGA: Historical Data on Enumerator Productivity Are Limited. GAE-01-208R.Washington, D,C.: January 5, 2001. US GAO: 2000 census: Better Productivity Data Needed for Future Planning and Budgeting. At that time, we will send copies to other interested congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the Bureau of the Census. Copies will be made available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you have any questions concerning this report, please contact me on (202) 512-6806. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. before it would commit resources to investigate local data issues. The Full Count Review program had no filter for screening submissions based on the quality of the documentation. Better guidance on documenting issues could make the bureau’s follow-up investigations more efficient. Another area where there is room for improvement concerns the consistency and clarity in which the bureau communicated the objectives of the Full Count review program and how the bureau planned to use analysts’ input. The bureau may have set up the expectation that a larger number of issues would be resolved during Full Countreview. The Full Count Review program ran from June 2000 through March 2001. The bureau expected data analysts to identify data discrepancies, anomalies, and other data “issues” Some of the analysts’ work was contracted to members of the FSCPE, an organization composed of state demographers that works with the bureau to ensure accurate state and further action on them (see app. 1 for the disposition of Full count Review data issues by state). The overall results of the Full Count review program and FSC PE members’ participation appear to be mixed. We analyzed the work papers submitted by FSCPE members and other participants in the Full Count Review program. We also analyzed data from the bureau’s Count Review Information System. To identify lessons learned for future improvements, we examined bureau training manuals, statements of work, future improvements. We performed our audit in Washington, D.C., and the Bureau of Population and Social Services’ Washington, Washington, DC, office. We did not independently verify the information contained in the data. the basis of the quality and precision of the documentation, and investigating first those issues that are best documented and thus more easily resolved. exploring the feasibility of using staff from the bureau’s regional offices to help investigate data issues in the field prior to the release of public law data. The Secretary of Commerce should also ensure that the bureau clarifies and consistently communicates to participants the objectives of the Full Count Review program and how the bureau plans to use the information derived from the program, the authors say. members’ local demographic knowledge. According to bureau officials, the bureau plans to include a Full Count Review program in census tests later in the decade. Foremost among the areas in need of improvement is resolving, to the extent practical, a larger number of data issues prior to the release of apportionment data. The bureau should be given to planning the Full Count review program early in the census cycle and testing procedures under conditions as close to the actual census as possible, the authors say. from the 2000 Census appeared to accurately reflect the large amount of new house construction that had taken place within a specific census tract. However, because the population count differed from that indicated by other data sources, the analyst flagged it as an issue to avoid undercounting the population. Bureau officials told us that they used the Full Count Review program to identify systemic errors such as those that could be produced by software problems. None were found, officials said. The officials noted that the bureau generally did not use the Full count review program to resolve individual issues. Review program, with FSCPE participation, was not conceived until February 1999, which was extremely late in the census cycle, coming just 14 months before Census Day, April 1, 2000. Decision stemmed from the Supreme Court’s January 1999 ruling that prohibited the bureau from using statistical sampling for purposes of congressional apportionment. Faced with the larger workload of reviewing two sets of data— adjusted and unadjusted—the bureau decided to enlist the help of FSC PE members in order to meet the deadlines for releasing public law data. Census data remain an important element in allocating federal aid to state and local governments. With billions of dollars at stake, the data are scrutinized intensely for accuracy. The Full Count Review program was designed to rapidly examine, rectify if possible, and clear census data files and products for subsequent processing or public release. The fact that the apportionment and redistricting data were released with around 4,800 unresolved data issues of unknown validity, magnitude, and impact is cause for concern. errors did not require additional research or field verification. Bureau officials told us that they lacked the time to research the remaining issues. As a result, the bureau missed an important opportunity to verify and possibly improve the quality of the data. Until these issues are resolved, uncertainties will surround the accuracy of the census data for the affected localities. Some of the issues might be resolved soon, but not all of them will be resolved in time for the next census. The U.S. House of Representatives is expected to vote on a new redistricting bill this week. Of the 4,804 issues remaining after Full Count Review, 1,994 (42 percent) were referred to CQR. Of these, 537 were accepted for further investigation. The remaining 1,457 issues did not meet the bureau’s documentation requirements and consequently, the bureau took no further action on them. The bureau had no mechanism for managing the Full Count review workload. Unlike the CQr program, where the bureau required local governments to provide specific documentation before it would commit resources to investigate local data issues, the agency did not have such a mechanism. as much supporting information as necessary. Some analysts provided only minimal data, others supported issues with state and local administrative records, historical data, photographs, and maps. In some cases, the bureau had difficulty determining the precise nature of an issue or if in fact an issue even existed. In contrast, the CQR program provides comprehensive guidelines on the documentation required for making submissions. The guidance available on the bureau’s CQr web site notes that before the bureau will investigate concerns raised. Bureau’s requirements for documenting data issues were not clearly defined. Training materials did not provide any specific guidance on the type of evidence analysts needed to support data issues. Field staff would be needed to help verify issues, and the effort would require close coordination with several bureau units. This could help explain why the bureau was not able to correct a larger number of issues, the authors say. The report was published in the Journal of the National Law Enforcement Association (JNLEA) volume 3, issue 1. prisons, dormitories, nursing homes, and similar group living arrangements. Analysts also identified 479 housing unit issues (10 percent of the total), and 288 household issues (6 percent) There were also 383 issues (8 percent) that the bureau classified as “other” They contained questions concerning the demographic characteristics of the data such as age, race, and gender. The bureau was unable to classify 2,060 issues (43 percent) The bureau is investigating the issues. An analyst compared population data from the 1990 Census and 2000 Census. The 2000 Census did not appear to reflect this increase, and it was flagged. The analyst determined that bureau data had placed college dormitories in the wrong tract. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/suspect. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Count Review program to resolve individual issues. Officials: Bureau corrected data for 5 of the 4,809 issues prior to the December 31, 2000, release of reapportionment data. FSCPE members identified the five issues, all of which involved group quarters that were placed in the wrong locations. They included (1) a military base in Nevada, (2) 10 facilities at a college in Wisconsin, (3) 9 facilities ata prison in New York City, (4) 14 facilities at an elementary school. prison in New York City, (4) 14 facilities at a Washington prison, and (5) a federal medical center in Massachusetts. FSCPE analysts found them early in the Full Count Review program, while the bureau was processing a key geographic data file. The five errors did not require additional research or field verification, the bureau said. The corrections were incorporated into the data before the data were finalized. The errors were documented and recommended by the FSC PE analysts, the agency said. that works with the bureau to ensure accurate state and local population estimates. The bureau contracted with 53 FSCPE members who reviewed data for 39 states and Puerto Rico. Bureau employees reviewed data. for the 11 remaining states and the District of Columbia without FSC PE representation in Full Count Review. Bureau and F SCPE analysts were to ensure that (1) group quarters were correctly placed or “geocoded” on census maps, and that their population counts and demographic characteristics appeared reasonable. Bureau data show that after reviewing census data for 39 states and Puerto Rico, FSCPE members identified a total of 1,402 issues. Since the bureau has yet to resolve most of these issues, it is not known whether they are necessarily errors. Group quarters issues were those most frequently identified by the bureau, accounting for 1,599 of the 4,809 issues identified (33 percent) The remaining issues could not be categorized because the nature of the issue couldn't be determined from the documentation. bureau was unable to classify 2,060 issues (43 percent) In these cases, analysts did not provide sufficient documentation for the bureau to determine the nature of the issue. Analysts used an automated process that compared data from the 2000 Census to independent benchmarks such as the 1990 Census. This process alerted bureau officials that there were data discrepancies, but did not indicate their nature. By comparison, FSCPE members compared census data to administrative records and other data, and were better able to document specific issues.

ROUGE-1: 65.08, ROUGE-2: 58.10, ROUGE-L: 26.17
BERTScore: 67.25

==============================================
==================== [94/100] ====================
Summary:
As more and more network addresses come into use, there is concern about the growth in the number of routing tables entries. Historically, IP addresses were organized into three commonly used classes—Classes A, B, and C. For Class A, there are 126 possible network addresses, each with nearly 17 million hosts. Slightly more than 16,000 networks may have a Class B address. Finally, there can be approximately 2 million networks with a Class C address. Each with a maximum of 254 host addresses. C address, each with a maximum of 254 host addresses. CIDR treats multiple contiguous Class C addresses as a single block that requires only one entry in a routing table. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons. The number of IP addresses that must be maintained in each router for traffic routing purposes is substantially reduced. However, this reduces the number of addresses that can be used in a single routing table by a large enough number of routers to handle all Internet traffic. An Internet Protocol (IP) address is a number that is typically written as four numbers separated by periods. When information is sent from one network or node to another, the packet of information includes the destination IP address. Because the IP deals with inter-networking, the IP address is based on the concept of a network address and a host address. The network address indicates the network to which a computer is connected, and the host address identifies the specific computer on that network. The IP address uniquely identifies a computer connected to the Internet. host address identifies the specific computer on that network. In its memory, the router contains a “routing table’ which contains information specifying all of the IP addresses of other networks. The router compares a packet’s destination IP address with the information contained in the routing table to determine the network to which the packet should be sent. In order to ensure that packets from one network can reach any other network, the Router must include an entry for each network it is connected to. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list contains links to the full- texts of the documents.. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’S Reports,” on its Web site daily. E-mail us at fraudnet@gao.gov or call 1-800-424-5454. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao,.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.site daily. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO reports is to go to: www.gao.gov/news/press-releases/news-reporters-and-public-officials-get-a-look-at-what-the-general-accounting-office-is-examining. FCC believes the appropriate means to collect information on Internet backbone networks at the present time is through informal and experimental efforts, which are currently under way. Because of the trend towards convergence in the communications marketplace and the nation’s increasing reliance on the Internet, FCC may need to periodically reassess its data collection efforts. If a more formal data collection program is deemed appropriate, FCC should exercise its authority to establish such a program. We provided a draft of this report to the FCC, NTIA of the Department of Commerce, and DOJ for their review and comment. FCC and NTIA officials stated that they were in general agreement with the facts presented in the report. A trial program for voluntary reporting of outages by providers not currently required to make such reports to FCC, such as Internet backbone providers. A focus group of the Council will evaluate the effectiveness of the program upon its completion and analysis of trial data. We were told that, due to concerns by some Internet providers about reporting network outages to the FCC, some providers may not report outages. A recommendation on outage reporting of these networks will be made by the Council after it has completed its study. agreement with the facts presented in the report. Technical comments provided by FCC, NTIA and DOJ officials were incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report for 14 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional committees, the Chairman, FCC; the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information, Department of Commerce. We will also make copies available to others upon request. Internet backbone market appears to be competitive, but another market that is essential to the functioning of the Internet may be less so. Most ISPs and other end users connect to a backbone provider’s point of presence through the local telecommunications infrastructure. These systems are typically owned and operated by incumbent telephone companies. Many of the market participants with of the 1996 act noted that local telephone markets are, in their view, close to monopolistic; and some noted that several companies attempting to compete against incumbent local telephone carriers have recently gone out of business. Market participants described increasing choice of providers and lower prices as evidence of the competitiveness of the market. Officials also described to us factors that may reduce competition in this market or cause other problems, such as the limited number of Tier 1 providers. The manner in which Internet addresses are assigned, and the lack of control or knowledge about the movement of traffic across backbone networks. We were also told that the choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet would be limited in rural areas. The market is expected to be more competitive in the coming years. development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the Internet. According to many of the company officials we interviewed, there appears to be ample deployment of fiber optic cable in Internet backbone networks to support high bandwidth services. Concerns were expressed to us that shortcomings in the local telephone market were likely to intensify in the future due, in part, to the increase in demand for high-speed Internet services. We were told that capacity continues to be built by backbone providers and others and that backbone networks’ capacity will not be a bottleneck for the deployment of broadband applications. future due, in part, to the increase in demand for broadband applications and content. We found that some companies are offering services to address this problem by attempting to bypass incumbent telephone companies’ facilities. However, the majority of these efforts are focused on business customers in urban areas. Metropolitan fiber rings are being constructed as an alternative to using incumbent carrier services. Business customers purchase a direct connection to the fiber ring, which is connected directly to the backbone point of presence. For example, we found: limited broadband capabilities in local telephone markets could stall certain new applications. Incumbent local telephone companies have stated that the rollout of DSL service is hampered by the cost of reengineering parts of the network and existing regulations that require them to sell piece parts of their networks to competitors at cost-based rates. Legislation is pending in the 107th Congress that would address these concerns, and proponents of this legislation have said that this would help DSL roll-out in the U.S. and around the world. other high speed access lines—which are often used to link businesses (such as an ISP) to an Internet backbone point of presence. Some companies we spoke with expressed concern about slow or limited deployment of high-speed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) service in residential areas. Incumbent local carriers, on the other hand, have stated that there is considerable competition in the provision of special access service. Wireless direct access is also becoming available that will enable a company’s data traffic to bypass local telecommunications infrastructures. for new services, such as Internet- based voice and video services, foretell a trend commonly identified as “convergence” in the broader communications sector. This expectation of greater convergence was widely shared by the market participants we interviewed for this study and for other studies we have conducted at your request over the past 3 years. There is a strong expectation that traditionally regulated services are already migrating to the Internet and will soon become common applications used by residential and business Internet users. Also, the increasing importance of the Internet to the U.S. economy. common applications used by residential and business Internet users. The implications of convergence and greater future reliance on the Internet are at present largely unknown. No evidence came to light in the course of this study to suggest that the long-standing hands-off regulatory approach for the Internet has not worked or should be modified. Further, no evidence that the hands-on regulatory approach has worked or that it should be changed in any way in the future. The Internet has evolved from a nascent but promising information tool to a 21st century medium for commerce and communications. wide geographic scope, having a network with many IP addresses, having extensive information for traffic routing determinations, and handling a large percentage of transmissions. Unlike telecommunications services, the provision of Internet backbone service is not regulated by governmental communications agencies. FCC determined that “basic services’ would be regulated, but “enhanced services” was a vibrant and competitive market that should remain free of regulation. Congress maintained this distinction when it enacted the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The FCC is expected to make a decision by the end of the year. Congress maintained this distinction when it enacted the Telecommunications Act of 1996. No provisions were contained in the 1996 act pertaining to Internet backbone services. However, the treatment of these more established communications services and infrastructures under the Communications Act of 1934 has indirectly affected the Internet medium. Also, the act provided FCC and states the authority to take actions to encourage the deployment of advanced telecommunications capability. The act sought to increase competition in other communications sectors, primarily the local telephone market. It was amended to include the Internet in the telecommunications act of 1998. concerns, and proponents of this legislation have stated that this will advance the deployment of broadband in residential and rural areas. Opponents of the legislation believe the bill will not foster increased deployment ofbroadband services and may stifle competition in the local telephone market. In the 6 years since the federal government ended its sponsorship of a key backbone network, the Internet has changed the way people of the world live, work, and play. Other bills have been introduced in Congress proposing various other approaches and strategies to accelerate the Deployment of high-speed data services. and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large business users. Once on an Internet backbone network, digital data signals that were split into separate pieces or “packets” at the transmission point are separately routed over the most efficient available pathway and reassembled at their destination point. The standards that specify most data transmissions are known as the Internet Protocol (IP) Suite. Under part of this protocol, streams of packets are routed to their destination over themost efficient pathway. Other aspects of the protocol facilitate the routing of packets to their appropriate destination by examining the 32-bit numeric.  latency and the loss of data packets due to traffic congestion is a consequence of the current protocols for transmitting Internet traffic. As transmissions of time-sensitive applications over the Internet become increasingly common in the future, these problems may become particularly acute. Before such broadband content can be provided, both the backbone and the local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth. Of adequate quality. Also, more broadband content is expected to be transmitted over theInternet.of adequatequality. A few of those we interviewed noted that these applications can run well across the Internet. control and encryption. Companies reduce reliance on backbone service by caching frequently used content on their servers. “Internet2’ is a partnership of universities, industry, and government formed to support research and the development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the Internet. The Internet is not viewed as conducive to supporting research capabilities of high-speed technologies and other advanced functions, so alternative methods for such research have emerged. In addition, companies have emerged that specialize in caching frequently accessed content and storing it in varied geographic locations. New Internet services, such as video streaming and voice telephone calls over the Internet, are expected to become increasingly common in the coming years. Both Internet backbone networks and local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth and technical capabilities to support such services. In the absence of adequate information, it is difficult to fully ascertain the quality of service, the reasons for problems when they occur, and the extent of market concentration and competition in the Internet backbone market, the authors say. They say most of those with whom we spoke were optimistic that backbone about the adaptability of the Internet to new services. Companies have emerged to build and provide services over networks that do not rely as much on traffic exchange across networks. For example, a few providers are building and relying on private data networks—rather than the Internet—for the transmission of voice services. Some companies are building “virtual private networks’— networks configured within a public network for data transmissions that are secured via access control and encryption. Companies reduce reliance on backbone service—and thus, thus the sufficiency of the best efforts standard for Internet transmissions. Many companies are developing technologies to enable voice services to be provided over IP networks. At present, however, many backbone networks are not well designed to provision such “time-sensitive” services. Real-time services such as IP telephony and interactive video require “bounded delays” These services require very low and uniform delays between sender and receiver in order for the service to be of adequate quality. Also, more broadband content is expected to be available over the Internet in the coming years. telephone networks—and the quality of Internet services can be compromised when high levels of traffic flow lead to congestion. Several of the market participants we interviewed were particularly concerned about their ability to understand where and why problems have occurred. Because the Internet is a network of interconnected networks with little data available or reported on service disruptions or outages, finding the source, cause, or reason for a problem may be the source and cause of a problem. Several ISPs noted that they receive service level guarantees from their backbone provider but that collecting remuneration for “downtime” is difficult. was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of quality for Internet services. We were told that this difficulty is related to the way that the Internet is engineered. Internet traffic is exchanged among providers on a “best efforts” basis. However, the Internet was not engineered to enable extremely high quality service at all times, as are telephone networks. The quality of Internet services can be compromised at any time, according to experts who spoke to CNN and other news outlets on the condition of anonymity. NRIC V is in the process of evaluating and will report on the reliability of “packet- switched’ networks. The council is also examining issues related to interconnection and peering of Internet backbone providers. We found that participants in Internet markets have begun to address latency and reliability problems in Internet backbone networks. For example, NRIC V will be evaluating the sufficiency of the best efforts of the Internet backbone provider’s “backbone-to-backbone” network. Most companies we interviewed in rural areas purchased “transport” services to connect to an Internet backbone network. Eighteen of the 24 ISPs and 3 of the 8 end users we interviewed used transport from across such distances. The one disadvantage of distant transport noted by several providers was cost. Some company officials noted that it generally costs more to purchase transport to a distant location than it does to connected to a backbone at a local point of presence. Part, by governmental subsidy) that may actually discourage private backbone companies from entering and thriving in such markets. of the 8 end users we interviewed used transport from their location to another location for at least some of their Internet traffic. Sometimes transport was used to move data traffic to a nearby city that was not very far away. But in some cases—particularly for ISPs in rural areas—traffic was transported a few hundred miles to a point of presence of a backbone provider. The majority of officials from these companies told us that the quality of Internet service is not diminished by transporting traffic across such distances. Members of Congress are often concerned about whether telecommunications services reach rural areas. Several representatives of companies we interviewed noted that there are less Internet backbone facilities running through rural areas and fewer points of presence in those areas. As such, purchasers of backbone connectivity in rural areas may have fewer choices among providers than their counterparts in more urban locations. One point made by two rural providers is that rural areas sometimes have subsidized networks (e.g., state networks or networks funded, in part, by governmental subsidy) trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. To obtain information from a wide variety of participants within the Internet backbone market, we visited locations in 12 states with varying characteristics. We included large and small cities and rural areas from various regions of the country. Other criteria used for selection of areas were proximity to Internet points of presence, which are access points to the Internet, and proximity to network access points (NAP), which are points where Internet backbones interconnect. Also considered were the presence of other features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks. it generally receives a block of IP addresses from among the addresses that are assigned by ARIN to that backbone provider. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons. It presents unique problems for smaller ISPs and other entities. If an entity seeking IP addresses cannot utilize a large block of address issued by. ARIN, the entity must obtain their addresses from. among the allocations made by ARin to their Internet backbone. provider. The method of allocating IP addresses in large blocks enables backbone routers to operate efficiently. It makes it difficult for router for traffic routing purposes is substantially reduced. Spoke also told us that it makes it difficult for smaller entities to switch backbone providers. If an ISP were to change its backbone provider, it would generally have to relinquish its block of IP addresses and get a new block of addresses from the new backbone provider. Several ISPs and end users with whom we spoke said that changing address space can be time consuming and costly. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of their backbone provider's IP address block. We found that the degree of difficulty in changingaddress space depends on how an individual company’s computer network is configured. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of customers due to a change of IP addresses. A few also told us that it is not uncommon for an ISP to retain a relationship with its original backbone provider. It appears, therefore, that customers’ feelings of being tied to a provider may lessen the effective level of competitiveness in this market. A concern among several market participants we interviewed was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of connectivity. Is it possible to guarantee a customer a given amount of connectivity? An ISP’s traffic connects to a backbone Internet backbone networks. Backbone providers have points of presence in varied locations. If an ISP or end user is far from a point of presence, it is able to reach distant points of Presence over telecommunications lines. Figure 1 depicts two hypothetical Internet backbone Networks that link at interconnection points and take traffic to and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large businesses. The hypothetical networks are shown in Figure 1, the hypothetical backbone networks that take traffic from and to residential users. Several ISPs and end users expressed concern about the manner in which Internet addresses are allocated. Two companies specifically mentioned that they had or were planning to move their facilities to more urban locations because of the cost of distant transport. Most ISPs and other end users do not directly obtain their own IP addresses, but they instead receive a block of IP addresses from a backbone provider. In particular, when an ISP obtains an Internet connection from the backbone provider, it also generally receives aBlock of IP Address from the Backbone. IP addresses for North America are allocated by the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) There are many Internet backbone providers offering service in the United States. Boardwatch reports 41 backbone providers with a national network and many other regional backbones. Approximately five to eight of these national providers are considered to be “Tier 1” backbone providers. A Tier 1 provider is defined by Boardwatch as having a network of wide geographic scope, having anetwork with many IP addresses, and many regional networks. Some Internet backbone providers value several features of NAPs. When a company interconnects at a NAP, it saves on equipment costs and administrative overhead. Representatives of two companies with whom we spoke noted that the NAP's play an important role in helping to keep the market for backbone service open for entry, and thus more competitive. NAP’s provide new backbone firms an efficient, low-cost method for exchanging traffic with numerous other providers. The term NAP refers to approximately 10 major traffic exchange points that host backbone providers. Two types of facilities are used for the exchange of data traffic by interconnected Internet backbone providers. The first type of facility, known as a “network access point” (NAP), enables numerous backbone providers to interconnect with each other at a common facility. Internet data traffic is also exchanged by backbone providers at “private” interconnections. In a ‘peering’ relationship, backbone providers exchange data destined for other providers. Two different types of financial arrangements exist among backbone providers for traffic exchanges. A NAP facilitates the interconnection of multiple backbone providers. In a “peering” relationship, backbone providers exchange data destined only for each other’s network. In the early to mid-1990s, the National Science Foundation designed and partially funded four NAPs, each of which was managed by a different company. Since that time, other interconnection points have been constructed, and for purposes such as transit payments. For more information, visit the NAP website.  congestion and poor quality of connections at the NAPs led backbone providers to engage in “private interconnection.” Private interconnection refers to the exchange of traffic at a place other than a NAP. Of 17 backbone providers with whom we spoke, 15 used both N APs and private interconnections; the remaining 2 used only private interconnection, avoiding the Naps entirely. Because of the private nature of these agreements, the number of private interConnections that currently exist across the U.S. is not known. of the 15 providers using both NAPs and private interconnection said they exchanged more than 80 percent of their traffic at private exchange points. Of the 17 companies that we met with, 10 provided estimates of how their mix of private inter connection and NAP use would likely change in the future. Nine of the 10 stated that they either plan less use of NAPS in the next few years or do not see their mix. of Naps andprivate interconnection changing. Only one company said that it was likely to make greater use ofNAPs in thefuture. Spoke said that some NAPs were not well managed. Some NAP technology was not “scalable’ — that is, beyond some level, it was very costly to increase the amount of traffic that could be exchanged. If traffic exchange at a NAP became congested, service quality could be compromised. Two typical problems that congestion causes include latency (delay in the transmission of traffic) and packet loss (when transmitted data are actually lost and never reach their destination). For example, one backbone provider told us that the loss of packets had sometimes reached 50 percent. We found that it is generally not viewed as economical for a backbone provider to peer with a less geographically dispersed backbone provider. Even if there were equal traffic flows, the larger provider will tend to carry traffic a further distance. When backbones C and D exchange traffic, C must carry the traffic much farther on the return path before it can hand off the data packets to D. The “tiering” of Internet backbone providers and the dual system of peering and transit agreements have caused controversies. In a peering arrangement, two backbone providers agree to exchange traffic destined only for each others’ networks. By the mid to late-1990s, another financial arrangement known as “transit’ emerged. While peering generally entails traffic exchange between two providers without payment, transit entails payment by one provider to another for carrying traffic. Currently, there is a segregation of backbone providers into “tiers.” The top tier or “Tier 1” providers generally peer with each other and sell transit to smaller backbone providers. We found no official data source that could provide information to allow an empirical investigation of the nature of competition in the Internet backbone market. Neither FCC nor NTIA collect data on the provision of Internet backbone services. DOJ often collects data for merger-specific analyses, but such data are not publicly available. Neither the Bureau of Labor Statistics nor the U.S. Census Bureau currently collects data directly on Internet backbone providers. The choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet backbone networks may be limited. features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks, state Internet Service Provider (ISP) associations, or Native American reservations. In the selected localities, we conducted 55 semistructured interviews with participants in the Internet backbone market between January and June 2001. We interviewed eighteen Internet backbone providers of varying size; two miscellaneous Internet companies that provide backbone-like twenty-four Internet size; eight end users of backbone services, including a college, a state government, corporations, and providers of content and Web hosting. for purposes of conducting interviews to support this study. In some cases, our request for an interview was declined, our telephone contacts were not returned, or we were unable to schedule an interview after repeated discussions with company officials. In addition to the information collected through interviews, we also conducted technical, legal, and regulatory research on the characteristics and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Each individual network or node that is connected to the Internet is identified by an Internet Protocol (IP) address—a number that is typically written. No official data sources were identified that would provide information on the structure and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Some backbone providers are filling market niches by offering customers additional or unique services to complement their backbone services. Some stated that it is difficult to guarantee their own clients a certain level of service if they receive few guarantees themselves. Transit customers, however, do contract for a specifiedlevel of service for such items as “uptime” — the functioning of a network without impairment or failure. telecommunications providers is collected. To investigate the degree of competition, we spoke with an array of buyers and sellers of backbone connectivity and asked questions that were designed to provide information about the competitiveness of the market. We asked questions about the availability of choice among providers in the market, the viability of purchasing transport to a distant location to connect to a backbone provider, the length of contracts for backbone connectivity, the types of service guarantees buyers receive from sellers, the ability of buyers to negotiate favorable contract terms, and the factors that were important to buyers. Senate Committee on the Judiciary asked us to report on the physical structure and financial arrangements among Internet backbone providers. We interviewed officials and obtained documents from the Federal Communications Commission, the Department of Justice, the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We also interviewed two national Internet industry trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. If you have any questions about this report, please call me at 202- 512-2834.will also make copies available to others upon request. the world live, work, and play. Its rapid growth is seen in the substantial investments made by private sector firms in backbone networks and interconnection facilities. Internet backbone providers not only compete with each other for customers but also cooperate for the exchange of traffic. The success of the Internet, as evidenced by its growth, evolution, diversity, and cooperative structure, has occurred with minimal government involvement. It is the result of a dynamic marketplace where providers compete for customers and cooperate for traffic. It's also a result of the proliferation of interactive applications and content, and the increase in the connectivity of end users. Despite the Internet’s success and the competitiveness of the Internet backbone market, several issues of concern regarding this market were raised to us during the course of our study. Market participants noted the importance of Tier 1 backbone providers and the potential for reduced competition if consolidation were to occur at the Tier 1-provider level. The inability of backbone customers to ascertain the causes of service degradation or traffic disruptions was also expressed to us, along with concerns about the adaptability of the internet to new services. Contract terms, and the factors that were important to buyers when choosing a backbone provider. Most non-Tier 1 backbone providers stated that they can purchase transit from a backbone providers. A few ISPs and other purchasers of backbone services also noted that the extensive choice of backbone providers enables them to engage in “multihoming” The existence of approximately 40 national backbone providers may not fully reveal the competitiveness of this market. It appears that even if the “relevant” market for primary backbone connectivity is the Tier 1 providers, that market segment may be viewed as competitive. noted that, coincident with increased choice of backbone providers throughout the country, the price of backbone connectivity had declined significantly in recent years. Representatives of several companies told us that although they were presented with standard contracts by backbone providers, they were able to negotiate terms and conditions in their contracts that were important to them. A few ISP representatives with whom we met said they receive frequent sales calls from multiple backbone providers. An ISP representative noted that many backbone providers are working to increase the speed and decrease the latency of transmissions of their networks to improve their networks. Whom we spoke expressed concerns about their inability to peer with the largest providers. We were also told that peering policies should be made public. Some backbone providers with whom we spoke stated that the market is competitive, and transit rates have been decreasing. We found that some non-Tier 1 backbone providers do not want to peer With the largest backbone providers.. Some providers said they already had posted or soon would be posting their peering. policies on their Web sites or otherwise making them publicly available. The recent economic downturn in the communications sector may portend a further shakeout of backbone providers. Without quality interconnection, customers may have an incentive to buy service from the largest provider with the best-connected network. This would give the larger provider a competitive advantage, which in turn could cause the market to ‘tip’ More and more users would choose connectivity from the larger network, risking a monopolization of the industry. The FCC Working Paper and the Antitrust Division of DOJ have noted that in industries like the Internet backbone market, interconnection among carriers is critical to the quality of service consumers receive.

ROUGE-1: 79.32, ROUGE-2: 71.69, ROUGE-L: 21.60
BERTScore: 57.85

==============================================
==================== [95/100] ====================
Summary:
U.S. market share of the worldwide travel market and a decline in overseas visitors to the United States since 9/11. State Department’s 2003 report on Patterns of Global Terrorism recorded 67 attacks on American business facilities and 7 business casualties. In 2006, the Overseas Security Advisory Council noted that more threats against the private sector occurred in 2006 than in 2004 or 2005 in most of the industries it reports on. Working Group on Anti-Americanism also indicated that threats to American private property and personnel working overseas have become constant in some regions, especially the Middle East. 56 private U.S. citizens were killed as a result of terrorism incidents in 2005. The Working Group on Anti-Americanism suggests that there is some correlation between anti- Americanism and violence against Americans in the greater Middle East. The relationship is complex. For example, while increased anti-Americanist in Europe or Jordan has not led to violence against American or U.s. citizens, it has led to more violence in the region. The group notes that Americans face an increased risk of direct attack from individuals and small groups. Security concerns are particularly elevated in countries with significant Muslim populations. Security and budgetary concerns have led to the closure of publicly accessible facilities around the world. In Pakistan, for example, all American Centers and Libraries have been closed. The threat level for terrorism is rated as “critical” or “high” in 80 percent of posts. The U.S. military is committed to maintaining a balance between safety and mission, says the U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Anti-Americanism around the world may reduce the U.S.’s ability to pursue its foreign policy goals. The 9/11 Commission report of July 2004 stated that perceptions of the United States’ foreign policies as anti-Arab, anti-Muslim, and pro-Israel have contributed to the rise in extremist rhetoric. The Council on Foreign Relations has argued that increasing hostility toward America in Muslim countries facilitates recruitment and support for extremism and terror. Americans now face increased security costs. Foreign leaders may seek to leverage anti-American sentiment in pursuit of their own political goals. As these leaders achieve personal political successes based on their opposition to the United States, they may then be less likely to support U.S. foreign policy. Further, the 9/11 Commission, the Council on Foreign Relations, and others have reported on the possibility thatAnti-Americanism may also serve as a barrier to success in the world.our policy goals far more difficult.” The Working Group on Anti- Americanism said. on strategic communication, the Defense Science Board states that “damaging consequences for other elements of U.S. soft power are tactical manifestations of a pervasive atmosphere of hostility” Similarly, the Council on Foreign Relations has claimed that the loss of goodwill and trust from publics around the world has had a negative impact on U.s. security and foreign policy. Anti-American sentiments may negatively affect American economic interests and military operations, and the security of Americans. According to Business for Diplomatic Action, anti-Americanism can hurt American businesses by causing boycotts of American products. any causal relationships between negative foreign public opinion and specific negative outcomes regarding U.S. interests. Despite the fact that we cannot draw a direct causal link between anti-Americanism. and specific outcomes in these areas, it is clear that growing negative foreign. public opinion does not help the United States achieve its economic, foreign policy, and security. goals. U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called for an end to the use of anti- Americanism as a political football.  favorable attitudes toward the United States in Indonesia declined from 75 percent in 2000 to 30 percent in 2006. Numerous experts, expert groups, policymakers, and business leaders have expressed concerns that anti-Americanism may harm U.S. interests in various ways. In its 2004 report on strategic communication, the Defense Science Board states that “damaging’ anti-U.S., anti-Muslim sentiment is a worldwide trend. While individual opinion polls might reflect a snapshot in time, consistently negative polls may reflect the development of more deeply seated sentiments. Jordan has not led to violence against Americans or U.S. interests in those areas, but it does seem to play a role in fueling such violence in Iraq. Other factors, such as the visibility of Americans overseas, particularly in Iraq; the role of the media in supporting anti-Americanism; and the absence of economic security may also contribute to this violence. While all of the topics discussed here represent areas in which anti- Americanism may have negative consequences, the empirical evidence to support direct relationships is limited. boycotts of American products, a backlash against American brands, increased security costs for U.S. companies, and higher foreign opposition to U.s. trade policies. A report from the Princeton-based Working Group on Anti-Americanism generally echoes the possibility that anti- Americanism may harm U. s. business interests. The U. S. travel industry has reported significant declines in the U.K. market share of the worldwide travel market and a decrease in the world’s best talent to join American workforce. as American Centers and Libraries. In Pakistan, for example, all American Centers have closed for security reasons; the last facility, in Islamabad, closed in February 2005. These same concerns have prevented establishing a U.S. presence elsewhere. As a result, embassies have had to find other venues for public diplomacy programs. Some activities have been moved onto embassy compounds, where precautions designed to improve security have had the ancillary effect of sending the message that the United States is unapproachable and distrustful. escorts contribute to this perception, as do requirements restricting visitors’ use of cell phones and pagers within the embassy. According to one official in Pakistan, visitors to the embassy’s reference library have declined to as few as one per day. Other public diplomacy programs have had to limit their publicity to reduce the risk of becoming a target. A recent joint USAID-State report concluded that “security concerns often require a ‘low profile’ approach during events, programs or other situations’ which, in happier times, would have been able to generate considerable good will for the U.S. This constraint is particularly acute in Pakistan, where the embassy has had to reduce certain speaker and exchange programs. State has responded to security concerns and the loss of publicly accessible facilities through a variety of initiatives. According to State data, there are currently 365 American Corners throughout the world, including more than 200 in the Muslim world, with another 31 in the Middle East and North Africa.. public outreach and other functions within their host country capitals. It was particularly difficult to find time to travel outside the capitals to interact with other communities. This challenge is compounded at posts with short tours of duty, including many tours in the Muslim world. Officials stated that it is difficult to establish the type of close working relationships essential to effective public diplomacy work when they are in country for only a short time. In our May 2006 report, we reported that the average length of tour at posts in theMuslim world is about 22 percent shorter. posts in the Muslim world is about 22 percent shorter than tour lengths elsewhere. Public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours. Officials at State said that the Management bureau is currently considering options for reducing the administrative burden on posts, including the development of centralized posts. The State Department recommends that the Secretary of State designate more administrative positions to overseas public affairs sections to reduce the burden on the State Department's Overseas Public Affairs Office (OPPO) for overseas posts. Staffing shortages may also limit the amount of training public diplomacy officers receive. Public diplomacy officers at posts are burdened with administrative tasks. State is repositioning several public diplomacyOfficers as part of its transformational diplomacy initiative. However, this effort represents shifting existing public diplomacy Officers and does not increase the overall number of officers, which we have noted were generally the same in fiscal years 2004 and 2006. The U.S. State Department has not released a full list of the officers it has reassigned. officers at posts are burdened with administrative tasks, and thus have less time to conduct public diplomacy outreach activities. One senior State official said that administrative duties, such as budget, personnel, and internal reporting, compete with officers’ public diplomacy responsibilities. Another official in Egypt stated that she rarely had enough time to strategize, plan, or evaluate her programs. These statements echo comments we heard during overseas fieldwork and in a survey for our 2003 report. In that survey, officers stated that, although they manage to attend public outreach and other functions within their host country capitals, GAO: State Department continues to experience significant foreign language proficiency shortfalls in countries around the world. In countries with significant Muslim populations, we reported that 30 percent of language- designated public diplomacy positions were filled by officers without the requisite proficiency in those languages. In Arabic language posts, about 36 percent of staff unable to speak Arabic at the designated level. State has begun to address these shortfalls, including the development of centralized administrative capabilities offshore. The information officer in Cairo stated that his office does not have enough Arabic speakers to engage the Egyptian media effectively. State has begun to address these language deficiencies by increasing its overall amount of language training and providing supplemental training for more difficult languages. Security concerns have limited embassy outreach efforts and public access, forcing public diplomacy officers to strike a balance between safety and mission. For example, State’s Foreign Service Institute recently offered a week of intensive media training for language-qualified officers that provided guidance on how to communicate with Arabic-speaking audiences. Shortly after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the U.S. State Department increased the number of officers meeting language requirements. structure to reinforce the Board’s role as CEO with a host of responsibilities. In 2006, MBN, which received $79 million in funding in fiscal year 2006, faces several managerial and editorial challenges. While MBN has taken steps to improve its process of program review and evaluation, it has not yet implemented our recommendations to improve the system of evaluation and program review, says the report. The report concludes that the BBG should take a more active role in shaping its overall strategic direction and setting expectations. not yet implemented our recommendations to improve its system of internal control or develop a comprehensive staff training plan. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Audrey Solis, Assistant Director; Michael ten Kate; Eve Weisberg; Kate France Smiles; and Joe Carney. I would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For questions regarding this testimony, please contact Jess T. Ford at (202) 512-4128 or fordj@gao.gov. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army on 8457 909090 or see http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The BBG’s vision is to create a flexible, multimedia, research-driven U.S. international broadcasting system. The BBG created a single strategic goal to focus on the key objective of maximizing impact in priority areas of interest to the United States. We recommended that the BBG improve its audience research methods, including identifying significant methodological problems with its audience surveys. We found that methodological concerns call into question the potential accuracy of this key performance measure with regard to Radio Sawa's listening rates and Alhurra's viewing rates. The key objectives of U.S. public diplomacy are to engage, inform, and influence overseas audiences. Public diplomacy is carried out through a wide range of programs that employ person-to-person contacts and print, broadcast, and electronic media. Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, State has expanded its public diplomacy efforts globally. In May 2006, we reported that this trend continued with funding increases of 25 percent for the Near East and 39 percent for South Asia from 2004 to 2006. recently launched a pilot public diplomacy performance measurement data collection project. In 2001, the BBG introduced a market-based approach to international broadcasting that sought to “marry the mission to the market” This approach was designed to generate large listening audiences in priority markets. Implementing this strategy has focused on markets relevant to the war on terrorism, in particular in the Middle East through such key initiatives as Radio Middle East and Radio Palestine. The project is designed to collect, document, and quantify reliable annual and long-term outcome performance measures. State and the BBG spent close to $1.5 billion on public diplomacy programs in fiscal year 2006. In recent years anti-American sentiment has spread and intensified around the world. Pew Global Attitudes Project has found that the decline in favorable opinion of the United States is a worldwide trend. The BBG manages and oversees the Voice of America (VOA), Radio/TV Marti, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Radio free Asia, Radio Farda, Radio Sawa and the Alhurra TV Network. State Department had 887 established public diplomacy positions (overseas and domestic) as of March 31, 2007, but 199, or roughly 22 percent, were vacant. The BBG’s disparate organizational structure has been viewed as a key management challenge that significantly complicates its efforts to focus and direct U.S. international broadcasting efforts. Although several recent reports on public diplomacy have recommended an increase in public diplomacy program spending, several embassy officials stated that they do not have the capacity to effectively utilize increased funds. more than 200 in the Muslim world, with another 31 planned. Two of the posts we visited in October 2005 were having difficulty finding hosts for American Corners, as local institutions fear becoming terrorist targets. The Broadcasting Board of Governors has its own set of public diplomacy challenges, including trying to gain large audiences in priority markets and dealing with a disparate organizational structure that contains multiple discrete broadcasters. As noted in the BBG’s strategic plan, “diverse organizations with different missions,” plan, “the diversity of the BBG ... makes it a challenge to bring all the separate parts together in a more effective whole” As we reported in July 2003, the Board hoped to address this key challenge through two primary means. First, it planned to treat the component parts of U.S. international broadcasting as a single system with the Board in the position of actively managing resources across broadcast entities to achieve common broadcast goals. Second, it intended to realign theBBG’s organizational structure to reinforce the Board's role as CEO. Better Assess the Impact of Agencies’ Marking and Publicizing Efforts. U.S. Public Diplomacy: State Department Efforts to Engage Muslim Audiences Lack Certain Communication Elements and Face Significant Challenges. International Affairs: Persistent Challenges. The Department of State: Staffing and Foreign Language Shortfalls Persist Despite Initiatives to Address Gaps. The State Department and Broadcasting Board of Governors Expand Efforts in the Middle East but Face Significant challenges. The United States Agency for International Development: Management of Middle East Broadcasting Services Could Be Improved. This work is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. Because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you want to use it. The U.S. Government Accountability Office is an independent agency that advises the government on issues of national security. The GAO's mission is to provide the public with information about the State Department's efforts to address national security issues. The U.S. government lacks an interagency public diplomacy strategy. While the department has articulated a strategic framework to direct its efforts, comprehensive guidance on how to implement this strategic framework has not yet been developed. In addition, posts generally do not pursue a campaign-style approach to communications that incorporates best practices endorsed by GAO and others. State has begun to take credible steps towards instituting more systematic performance measurement practices, consistent with recommendations GAE and others have made. Finally, although the BBG has developed a strategic plan to integrate its diverse efforts, the State Department has yet to develop its own strategic plan. GAO: U.S. lacks a governmentwide, interagency public diplomacy strategy. The lack of such a strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages, GAO says. The BBG has added audience size as a key performance measure within its strategic plan, it adds. GAO: Our latest review of MBN’s operations call into question the potential value of this measure due to various methodological concerns. The GAO has made a number of unsuccessful attempts to develop a strategy. strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages and therefore increases the risk of making damaging communication mistakes. State officials have said that it also diminishes the efficiency and effectiveness of governmentwide public diplomacy efforts. Several reports have concluded that a strategy is needed to synchronize agencies’ target audience assessments, messages, and capabilities. On April 8, 2006, the President established a new Policy Coordination Committee on Public Diplomacy and Strategic Communications. This committee intends to better coordinate interagency activities, including the development of an interagency public diplomacy strategy. that normally exceeds the three- to four-page plans produced by posts in pilot countries. The plans omit basic elements, such as specific core messages and themes. In the absence of such research, programs may lack important information about appropriate target audiences and credible messages and messengers. Based on prior reports by GAO and others, the department has begun to institute a more concerted effort to measure the impact of its programs and activities. The department created (1) a task force to assess the effectiveness of the department's programs. Five tactics will be used to implement the Under Secretary’s priority goals. 18 posts selected to participate in a pilot initiative focusing on this objective. We have recommended that State adopt strategic communication best practices. These steps include defining the core message, identifying and segmenting target audiences, developing detailed communication strategies and developing country-level plans focusing on the countering extremism goal. We reviewed most of the plans submitted in response to this guidance. Although useful as a high-level planning exercise, these plans do not adhere to the campaign-style approach. message, identifying and segmenting target audiences, developing detailed communication strategies and tactics, and using research and evaluation to inform and re-direct efforts as needed. In 2006, our review of public diplomacy operations in Nigeria, Pakistan, and Egypt in 2006 found that this approach and corresponding communication plans were absent. In a recent development, 18 posts participating in the department’s pilot countries initiative have developed country-level plans focusing on the countering extremism goal. These plans have been released to the public. In March 2007, we reported that most agencies involved in foreign assistance activities had established some marking and publicity requirements. However, we identified some challenges to marking and publicizing activities. The U.S. government also lacks a governmentwide strategy and meaningful methods to ensure that recipients of foreign assistance are consistently aware that the aid comes from the United States. We have been told this strategy is still under development and will be issued soon.. State indicated that the interagency public diplomacy strategy will address assessment of marking and. publicity programs on public awareness. State has not yet developed a comprehensive strategy to guide the Department’s efforts to engage the private sector. In 2005, the Under Secretary established a strategic framework for U.S. public diplomacy efforts. This framework partially responds to our 2003 recommendation that State should develop and disseminate a strategy to integrate its public Diplomacy efforts and direct them toward achieving common objectives. The Under Secretary noted that she intends to achieve these goals using five tactics—engagement, exchanges, education, empowerment, and evaluation. impact of its programs and activities. The Department established an expanded evaluation schedule that is designed to cover all major public diplomacy programs. The department also has called on program managers to analyze and define their key inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact to help identify meaningful performance goals and indicators. Finally, the department recently launched a pilot public diplomacy performance measurement data collection data collection to help measure the department's performance in the public diplomacy community.iReport.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery.

ROUGE-1: 82.19, ROUGE-2: 72.37, ROUGE-L: 27.26
BERTScore: 61.58

==============================================
==================== [96/100] ====================
Summary:
after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees and subcommittees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report or wish to discuss it further, please contact me at (202) 512-6906 or Casey Keplinger, Assistant Director. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through GAO's Web site (www.gao.gov) Each weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products, e-mails us at jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk. have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon. Go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates” to get the latest from the GAO. For more information, go to: http://www.gaO.gov/news/press-releases/2014/05/05-05/gao-e-mailing-you-a-list-of- newly-posted- products-every- afternoon.  weaknesses can result in uncontrolled spending of taxpayer dollars, misplaced or unaccounted for property, and challenges in producing financial statements. FEMA’s auditors reported seven internal control weaknesses for fiscal year 2002, including weaknesses in information security controls over its financial systems environment; financial system functionality; financial reporting. Weaknesses such as these have existed for several years and contribute to INS's systems continuing inability to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. Although the weaknesses did not interfere with the agency’S ability to obtain an unqualified opinion on its financial statement audit, they did result in the need for extensive manual effort to prepare reliable financial information. weaknesses specifically contributed to FEMA’s systems’ failure to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. These weaknesses resulted from FLETC not having adequate policies and procedures in place to ensure that funds obligated were proper and that costs for construction in progress were recorded properly. Further, auditors found that FLE TC was not taking the steps necessary to be in compliance with certain Office of Management and Budget requirements. Many of these weaknesses lead to FLETTC’‘s inability to substantially complying with FFM MIA. were unable to provide an opinion on other financial statements for the 7 months ending September 30, 2003. For fiscal year 2002 and prior to its transfer to DHS, Customs’ auditors reported nine internal control weaknesses. DHS’s auditors also found significant deficiencies at the Coast Guard and Secret Service, preventing them from being able to express an opinion. FEMA, Customs, and TSA each had weaknesses at the time of theirTransfer to DHS. However, in the 2003 audit report, these weaknesses were classified as observations and recommendations. TSA is a relatively new agency formed after the September 11, 2001, terror attacks. Auditors reported six internal control weaknesses. These weaknesses contributed to Customs’ systems inability to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA, auditors said. The weaknesses can result in the agency's inability to comply with FFMia requirements, the report said. It added that the weaknesses could leave Customs' information vulnerable to unauthorized access, and the necessity of extensive manual procedures and analyses to process routine transactions. receivable are determined and recorded on a timely basis. In order to resolve several weaknesses at FLETC and TSA, various policies and procedures were implemented. TSA has hired additional staff, thereby resolving its weaknesses of not having a sufficient number of qualified accounting personnel. In addition to the 7 material weaknesses and 7 reportable conditions reported in the 2003 financial statement audit, DHS reported 12 additional weaknesses that affect the department’s full compliance with certain objectives of 31 U.S.C. 3512(c), (d) When DHS was created in March 2003 and merged with 22 diverse agencies, there were many known financial management weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the inherited agencies. Auditors were unable to opine on the consolidated statements of net costs and changes in net position, combined statement of budgetary resources, and consolidated statement of financing. The auditors reported 14 reportable conditions on internal control, 7 of which were considered to be material weaknesses. Most of the 22 components that transferred to DHS had not been subjected to significant financial statement audit scrutiny prior to their transfer. substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. Nine of the 30 internal control weaknesses identified in prior component financial statement audits have been closed as of September 30, 2003. The remaining 21 issues represent continuing weaknesses that have been reported in DHS’s first Performance and Accountability Report. The department's independent auditors classified the remaining 7 weaknesses as lower level observations and recommendations. The total number of reportable conditions for DHS for fiscal year 2003, 7 of which were considered to be material weaknesses. The Coast Guard and Strategic National Stockpile had weaknesses in financial oversight. Financial reporting process was complex and labor-intensive at the Coast Guard. Several DHS bureaus lacked clearly documented procedures, making them vulnerable if key people leave the organization. The auditors found weaknesses across DHS in its entitywide security program management and in its financial systems functionality and technology. The Coast Guard had no specifically attributable reported weaknesses identified in DOT’s financial statement audit. However, newly identified weaknesses were one of the main reasons that independent auditors issued a qualified opinion on the consolidated balance sheet. across DHS in its entitywide security program management and in controls over system access, application software development, system software, segregation of duties, and service continuity. The Coast Guard was unable to support the recorded value of $2.9 billion in PP&E due to insufficient documentation provided prior to the completion of audit procedures. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) lacked a comprehensive property management system and adequate policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of itsPP&E records. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) lacked the ability to manage its property, plant, and equipment. Internal controls over physical counts of OM&S were not effective at the Coast Guard. The Secret Service did not record the pension liability for certain of its employees and retirees. When corrected, the auditors had insufficient time to audit the Secret Service. The Coast Guard also had not recently reviewed its OM/S capitalization policy, leading to a material adjustment to its records when an analysis was performed. The auditors were unable to verify the recorded value of $497 million inOM&S. when corrected, the auditors had insufficient time to audit the amount recorded. The Coast Guard also was unable to provide, prior to the completion of audit procedures, sufficient documentation to support the recorded value of $201 million in post-service benefit liabilities. DHS lacked controls to verify that monthly financial reports and transferred balances from legacy agencies were accurate and complete. The Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s (CBP) accounting system lacked automated controls to detect and prevent excessive drawback claims and payments. related information was inconsistent and inefficient. CIS did not perform cycle counts of its work in process that would facilitate the accurate calculation of deferred revenue. Several large DHS bureaus had not developed and adopted effective SOPs or established systems to track, confirm, and reconcile intragovernmental balances. The Coast Guard lacked written standard operating procedures (SOP) to guide the process, primarily as the result of a new financial system that substantially increased the number of reconciling differences. The Department of Homeland Security's budget for fiscal year 2015 was $1.2 billion. FEMA's financial systems were unable to perform certain basic accounting functions efficiently. FEMA’s systems were also unable to accurately track basic accounting information, such as real and personal property and accounts receivable. Many of these weaknesses specifically contributed to FEMA's systems’ failure to substantially comply with the requirements of the Federal Financial Reporting Act of 1974. FEMA also had a lack of a process to evaluate the accuracy of a new claims estimation methodology, which contributed to its failure to meet the requirements. inherited from component agencies. For example, Customs had a previously identified weakness related to the effectiveness of its internal controls over accurate reporting of entry duties and taxes. FEMA’s accounts receivable processes were strengthened to ensure that accounts Receivable are determined and recorded on a timely basis. In the U.S. military, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is responsible for the protection of the nation's national security. The Department of the Homeland Security has responsibility for the security of the country's borders, airports, ports of entry and waterways. or established systems to track, confirm, and reconcile intragovernmental balances and transactions with their trading partners. Strategic National Stockpile (SNS): The SNS accounting process was fragmented and disconnected, largely due to operational challenges caused by the laws governing SNS. A $485 million upwards adjustment had to be made to value SNS in DHS’s records properly. Accounts payable and undelivered orders: CIS and the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), TSA, and the Coast Guard had weaknesses in their processes. of 31 U.S.C. 3512(c), (d) (commonly known as the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA) FMFIA requires that management ensure that it has an organizational structure that supports the planning, directing, and controlling of operations to meet agency objectives. The standards also define internal control as a key component necessary to ensure that financial reporting information is reliable. Examples of the weaknesses reported by DHS included deficient controls over laws and regulations regarding the border entry process, nonconformance related to system security. The Government Accountability Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. It exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American people. The Office is responsible for the audit and evaluation of the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center. It is also responsible for providing oversight of the FBI, the DEA, the Secret Service, and other federal law enforcement agencies. The office is located in Washington, D.C. and has offices in New York, Los Angeles, and Washington, DC. orders. Reportable Condition (Drawback Claims on Duties, Taxes, and Fees) Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Reportable condition (Acceptance and Adjudication of Immigration and Naturalization Applications) Reportability Condition (Accounts Payable and Undelivered Orders) Observation & Recommendations to Management Material weakness ( financial systems functionality and technology) Material strongness (financial systems functionability and technology). Reportablecondition (In-bond Movement of Imported Goods) CBP did not have a reliable process of monitoring the movement of ‘in-bond’ shipments. CBP lacked an effective compliance measurement program to compute an estimate of underpayment of related duties, taxes, and fees. The Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services’ (CIS) process for tracking and reporting the status of applications and related information was inconsistent and inefficient. Also, CIS did not prevent excessive drawback claims and payments. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) failed to adequately monitor the movements of “in- bond” shipments, which are merchandise that is not subject to duties until it reaches its destination. The CFO Act requires the agency’s CFO to develop and maintain an integrated accounting and financial management system that provides for complete, reliable, and timely financial information. The act also requires that the agency's CFO be qualified, presidentially appointed, approved by the Senate, and report to the head of the agency. FFMIA requires that agencies implement and maintain financial management systems that substantially comply with federal financialmanagement systems requirements, applicable accounting to provide the Congress and agency management with reliable financial information for managing and making day-to-day decisions. it interferes with the enterprise approach or causes significant short-term inefficiencies for agencies that must quickly adapt to other systems. DHS is currently subject to most financial management improvement laws except for the CFO Act and FFMIA. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise and costly financial management system that does not provide the information needed by management or meet the requirements of financial management laws. We are making eight recommendations for executive action at DHS that will improve financial management at the department. updated our recommendation accordingly. We applaud the current leadership at DHS for voluntarily complying with some audit provisions of the CFO Act. We continue to strongly support passage of legislation that would statutorily make DHS a CFO act agency. We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will issue a new recommendation to DHS on how to comply with financial management legislation. The report will be released to the public at a later date. substantially comply with federal financial management systems requirements, applicable accounting standards, and the U.S. Government Standard General Ledger at the transaction level. While not required to comply with provisions of the CFO Act or FFMIA, the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002, requires DHS to prepare and have audited financial statements annually. It also requires auditors to report whether the agency’s financial management. systems substantially comply with the three requirements of FFM MIA. In identifying improved financial performance as one of DHS obtained a consolidated financial audit for the 7-month period from March 1, 2003, to September 30, 2003. DHS received a qualified opinion from its independent auditors on its consolidated balance sheet. Auditors were unable to opine on the company's financial performance. The company was able to routinely provide timely, accurate, and useful financial and performance information. DHS had neither material internal control weaknesses nor material noncompliance with laws and regulations, and meeting the requirements of FFMIA. The President’s Management Agenda recognized that an unqualified financial audit opinion is a basic prescription for any well-managed organization. Without sound internal control and accurate and timely financial information, it is not possible to accomplish the agenda. The Joint Financial Management Improvement Program (JFMIP) Principals have defined certain measures, in addition to receiving an un qualified financial statement opinion, for achieving financial management success. These additional measures include being a member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. enterprise solution will be accomplished in three phases. Phase I includes defining, acquiring, and testing the planned solution. Phase II involves implementing the solution throughout DHS, and Phase III is ongoing maintenance of the solution. According to DHS, the eMergevendor selection to occur in April or May of 2004. However, vendor proposal requests were issued in June 2004 and selection is to be completed in July 2004. The Business Automation Initiative is an interim project to be developed by contractors during 2004. DHS considered system proposals to automate purchase requests and streamline employee entry/exit process. Instead of pursuing this interim solution, DHS plans to include it in the requirements of the eMerge initiative. DHS has obtained approval of the requirements from various high-level DHS officials. However, these documents were not provided to us until 2004.2004. DHS issued a request for proposal (RFP) was issued by DHS for the e merge initiative, but it was not provided until 2004, when we obtained the documents. Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the District of Columbia Courts (DC Courts) to acquire new information systems. NASA is on its third attempt in 12 years to modernize its financial management process and systems. DC Courts began its system acquisition in 1998 and has struggled in its implementation. One of the key impediments to the success of integration efforts at NASA was the failure to involve key stakeholders in the implementation or evaluation of system improvements. As a result, new systems failed to meet the needs of NASA. a result, new systems failed to meet the needs of key stakeholders. DC Courts struggled in developing requirements that contained the necessary specificity to ensure the system developed would meet its users’ needs. To avoid similar problems, it is important, among other things, that DHS ensure commitment and extensive involvement from top management and users in eMerge. Although we did not perform audit procedures to determine the impact of these reductions, reduction of service providers prematurely, without considering the provider’s reliability, or without an overall consolidation plan, could be negative. internal control weaknesses, some of which are scheduled to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2004. DHS has begun working with a contractor to design and implement a tracking system for outstanding weaknesses identified during the department’s independent financial audits. While this system is still being developed by the OCFO, with assistance from contractors, it is not yet fully functional and does not include information on all reported weaknesses. Until such time that it does, it will provide limited oversight and information on the status of corrective actions to address weaknesses at DHS. produce relevant and reliable financial information. DHS’s CFO testified that the department is committed to resolving the remaining weaknesses and has developed a plan to do so. corrective actions will be developed by each applicable bureau or directorate and submitted to the OCFO. According to this document, corrective action plans of varying levels of detail are in place to address 12 of the 14 internal control weaknesses. Some of the corrective actions are scheduled to be implemented in the near future, the CFO said. that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Under Secretary for Management to do the following: Continue to maintain strong involvement of key stakeholders and top management throughout the acquisition and implementation of the eMerge. Maintain a tracking system of all auditor-identified and management- identified control weaknesses. We obtained written comments on a draft of this report from DHS’s Chief Financial Officer. The comments DHS provided to us are reprinted in appendix IV. DHS generally agreed with the overall findings and recommendations. However, in response to our recommendation to incorporate all internal. The original intent of our recommendation was to encourage DHS to track and resolve all auditor reported material weaknesses. DHS felt the recommendation was too broad and suggested that we change the language to reflect tracking of all auditor-identified and management-identified internal control weaknesses. We fully support DHS including all management- identified control weaknesses as well, and have updated our recommendation accordingly. Additionally, DHS commented on its commitment to tracking and resolving material weaknesses, reportable conditions, and observations and recommendations, similar to those discussed throughout this report. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise solution will meet the requirements of financial management laws it is currently not subject to. DHS has implemented a commercial-off-the-shelf tool called Dynamic Object Oriented Requirements System (DOORS) to track requirements of various laws, regulations, and circulars place on the development of the system. It would certainly make good business sense to do so given DHS's size and mission. It is also important that DHS be proactive and incorporate the requirement of the CFO Act and FFMIA. DOORS is intended to be DHS’s repository of all applicable system, process, technological, data, or other requirements. DHS estimated that several thousand compliance requirements will be tracked using DOORS once analysis is completed. After the repository is complete, requirements reports are to be printed directly from DOORS and attached to future RFPs to ensure that contractors are aware of the legislative requirements of the systems to be developed. A system to record, track, and link all legislative requirements as a financial management system is being developed. legislative requirements as a financial management system is being developed is important. Also important is that DHS be statutorily required to comply with the CFO Act and FFMIA. Meeting these financial management improvement requirements will help produce timely and useful financial and business information. Through the eMerge initiative, DHS has plans to integrate and consolidate its financial andBusiness systems. But without such things as continued active oversight from top-level management, DHS could find itself in the same position as other federal departments. as high risk based on three factors: (1) the implementation and transformation of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner, (2) components to be merged into DHS already face a wide array of existing challenges, and (3) failure to effectively carry out its mission would potentially expose the nation to very serious consequences. One of the department’s key challenges is integrating the components’ respective financial management systems, many of which were outdated and had limited functionality. classified as observations and recommendations, a much less serious classification. Lower classification within DHS does not mean that the issues are now somehow less severe, it merely refers to the materiality of a component within DHS. Resolving all previously reported internal control weaknesses, regardless of the current designation at DHS, is key to DHS’s ability to produce relevant and reliable financial information. The issues by themselves were relatively more significant than when considered in the context of the much larger consolidated operations of DHS as a whole. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 merged 22 federal agencies and organizations into DHS. DHS’s missions include preventing terrorist attacks within the United States. The department has the third largest budget in the federal government, about $40 billion for fiscal year 2005. In January 2003, we designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors: (1) the implementation as well as addressing weaknesses from the inherited components, and (2) the integration of DHS with other federal agencies. key in ensuring that the necessary resources are available to address the weaknesses and to ensure that they are resolved in a timely manner. DHS intends to acquire and deploy an integrated financial enterprise solution and reports that it has reduced the number of its legacy financial systems. The acquisition is in the early stages, and continued focus and follow through, among other things, will be necessary for it to be successful. DHS expects the acquisition and implementation to take place over a 3-year time period and cost approximately $146 million. DHS’s OCFO needs to establish financial reporting roles and responsibilities, assess critical needs, and establish standard operating procedures (SOP) for the department. These conditions were not unexpected for a newly created organization, especially one as large as DHS. We performed our review from October 2003 through June 2004 in Washington, D.C., in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. We requested comments on this report from the Secretary of Homeland Security or his designee. Written comments were received from the department's Chief Financial Officer. the U.S. Secret Service, the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), and five directorates, each of which is headed by an Under Secretary. Within the Management Directorate is DHS’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO), which is assigned primary responsibility for functions, such as budget, finance and accounting, strategic planning and evaluation. OCFO is also charged with ongoing integration of these functions within the department. The CFO Act requires the agency's CFO to develop from the OCFO’s Office of Financial Management and OIG staff. In addition to items already mentioned, we reviewed planned corrective actions developed by the department to address its fiscal years 2002 and 2003 material weaknesses and reportable conditions. We conducted a walk-through to review the system DHS is developing to track planned corrective action. We have not reviewed system requirements or other recently developed plans because these were completed and obtained after our fieldwork was completed. We requested comments from the Director of the RMTO and other officials. and other staff in this office. We also reviewed testimony of DHS’s current and former CFO and DHS”s OIG related to financial management at the department. We reviewed documentation detailing the reduction of financial service providers. However, substantial documentation related to the eMerge initiative was not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. We did not include analysis or evaluation of such information in this report. To determine whether the planned cuts were positive or negative for the department, we did not complete audit procedures. initiative. However, these documents were not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. We are unable to determine if DHS, through the RMTO, is developing a financial enterprise solution that will be in alignment with departmentwide information technology plans. Nevertheless, we have found that similar projects have proven challenging and costly for other federal agencies. We have reported on the efforts of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the District of Columbia (D.C.)

ROUGE-1: 78.38, ROUGE-2: 70.48, ROUGE-L: 29.11
BERTScore: 51.02

==============================================
==================== [97/100] ====================
Summary:
 piracy threatens tankers transiting one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes near key energy corridors and the Suez Canal. The vast areas at risk for piracy off the Horn of Africa, combined with the small number of military ships available for patrolling them, make protecting energy tankers difficult. According to the International Maritime Bureau, 30 percent (490 of 1,650) of vessels reporting pirate attacks worldwide from 2006 through 2010 from 2006 to 2010.are sprawling installations often close to population centers. of vessels reporting pirate attacks worldwide from 2006 through 2010 were identified as tankers. pirate attacks against tankers have tripled in the last 5 years. From January through June 2011, 100 tankers were attacked, an increase of 37 percent compared to tankers attacked in 2010. In addition, tankers are fetching increasing ransom demands from Somali pirates. The International Maritime Organization is working to reduce the threat of pirate attacks on tankers in the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea. The U.S. State Department is working with the U.N. Security Council and the European Union to combat piracy in the region. Media reports indicate a steady increase in ransoms for tankers. The U.S. Maritime Administration and the Coast Guard have issued guidance for commercial vessels to stay 200 miles away from the Somali coast. pirates have adapted and increased their capability to attack and hijack vessels to more than 1,000 miles from Somalia using boats and helicopters. The pirates are based in the Somali port city of Kismayo, about 1,500 miles from the coast of Somalia, according to reports. The Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) contains an estimated 85 million barrels of oil. The Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP) is responsible for transporting about 10 percent of imported oil. Unlike OCS facilities, deepwater ports enable tankers to offload oil or liquefied natural gas for transport to land by underwater pipelines. In 2007, we assessed Coast Guard and FBI efforts to ensure the security of energy tankers and respond to terrorist incidents involving energy Tankers. The Coast Guard seeks to mitigate many kinds of security challenges in the maritime environment. About 49 percent of the nation’s crude oil supply was transported by tanker into the United States in 2009. The remaining oil and natural gas used in the U.S. comes from Canada by pipeline or is produced from domestic sources in areas such as offshore facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The United States’ economy and security are heavily dependent on oil, natural gas, and other energy commodities, the authors say. The authors say the government needs to do more to ensure the safety and security of the country. hijack vessels to more than 1,000 miles from Somalia using mother ships, from which they launch smaller boats to conduct the attacks. Offshore energy infrastructure also faces risks from various types of attacks. In 2004, a terrorist attacked an offshore oil terminal in Iraq using speedboats packed with explosives, killing two U.S. Navy sailors and a Coast Guardsman. Potential attack methods against offshore energy infrastructure identified by the Coast Guard or owners and operators include crashing an aircraft into it or using a submarine vessel. many miles from shore. The FBI shares responsibility with the Coast Guard for preventing and responding to terrorist incidents in the maritime environment. Energy tankers face risks from various types of attack, including suicide attacks, armed assaults by terrorists or armed bands, and launching a “standoff” missile attack using a rocket or some other weapon fired from a distance. In recent years, we have issued reports that discussed risks energy tankers. face from terrorist attacks and attacks from other criminals, the FBI says. tankers face from terrorist attacks and attacks from other criminals, such as pirates. Terrorists have attempted and in some cases carried out attacks on energy tankers since September 11, 2001. To date, these attacks have included attempts to damage tankers or their related infrastructure at overseas ports. In 2002, terrorists conducted a suicide boat attack against the French supertanker Limburg off the coast of Yemen. In 2010, an incident involving another super tanker, the M/V M. Star, in the Strait of Hormuz is suspected to have been a terrorist attack. Three main places in which tankers may be at risk of an attack: foreign ports; in transit, especially at narrow channels, or chokepoints; and at U.S. ports. For example, foreign ports, where commodities are loaded onto tankers, may vary in their levels of security. Tankers remain at risk upon arrival in the United States because of the inherent risks to port facilities, the authors say. In addition, while tankers are in transit,. they face risks because they travel on direct routes that are known in advance. Energy tankers often depart from foreign ports and are registered in countries other than the United States. The United States has limited authority to oversee the security of such vessels until they enter U.S. waters. Offshore energy infrastructure also presents its own set of security challenges because some of this infrastructure is located many miles from shore. The FBI shares responsibility with the FBI for protecting the nation's energy infrastructure. The agency says it is working to identify security gaps and take actions to address them.. energy tankers and respond to terrorist incidents involving energy tankers. The Coast Guard visits foreign exporting ports to assess the effectiveness of anti-terrorism measures in place. Port stakeholders in the United States have taken steps to address vulnerabilities at domestic ports. For example, the Houston Ship Channel Security District is a public-private partnership that was established to increase preparedness and response capabilities with the goal of improving security and safety for facilities, employees, and residents of the Houston area. The U.S. There are two main types of offshore energy infrastructure that the Coast Guard oversees for security. The first type are facilities that operate on the OCS. The second type are deepwater ports, which are fixed or floating manmade structures used or intended for use as a port or terminal for the transportation, storage, or handling of oil or natural gas. If a facility of this type meets or exceeds any one of three thresholds for production or personnel, it is subject to 33 C.F.R. part 106 security requirements. MSRAM assessments for all 50 of the OCS facilities that are subject to federal security requirements in 2011. Coast Guard officials generally agreed with our finding and they have since incorporated these 12 facilities into MSRAM and completed the required risk assessments. Revising policies and procedures to include such a requirement is important in that the number of O CS facilities could change each year. We provided a draft of this testimony to DHS and DOJ for comment. The Coast Guard concurred with our recommendation to revise policies. Coast Guard does not consider OCS facilities that it has assessed in MSRAM to be high risk. DHS and DOJ provided oral and technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. Improvements in security could help to prevent a terrorist attack against this infrastructure, which could have significant consequences, such as those resulting from the Deepwater Horizon incident. This testimony concludes our work on Coast Guard efforts to assess security risks for offshore energy infrastructure. However, we will continue our broader work looking at the security of offshoreEnergy infrastructure, including Coast Guard security inspections. and other measures to better secure OCS facilities and deepwater ports. We will continue to work with the Coast Guard to develop solutions to ensure that inspections of OCS facility are completed as required. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. The testimony was written by Christopher Conrad, Assistant Director; Neil Asaba, Analyst-in-Charge; Alana Finley; Christine Kehr; Colleen McEnearney; Erin O’Brien; Jodie Sandel; and Suzanne Wren. The Coast Guard uses a tool called the Maritime Security Risk Analysis Model. The tool assesses security risks to about 28,000 key infrastructure in and around the nation’s ports and waterways. The Coast Guard”s efforts to assess security risks are part of a broader effort by DHS to protect critical infrastructure and key resources. To assessments, the Coast Guard has taken a number of actions in assessing security risks of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. The agency has also used an independent risk assessment to assessed security risks as part of the application process for recently constructed deep water ports. MSRAM produces a risk index number for each OCS facility and deepwater port. Based on MSRAM’s output, which is a relative risk ranking, OCS facilities are not considered to be high-risk targets. The Coast Guard has also taken actions to supplement MSRAM by, among other things, including new data fields on the frequency with which tankers visit a port and oil and gas production data from the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement. small boat attack, sabotage, or an attack by a swimmer or diver. Analysts use MSRAM to evaluate vulnerabilities of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. MSRAM’s output produces a risk index number for each maritime target—such as an OCS facility or a deepwater port. The analysts use MS RAM to evaluate potential consequences of an attack, such as deaths or injuries and economic and environmental impacts. It also assesses factors such as the ability of key stakeholders, including the owner, operator, or law enforcement, to interdict an attack. Coast Guard may recommend conducting more research on the vulnerability to and consequences of attack scenarios. The Coast Guard is currently conducting a study on OCS facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The study initially reviewed the “lessons learned” from Deepwater Horizon and how those lessons could be used to improve MSRAM. Gaining a better understanding of target hardness of these and other threat scenarios could improve the quality of the output from MSRAM, Coast Guard officials say. The scope of the study has not yet been determined. Coast Guard officials are studying the “lessons learned” from the Deepwater Horizon incident. Part of the study involves examining whether analysts should use MSRAM to assess MODUs in the future. MSRAM does not assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, it does not have the capacity to do so.a blowout. Gaining a fuller understanding of the security risks associated with MODUs could improve the quality of program decisions made by Coast Guard managers. Coast Guard officials say the scope of the study has been expanded to include OCS facilities. The Coast Guard has limited not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are mainly interruption to land or water transportation. Coast Guard officials added that they are working with DHS’s Office of Risk Management and Analysis in studying ways to improve how it assesses secondary economic impacts. However, the Coast Guard did not conduct MSRAM assessments for all 50 of the O CS facilities that were studied. The Coast Guard does not have data on the ability of an OCS facility to withstand an attack. The Coast Guard recognizes that target hardness is an important consideration in assessing the vulnerability of OCS facilities. MSRAM analysts described challenges in assessing target hardness because empirical data are not available or research has not been conducted to do so. For example, research on whether a facility can withstand a direct attack is not available. The challenges are faced by others in the homeland security community involved in conducting risk assessments. risk to a facility. The Coast Guard has limited data for assessing secondary economic impacts from an attack on OCS facilities or deepwater ports. Coast Guard analysts stated that gathering these data is a challenge because there are few models or guidance available for doing so. During the course of our review, the Coast Guard started using a tool, called “IMPLAN,” that helps inform judgments of secondary economic impact. The tool, however, has limits in that it should not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are unclear. U.S. Counterpiracy Action Plan Gains Urgency as Piracy Escalates off the Horn of Africa. GAO-11-449T. Quadrennial Homeland Security Review: 2010 Reports Addressed Many Required Elements, but Budget Planning Not Yet Completed.GAO-10-940T. Maritime Security: Actions Needed to Assess and Update Plan And Enhance Collaboration among Partners Involved in Countering Piracy off the. Horn of African. GAE-10/10/856. Maritime security: DHS Progress and Challenges in Key Areas of Port Security. Horn of Africa is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. This article was updated on September 24, 2010, to reflect a new update to the National Infrastructure Protection Plan. It was originally published on December 15, 2005, on CNN.com. For more, go to www.cnn.com/horn-of-africa and www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/09/25/horns-of Africa-report-10-856. were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney General. The departments concurred or partially concurred with all of the recommendations. The Coast Guard and the FBI have made progress in implementing these recommendations. Two have been implemented, and the Coast Guard is in the process of implementing a third. But actions have not yet been taken to address the remaining two recommendations. See table 2 for a summary of our findings, recommendations and the current status of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. DHS is in the process of revising this document and did not have further information regarding whether or how the spill and terrorism response annexes may be revised. Further, the FBI has not taken independent action to implement this recommendation, in part because it did not concur with the need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a terrorist attack, the Coast Guard and the FBI will work together to develop an operational plan that integrates the different spill and terror sections of the National Response Framework. goal of improving security and safety for facilities, employees, and communities surrounding the Houston Ship Channel. The security district has installed technology, such as night vision and motion-activated detection equipment, and conducts patrols on land and in the water. We also reported on challenges that remained in (1) making federal agencies’ protective actions more effective and (2) implementing plans for a response to an attack, if a terrorist attack were to succeed despite the protective measures in place. We made five recommendations in our 2007 report, three of which were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security. In 2009 DHS issued an updated version of the 2006 National Infrastructure Protection Plan which describes the department’s strategic approach to infrastructure protection. The plan placed an increased emphasis on risk management and it centered attention on going beyond assessments of individual assets by extending the scope of risk assessments to systems or networks. The Coast Guard has taken a number of actions assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, these types of assessments are beyond the intended use of MSRAM. Examining how such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with intelligent adversaries. collectively identified and assessed threat scenarios as well as the potential consequences and vulnerabilities of each scenario. Based on this assessment, stakeholders identified and agreed to carry out security measures to mitigate the risks, such as installing camera systems and increasing radar coverage. The Coast Guard recognizes these challenges and generally has actions underway to study or address them. Coast Guard officials noted that some of these challenges are not unique to the Coast Guard’s risk assessment model and that they are faced by others in the military. The Coast Guard assesses security risks as part of its responsibilities for ensuring the security of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. Performance measures would allow DHS to set priorities for funding on the basis of reducing overall risk, thereby helping ports obtain resources necessary to respond. Coast Guard officials agreed that assessing “network effects” is a challenge and they are examining ways to meet this challenge. However, the Coast Guard’s work is this area is in the early stages of the process. The threat of terrorism against energy tankers and offshore energy infrastructure highlights the importance of the Coast Guard having policies and procedures in place. The Coast Guard has taken steps to implement prior GAO recommendations to enhance energy tanker security, and it continues to work towards implementing the three outstanding recommendations. However, there is uncertainty regarding the way in which the Coast Coast Guard will move forward in measuring “network effects.” The U.S. Coast Guard’s work is this area is in its infancy. need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a successful attack on an energy tanker, ports would need to provide an effective, integrated response. Clearly defined and understood roles and responsibilities for all essential stakeholders are needed to ensure an effective response, the authors say. DHS has begun to revise its grant programs, but it is still too early to talk about emergency response capabilities, they say. The authors say DHS should develop performance measures for emergency response capability. They say the agency should also look at the role of ports in the emergency response effort. Mobile offshore drilling units (MODUs) do not generally pose a risk of a terrorist attack. There is a brief period of time when a drilling unit strikes a well, but the well has yet to be sealed prior to connecting it to a production facility. The Deepwater Horizon was in this stage when it resulted in such a large oil spill. Such risks could involve the reliability of blowout preventer valves—specialized valves that prevent a well from spewing oil in the case of a blowout. How the Coast Guard assesses offshore infrastructure within the broader set of networks is important. For example, knowing what damage a malicious adversary could achieve by exploiting weaknesses in an oil-distribution network offers opportunities for improving the resiliency of the network within a given budget. The report noted that “complex systems almost always fail in complex ways” and cautioned that attempting to identify a single cause for the Deepwater Horizon incident would provide a dangerously incomplete picture of what happened. How such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with malevolent intent is central to this understanding. could change each year. For example, some facilities may drop below the production or personnel thresholds described earlier in this statement, thereby falling outside the scope of 33 C.F.R. part 106. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government state that policies and procedures enforce management directives and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. In addition, internal control standards state that such control activities are an integral part of an entity’s planning, implementing, reviewing, and accountability for stewardship of government resources. is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.

ROUGE-1: 75.77, ROUGE-2: 66.74, ROUGE-L: 30.03
BERTScore: 67.60

==============================================
==================== [98/100] ====================
Summary:
The TAG program established by the FDIC expired on December 31, 2010. It was replaced by the TAG program as established by Section 343 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The "TAG program" refers to two similar but distinct programs. Though both TAG programs provided unlimited deposit insurance to NIBTAs, they also differ in several ways.. The TAG program created by theFDIC was a voluntary program in which eligible financial institutions were automatically registered to participate unless they opted out. The Dodd- Frank Act, however, made all FDIC-insured banks part of TAG.  FDIC established TAG in 2008. Changes to FDIC's authority made by Dodd-Frank Act may prevent the FDIC from having the option of extending TAG. An extension of TAG, therefore, may require congressional action. On November 26, 2012, Senator Harry Reid introduced S. 3637 , a bill to temporarily extend the TAG program for two years. NIBTAs constitute one of several cash management tools used by businesses, non-profits, governments, and other entities. They provide depositors with easy access to their money.  section 1105 of Dodd-Frank provides the FDIC with authority to institute a widely available program of emergency assistance. The authority appears to be limited to guaranteeing debt obligations rather than expanding deposit insurance coverage. Though the authority is limited to situations involving a liquidity crisis, it could be used in the event of a major financial crisis in the U.S. It requires a detailed determination by the FD IC and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed Board) that a liquidity event exists and that failure to take action would have serious adverse effects. program developed in response to the financial crisis. Some deposits may migrate to the largest institutions due to a perception of their implicit guarantee. Dodd-Frank Act created a special resolution regime administered by the FDIC for failing firms that pose a threat to financial stability. Some market participants may have changed their views on the value of the program since the end of 2010, according to the report. The report was based on interviews with more than 1,000 people in the U.S. and around the world. In September 2008, ongoing financial turmoil escalated into a financial panic. Large financial institutions, such as Lehman Brothers and AIG, were failing. The federal government responded with a series of lending and guarantee programs to mitigate the economic damage. Among the many policy responses, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) established the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP) on October 14, 2008, to strengthen confidence and to encourage liquidity in the banking system. The TLGP had two parts: a debt guarantee program and a lending program. Since the financial crisis peaked in 2008, non-financial businesses have increased their holdings of checkable deposits and decreased their holding of money market funds. If one of the reasons that money flowed to deposits was the presence of TAG, it is possible that the expiration of TAG could lead to a partial reversal. Money market funds are currently earning historically low returns, lowering the opportunity to invest in them. However, one of their often cited benefits is that they have traditionally earned a higher yield than bank deposits. Funds are currently earning historically low returns, lowering the opportunity cost of holding noninterest-bearing deposits. There is also uncertainty surrounding the future regulation of money market funds. It is unclear if the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) will impose additional regulation. Although deposits could flow to money market Funds if TAG expires, it is unclear whether the SEC will impose new regulations on the funds. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), a council of financial regulators that is charged with monitoring systemic risk in the financial system, has identified structural vulnerabilities in funds. Money market funds are mutual funds that invest in money market securities. Money market securities are short-term financial instruments with relatively high liquidities and short maturities of between several days and about a year. Examples of money market Securities include negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs), bankers' acceptances, U.S. Treasury bills, commercial paper, debt issued by municipalities, and repurchase agreements (repos) Money market funds, therefore, act as intermediaries between shareholders who demand liquid investments and borrowers who desire short- term funding. Moneymarket funds attempt to keep a stable net asset value (NAV) on their shares. A stable NAV gives shareholders the impression of a high degree of safety similar to deposits but offering a higher return. If a money market fund falls below a $1.00 NAV, then the fund is said to "break the buck," and part of the fund's shareholders' invested principal is in jeopardy. Breaking the buck is a rare occurrence, though it happened in September 2008. In response, many withdrew their money from money market funds and deposited it in banks, as seen in Figure 5. table 1 shows statistics on TAG accounts by bank size. The largest banks have more accounts per institution and higher average account balances than smaller banks. Approximately 75% of TAG funds are in the 19 banks with more than $100 billion in assets. Those 19 banks account for 61% of total assets in the insured banking system. The expiration of TAG may increase the number of banks that would be allowed to fail if it were to be removed from the system. But even with TAG in place, the largest banks hold a disproportionately large share of TAG accounts. of TAG accounts. The expiration of TAG may increase the concentration of deposits in the largest banks. A potential indicator of the different views of large and small banks about the usefulness of TAG is the percentage of each group that opted out of the FDIC's TAG program when given the option. When the FD IC version of TAG expired on December 31, 2010, 31% of banks with assets over $10 billion were still participating in TAG, according to a study by the American Bankers Association. with assets over $10 billion were still participating in TAG. 75% of banks with less than $10billion in assets were in the program. The higher participation rate by smaller banks may signal that they believed they needed the program to attract funds, whereas the larger banks were less likely to view it as necessary. Others may argue that decisions to participate in TAG may not have been driven by the actual usefulness of the program as much as by a possible stigma associated with participating in a program developed in response to the financial crisis. The FDIC estimates that, for the 108 banks that failed in 2011 and the first quarter of 2012, TAG deposits amounted to 3 percent of deposits on average. Allocating DIF losses between these deposits and other deposits would result in an estimated TAG cost over these five quarters of about $270 million. The DIF may have to borrow from the Treasury to protect depositors, putting taxpayers at risk, according to the report. The number of bank failures has fallen from its peak in 2008, the report says. The number of bank failures has fallen from its peak in 2010. The number of institutions on the FDIC's "problem list," which is one potential indicator of the number of banks that are at risk of failing in the future, is still elevated. Most of the bank failures since January 2011 have been smaller banks which, as mentioned previously, had relatively few TAG deposits. If either of the two factors is different, then estimates of future losses based on the past losses of TAG to the banks could be different. Some have raised concerns about what effect an extension of TAG would have on the FDIC's Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) For a risk-based insurance system to function effectively, the entity setting the insurance premium must accurately forecast future risk or be able to recoup losses ex post. If a member institution fails, the proceeds in the DIF are used to prevent insured depositors from losing any of their insured deposits. The uncertainty about future regulation and the low yields makes it unclear how much would leave TAG accounts. losses based on the past losses of TAG to the DIF would be inaccurate. An additional potential cost of extending TAG would be the moral hazard associated with deposit insurance. In the context of deposit insurance, moral hazard can be dangerous. The counterfactual cannot be known with certainty, making it difficult to estimate the costs and benefits of extend TAG. It may be that extending TAG maintains confidence in the banking system and prevents future bank failures that would have required drawing on the D IF. It is possible that TAG could be extended beyond the current deadline. If TAG expires, depositors may choose to leave their deposits as uninsured deposits at their existing banks. NIBTAs have grown by approximately $1 trillion from $1.3 trillion in the third quarter of 2008. Changes in economic and financial conditions since TAG was introduced may make NIBtAs an appealing choice. The expiration of unlimited insurance may increase the risk of NibTAs. But even without TAG, the high degree of liquidity offered by NIB tas may incentivize some borrowers to keep their money as uninsured.  TLGP had two parts: a Debt Guarantee Program (DGP) and a Transaction Account Guarantee (TAG) program. TAG program currently provides unlimited deposit insurance for $1.4 trillion in noninterest-bearing transaction accounts. NIBTAs are accounts that do not pay interest and allow the depositor to make withdrawals without giving advanced notice to the bank. The DGP is no longer guaranteeing new debt, but TAG continues to apply to new deposit balances. The TAG program is available to any depositor whose account meets the eligibility criteria.  Deposit insurance can potentially create moral hazard by neutralizing market mechanisms that penalize the banking system for taking on additional risk. The reduced market discipline caused by deposit insurance could incentivize banks to issue loans that do not accurately price the underlying risk. moral hazard could impair the quality of credit intermediation decisions in the economy. Regulators are supposed to prevent banks from acting in a way that could put insured deposits at risk.. Extending deposit insurance is a good way to reduce moral hazard in the banking industry. The St. Louis Federal Reserve Financial Stress Index provides one measure of financial stress. According to this index, financial stress in 2012 is elevated compared with the lows of 2006 and 2007. Extending deposit insurance to some uninsured accounts through TAG may have strengthened the banking system by discouraging some borrowers from withdrawing their deposits during the height of the financial stress, according to the study. The study also looked at the moral hazard created by deposit insurance and the role of the FDIC in protecting depositors from losses. transactions, but any depositor whose account meets the eligibility criteria receives unlimited deposit insurance coverage. In spite of a loss of confidence in other parts of the financial system, the insured banking sector saw few bank runs during the financial panic. The establishment of TAG, in addition to the existing deposit insurance and other measures taken by regulators, may have bolstered depositors' confidence in banks as reliable counterparties. Deposit insurance brings stability to the banking sector by giving depositors confidence that if their bank fails, they will not lose their insured accounts. track of and possibly more types of fees to be aware of at different banks. Some depositors may attempt to recapture the safety they would lose if TAG expires by shifting their deposits to safer banks. Safer banks, such as those with higher capital levels or with less concentration in a risky asset class, may be perceived as less likely to fail. Depositors may move their accounts to one of the largest or most interconnected banks. For some, this may mean to a bank with uninsured deposits.  Depositors may move their accounts to one of the largest or most interconnected banks if they believe those banks are in practice "too big to fail" (TBTF) A bank is said to be TBTF if policymakers are likely to judge that its failure would cause unacceptable disruptions to the overall financial system and would act to prevent failure. If a depositor thinks policymakers would not allow a particular bank to fail, then the depositor may view their uninsured deposits as safer than if the deposits were in a bank that would be allowed to fail. Some market participants may view the steps taken by the Dodd-Frank Act to remove TBTF status as credible. In that case, uninsured depositors may move their deposits away from large institutions and use smaller banks. The traditional banking sector is not the only place depositors can deposit their money. Depositors can effectively "deposit" their money in other nonbank options by buying shares of nonbank companies.that pose a threat to financial stability. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. If TAG expires, depositors may change their perception of the safety of NIBTAs. Changes in the financial and regulatory environment since 2008 could also result in a different allocation than the pre-TAG levels. Three factors are typically important to depositors when determining where to allocate their money. The use of NibTAs could return to pre- TAG levels if TAG expires. If TAG expires then depositors will have to reevaluate how they allocate money across the various options in theFinancial system. can be converted into cash). Certificates of deposit, for example, may pay a higher interest rate than a typical savings account, but there are restrictions on when the money can be withdrawn. Depositors' preferences for safety, liquidity, and yield will determine how they allocate their money across the various options they face. If TAG expires, the options available to depositors can be simplified to two general choices: (1) depositors could leave some or all of their money in the traditional, insured banking sector or (2) they could move some orall their money out of the traditional banking sector. factors are typically important to depositors when determining where to place their money: safety, liquidity, and yield. Depositors would prefer to have more of all three, but face trade-offs. For example, generally speaking, there is a trade-off between safety and yield on an investment. To have a higher return, an investor may have to sacrifice liquidity (the ease with which an asset can be converted into cash). Certificates of deposit, for example, are a good place to start.

ROUGE-1: 80.35, ROUGE-2: 72.14, ROUGE-L: 27.88
BERTScore: 62.98

==============================================
==================== [99/100] ====================
Summary:
FPS does not have specific national guidance on when and how guard inspections should be performed. Inspections are typically completed by FPS during regular business hours and in locations where FPS has a field office. On an occasion when FPS officials conducted a post inspection at night, they found a guard asleep at his post after taking a break from work. The quality of guard posts at GSA buildings are inconsistent and the quality varied in the six regions we examined. The GSA has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post orders. to explain why it was not able to verify the status of the remaining 5,900 guards. In 2008, we recommended that FPS develop and implement specific guidelines and standards for measuring its performance and improve how it categorizes, collects, and analyzes data. RAMP could be the vehicle through which FPS implements these recommendations, but the use of inaccurate and unreliable data will hamper performance measurement efforts. Furthermore, it is unclear whether FPS will meet the implementation goals established by the RAMP program. FPS conducted an audit of CERTS to determine the status of its guard training and certification. Results of the audit showed that FPS was able to verify the status for about 7,600 of its 15,000 guards. One of its regions did not meet the deadline for submitting data to headquarters because its data were not accurate or reliable and therefore about 1,500 guards were not included in the audit. FPS was not able to explain why it was not can not verify the guards' status. our recommendation and stated that FPS will submit a monthly report to the Secretary. FPS took on a number of immediate actions with respect to contract guard management in response to our covert testing. For example, in July 2009, the Director of FPS instructed Regional Directors to accelerate the implementation of FPS’s requirement that two guard posts at Level IV facilities be inspected weekly. FPS also required more X-ray and magnetometer training for inspectors and guards. FPS has recently issued an information bulletin to all inspectors and Guards to provide them with information about package contents. FPS does not have a fully reliable system for monitoring and verifying guard training and certification requirements. 62 percent of the guards had at least one expired certification, including a declaration that guards have not been convicted of domestic violence. We also found that some guards were not provided building-specific training, such as what actions to take during a building evacuation or a building emergency. This lack of training may have contributed to several incidents.safety features had been repaired. We found that FPS doesn't have a Fully reliable system to monitor and verify guard training, certification requirements, or safety features. FPS requires that all prospective guards complete about 128 hours of training. In one region, FPS has not provided the X-ray or magnetometer training to its 1,500 guards since 2004. The chances of omitting major steps in the risk management process increase if personnel are not well trained in applying risk management. Insufficient X-rays and magnetometers may have contributed to several incidents required oversight hours and officials in another region said they are struggling to monitor the delivery of contractor-provided training in the region. inspectors and guards to provide them with information about package screening. FPS produced a 15-minute training video designed to provide information on bomb component detection. According to FPS, each guard was required to read the information bulletin and watch the video within 30 days. Despite the steps FPS has taken, there are a number of factors that will make implementing and sustaining these actions difficult. First, FPS does not have adequate controls to monitor and track whether its 11 regions are completing these new measures. It is unclear whether the new measures will be implemented in time. X-ray and magnetometer training may have contributed to several incidents at GSA buildings in which guards were negligent in carrying out their responsibilities. For example, at a level IV federal facility in a major metropolitan area, an infant in a carrier was sent through an X-ray machine due to a guard’s negligence. Because the guard was not paying attention and the woman placed the carrier on the X-rays machine, the infant was sent to a child care facility. The incident occurred at a facility that has child care services. X-ray machine. Because the guard was not paying attention and the machine’s safety features had been disabled, the infant in the carrier was sent through. FPS investigated the incident and dismissed the guard; however, the guard subsequently sued FPS for not providing the required X-ray training. The guard won the suit because FPS could not produce any documentation to show that the guard had received the training, according to an FPS official. In addition, FPS officials from that region could not tell us whether the X-rays machine”s safety Features had been repaired. Lack of training may have contributed to several incidents where guards neglected their assigned responsibilities. At a level IV facility, the guards did not follow evacuation procedures and left two access points unattended, thereby leaving the facility vulnerable. FPS has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post-emergency procedures, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Security Studies at the University of Florida. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. they found a guard asleep at his post after taking a pain-killer prescription drug. FPS also found other incidents at high-security facilities where guards neglected or inadequately performed their assigned responsibilities. For example, a guard failed to recognize or did not properly X-ray a box containing handguns at the loading dock at a facility. Because guards were not properly trained and did not comply with post orders, our investigators—with the components for an improvised explosive device (IED) concealed on their persons—passed undetected through access points controlled by guards. concealed on their persons—passed undetected through access points controlled by FPS guards at 10 of 10 level IV facilities in four major cities. The specific components for this device, items used to conceal the device components, and the methods of concealment that we used during our covert testing are classified, and thus are not discussed in this testimony. The facilities included district offices of a U.S. Senator and aU.S Representative as well as agencies of the federal government. Of the 10level IV facilities our investigators penetrated, 8 were government owned and 2 were leased facilities. In 2006, FPS had recommended, based on the results of its risk analysis, the use of this dog and an X-ray machine. The dog and handler work 12-hour shifts Monday through Friday when most mail is delivered and shipped. The GSA regional security officials we spoke with questioned whether this approach was more effective and efficient than using an on-site enhanced X-Ray machine that could detect biological and chemical agents as well as explosives. In accordance with its policies, FPS conducted a BSA of the site in 2008 and determined that using a dog would bring the projected threat rating down from moderate to low. and a U.S. Representative as well as agencies of the Departments of Homeland Security, Transportation, Health and Human Services, Justice, State, and others. The two leased facilities did not have any guards at the access control points at the time of our testing. Using publicly available information, our investigators identified a type of device that a terrorist could use to cause damage to a federal facility and threaten the safety of federal workers and the general public. The device was an IED made up of two parts—a liquid explosive and a low-yield detonator. a low-yield detonator. Investigators determined that the detonator could also be used to set off a liquid explosive and cause significantly more damage. To gain entry into each of the 10 level IV facilities, investigators showed a photo identification (a state driver’s license) and walked through the magnetometers. To ensure safety during this testing, we took precautions so that the IED would not explode. For example, we lowered the concentration level of the material. The material included a variety of materials not typically brought into a federal facility by employees or the public. identification (a state driver’s license) and walked through the magnetometers without incident. Our investigators also placed their briefcases with the IED material on the conveyor belt of the X-ray machine, but the guards detected nothing. At security checkpoints at 3 of the 10 facilities, our investigators noticed that the guard was not looking at theX-ray screen as some IED components passed through the machine. A guard questioned an item in the briefcase but did not search it. At each facility, once past the guard screening checkpoint, our investigators proceeded to a restroom and assembled the IED. A guard questioned an item in the briefcase at one of the 10 facilities but the materials were subsequently allowed through the X-ray machines. At some of the facilities, the restrooms were locked. Our investigators gained access by asking employees to let them in. With theIED completely assembled in a briefcase, our Investigators walked freely around several floors of the facility and into various executive and legislative branch offices. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately.Mark L. Goldstein at (202) 512-2834 or by e-mail goldsteinm@gao.gov. a security equipment countermeasure. The upgrade of a surveillance system shared by two high-security locations would cost around $650,000. Members of one building security committee (BSC) said they approved spending between $350,000 and $375,000 to fund their agencies’ share. But the BSC of the other location would not approve funding; therefore, FPS could not upgrade the system it had recommended. In November 2008 FPS officials told us that they were moving ahead with the project by drawing on unexpended revenues. FPS is developing a National Countermeasures Program. The program will establish standards and national procurement contracts for security equipment. According to FPS, the program will also include life-cycle management plans for countermeasures. FPS officials said they established an X-ray machine contract and that future program contracts will also explore the use of the schedule as a source for national purchase and service contracts. The agency says the program should provide the agency with a framework to better manage its security equipment inventory; meet its operational requirement to identify, implement, and maintain security equipment; and respond. the National Countermeasures Program is fully implemented, FPS will continue to rely on individual inspectors to make technology decisions. For example, FPS had anticipated that the X-ray machine and magnetometer contracts would be awarded by December 2008, and that contracts for surveillance and intrusion detection systems would be awards during fiscal year 2009. In May 2009, FPS officials told us that theX-rayMachine contract was awarded on April 30, 2009. They anticipated awarding the magnetometer contract in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and an electronic security services contract for Surveillance and intrusion Detection systems during the same period. requirement to identify, implement, and maintain security equipment; and respond to stakeholders’ needs. National Countermeasures Program includes improvements that may enhance FPS’s ability to leverage technology. It does not establish tools for assessing the cost-effectiveness of competing technologies and countermeasures and implementation has been delayed. Security professionals are faced with a multitude of technology options offered by private vendors, including advanced intrusion detection systems, biotechnology options for screening people, and sophisticated video monitoring. The National Counter Measures Program will enable inspectors to develop countermeasure cost estimates. the cost- effectiveness of alternative technologies into FPS’s planned improvements in the security acquisition area would represent an enhanced application of this key practice. We recently recommended that FPS develop a methodology and guidance for assessing and comparing the cost-effectiveness of technology alternatives, and DHS concurred with our recommendation. Another concern is that FPS had planned to implement the program throughout fiscal year 2009, but extended implementation into fiscal year 2010. Until the National Countermeasures Program is fully implemented, FPS will continue. offices, as described above. Leveraging technology is a key practice over which FPS has somewhat more control. FPS does not have a comprehensive approach for identifying, acquiring, and assessing the cost-effectiveness of the security equipment that its inspectors recommend. Individual FPS inspectors have considerable latitude in determining which technologies and other countermeasures to recommend. The inspectors receive little training and guidance in how to assess the relative cost-effectiveiveness of these technologies or determine the expected return on investment. FPS officials told us that inspectors make technology decisions based on the initial training they receive, personal knowledge and experience. FPS inspectors receive some training in identifying and recommending security technologies as part of their initial FPS physical security training. Since FPS was transferred to DHS in 2003, its refresher training program for inspectors has primarily focused on law enforcement. FPS does not provide inspectors with specialized guidance and standards for cost-effectively selecting technology. In the absence of specific guidance, inspectors follow the Department of Justice minimum countermeasure standards and other relevant Interagency Security Committee standards, but these standards are not set by FPS. FPS does not have a strategic human capital plan to guide its current and future workforce planning efforts. Instead, FPS has developed a short-term hiring plan that does not include key human capital principles, such as determining an agency’s optimum staffing needs. FPS has been transitioning to an inspector-based workforce, thus eliminating the police officer position and relying primarily on FPS inspectors for both law enforcement and physical security activities. FPS believes that this change will ensure that its staff has the right mix of technical skills and training needed. capital plan has also contributed to inconsistent approaches in how FPS regions and headquarters are managing human capital activities. FPS officials in some of the regions we visited said they implement their own procedures for managing their workforce. FPS does not collect data on its workforce’s knowledge, skills, and abilities. These elements are necessary for successful workforce planning activities, such as identifying and filling skill gaps and succession planning. We recently recommended that FPS improve how it collects data to help it improve its workforce planning efforts. FPS believes RAMP will provide inspectors with the information needed to make more informed and defensible recommendations for security countermeasures. FPS also plans to use RAMP to track and analyze certain workforce data, contract guard program data, and other performance data such as the types and definitions of incidents and incident response. FPS is designing RAMP so that it will produce risk assessments that are compliant with Interagency Security Committee standards, compatible with the risk management framework set forth by the National Infrastructure Protection Plan. as the types and definitions of incidents and incident response times. FPS intends for RAMP to improve its approach to risk assessment, human capital management, and performance measurement. FPS plans to transfer data from several of its legacy systems, including the Contract Guard Employment Requirements Tracking System (CERTS), into RAMP. In July 2009, we testified on the accuracy and reliability issues associated with CERTS. FPS has not fully addressed some implementation issues with RAMP, we say. We urge FPS to address these issues as soon as possible. is unclear whether FPS will meet the implementation goals established in the program’s proposed timeline. FPS began designing RAMP in early 2007 and expects to implement the program in three phases, completing its implementation by the end of fiscal year 2011. Until RAMP components are fully implemented, FPS will continue to rely on its current risk assessment. The program is expected to be fully implemented by the beginning of fiscalyear 2010, according to FPS officials. It is not clear whether FPS plans to implement a pilot version of RAMP by that time. FPS will continue to rely on its current risk assessment tool, methodology, and process, potentially leaving GSA and tenant agencies dissatisfied. We recently recommended that FPS provide the Secretary of Homeland Security with regular updates on the status of RAMP including the implementation status of deliverables, clear timelines for completion of tasks and milestones, and plans for addressing any implementation obstacles. DHS concurred with this recommendation and stated that FPS will submit a monthly report to the Secretary. Finally, as we stated at the outset, the protection of federal real property has been and continues to be a major concern. FPS cannot say with certainty that it is being done. New directives appear to be based primarily on what works well from a headquarters or National Capital Region perspective. In addition, another regional official estimated that his region is meeting about 10 percent of the required oversight hours. Officials in another region said they were meeting about 20 percent of required hours. The agency has 11 regions and can't track whether its 11 regions are completing these new requirements, a regional official said. It is not clear if the new requirements will be implemented by October 1. landscape changes and new threats emerge. implementing our specific recommendations related to areas such as human capital and risk management will be critical steps in the right direction. Overall, following this framework would enhance FPS’s chances for future success and could position FPS to become a leader and benchmark agency for facility protection in the federal government. We are pleased to answer any questions you might have. For further information on this testimony, please contact Mark L. Goldstein at (202) 512-2834 or by e-mail goldsteinm@gao.gov. The Interagency Security Committee is using its key facility protection practices as key management practices to guide its priorities and work activities. FPS faces challenges that are similar, in many respects, to those that agencies across the government are facing. With millions of people visiting the nation’s nearly 400 park units annually, ensuring their security and the protection of our national treasures is paramount. More emphasis on the key practices would provide greater assurance that Park Service assets are well protected, the committee said in a report. Homeland security information sharing can be ineffective and fragmented. It is critical that FPS and GSA reach consensus on sharing information in a timely manner. DHS did not explicitly commit to reaching consensus with GSA in identifying building security information that can be shared, the authors say. The steps we outlined in our recommendation comprise a comprehensive plan for sharing and safeguarding sensitive information, they say. They say it is important that FPS engage GSA to identify what building security info can be sharing and follow the information sharing and safeguard steps. the BSA is needed for GSA to fulfill its responsibilities related to the protection of federal buildings and occupants. establish internal controls to ensure that shared information is adequately safeguarded. provide guidance for employees to use in deciding what information to protect with sensitive but unclassified designations. provisions for training on making designations, controlling, and sharing such information with GSA and other entities. A review process to evaluate how well this information sharing process is working, with results reported to the Secretary of Homeland Security. The ability to share security-related information can unify the efforts of federal agencies in preventing or minimizing terrorist attacks. In the absence of comprehensive information-sharing plans, many aspects of homeland security information sharing can be ineffective and fragmented. Information is a vital tool in fighting terrorism, and the timely dissemination of that information to the appropriate government agency is absolutely critical to maintaining the security of our nation. In a post-September 11th era, it is crucial that federal agencies work together to share information to advance homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts. At one location, FPS had received inaccurate square footage data from GSA and had overcharged the primary tenant agency for a guard post that protected space shared by all the tenants. Once GSA was made aware of the problem, the agency obtained updated information and worked with the tenant agencies to develop a cost-sharing plan for the guard post. BSC members told us that security expenses were somewhat more equitable. GSA officials commented that this tenant adheres to its agency’s building security protocols and does not necessarily follow GSA's tenant policies and procedures. BSC members were confused about procedures for screening visitors who are passengers in employees’ cars that enter the building via the parking garage. One of the tenants recounted an incident in which a security guard directed the visitor to walk through the garage to an appropriate screening station. According to the GSA property manager, this action created a safety hazard. The BSC had no written policy on the procedure that members could access. Additionally, BSC members were not aware of the BSC’s policy on screening visitors. FPS plans to implement education and outreach initiatives to improve customer service to tenant agencies. 53 percent of e-mail addresses and 27 percent of the telephone numbers for designated points of contacts were missing from FPS’s contact database. FPS recommended that FPS collect and maintain an accurate and comprehensive list of all facility-designated points of contact, as well as a system for regularly updating this list. DHS concurred with our recommendations and recommended FPS develop and implement a program forEducation and outreach to GSA and tenant agencies to ensure they are aware of the current roles, responsibilities, and services provided by FPS. FPS, GSA, and tenant agency representatives did not all meet together regularly to make security preparations or manage security operations during construction. FPS officials told us they had not been invited to project meetings, although GSA officials said they had invited FPS and that FPS attended some meetings. In May 2008, FPS discovered that specific surveillance equipment had been removed. Survey of GSA tenant agencies found that they had mixed views about some of the services they pay FPS to provide. On average, one-third of tenant agencies could not comment on how satisfied or dissatisfied they were with FPS’s level of communication. met regularly, but GSA officials told us they were not invited to these meetings. At one location, GSA undertook a major renovation project beginning in April 2007. GSA said they do not receive timely incident information for the site from FPS and suggested that increased communication among the agencies would help them be more effective managers of their properties and provide tenants with better customer service. The GSA, FPS, and tenant agency representatives did not speak to CNN for this report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. FPS faces challenges in ensuring that its fee-based funding structure accounts for the varying levels of risk and types of services provided at federal facilities. FPS’s basic security fee, which funds most of its operations, does not account for the risk faced by specific buildings. The level providing the service differs significantly among different users, as is the case with FPS.require additional expertise and resources. Finally, FPS continues to struggle with funding challenges that impede its ability to allocate resources to more effectively manage risk. FPS charges federal agencies the same basic security fee regardless of the perceived threat to a particular building or agency. In fiscal year 2009, FPS charged 66 cents per square foot for basic security. FPS categorizes buildings according to security levels based on its assessment of each building’s risk and size. For example, level I facilities typically face less risk because they are generally small storefront-type-type buildings. The assessment does not affect the security fee FPS charges. The fee does not account for the risk faced by specific buildings, the level of service provided, or the cost of providing services. typically face less risk because they are generally small storefront-type operations with a low level of public contact, such as a Social Security Administration office. These facilities are charged the same basic security fee of 66 cents per square foot as a level IV facility that may contain high-risk law enforcement and intelligence agencies and highly sensitive government records. We also have reported that basing government fees on the cost of providing a service promotes equity, especially when the costs of providing the service differs significantly among different users. since 2004 and critical law enforcement services have been reduced or eliminated. For example, FPS has eliminated its use of proactive patrol to prevent or detect criminal violations at many GSA buildings. According to some FPS officials at regions we visited, not providing proactive patrol has limited its law enforcement personnel to a reactive force. In the past, proactive patrol permitted its police officers and inspectors to identify and apprehend individuals that were surveilling GSA building. In contrast, when FPS is not able to patrol federal buildings, there is increased potential for illegal entry and other crimes. buildings, there is increased potential for illegal entry and other criminal activity. In one city we visited, a deceased individual had been found in a vacant GSA facility that was not regularly patrolled by FPS. FPS does not fully ensure that its contract security guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a GSA building. We have noted that the effectiveness of a risk management approach depends on the involvement of experienced and professional security personnel. Further, that the chances of an incident like this happening are very high. FPS does not have a reliable data management system that will allow it to accurately track these measures. Without this ability, FPS has difficulty determining whether it has mitigated the risk of GSA facilities to crime or a terrorist attack. FPS is taking some steps in each of the key practice areas to improve its ability to better manage its resources, the report says. It is difficult for FPS to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of its efforts to protect federal employees and facilities, allocate its limited resources, or make informed risk management decisions. FPS is limited in its ability to assess the effectiveness of its efforts to protect GSA buildings. FPS has identified output measures that are a part of the Office of Management and Budget’s Performance Assessment Rating Tool. These measures include determining whether security countermeasures have been deployed and are fully operational. The amount of time it takes to respond to an incident, and the percentage of BSAs completed on time are also included in FPS’S federal facilities security index, which is used to assess its performance. activities. Without greater attention to key protection practices, FPS will be ill equipped to efficiently and effectively fulfill its responsibilities. FPS is responsible for assessing risk, strategically managing its workforce and contract guard program, recommending countermeasures, sharing information and coordinating with GSA and tenant agencies to secure GSA buildings. It is also responsible for measuring and testing its performance as the security landscape changes and new threats emerge. The committee established subcommittees for technology best practices and training, and working groups in the areas of performance measures and strategic human capital management. countermeasures to implement or were unable to obtain funding from their agencies. Compounding this situation, FPS takes a building-by-building approach to risk management. GSA and tenant agencies have concerns about the quality and timeliness of FPS’s the key practice areas to improve its ability to better protect GSA buildings. FPS is developing the Risk Assessment and Management Program (RAMP), which could enhance its approach to assessing risk, managing human capital, and measuring performance. It believes RAMP will provide inspectors with the information needed to improve the quality of BSAs. agencies have concerns about the quality and timeliness of FPS’s risk assessment services. For example, GSA officials told us they have had difficulties receiving timely risk assessments from FPS for space GSA is considering leasing. An inefficient risk assessment process for new lease projects can add costs for GSA and create problems for tenant agencies that have been planning for a move. Therefore, G SA is updating a risk assessment tool that it began developing in 1998, but has not recently used. FPS assesses risk and recommends countermeasures to GSA and tenant agencies. FPS’s ability to influence the allocation of resources using risk management is limited because resource allocation decisions are the responsibility of GSA. It is critical that FPS and GSA have well-established lines of communication with each other and with tenant agencies to ensure that all parties are aware of the ever- changing risks in a dynamic threat environment, the authors say. The authors recommend that FPS provide law enforcement and related security services for GSA buildings. FPS uses BSA executive summary to convey countermeasure recommendations to GSA. Document includes cost estimates but no analysis of alternatives. GSA and tenant agencies have limited assurance that investments in technologies are cost-effective, consistent across buildings, and best available alternatives. In 2006, FPS had had an explosives detection dog used to screen mail that is distributed elsewhere. For example, at one location we visited, an explosives Detection Dog was used to screens mail that was distributed elsewhere in the building. The types of information shared at the regional and building levels are inconsistent. Overall, FPS and GSA disagree over what information should be shared. GSA officials at all levels cite limitations with the BSA executive summary. FPS believes that this document contains sufficient information for GSA to make decisions about purchasing and implementing FPS’s recommended countermeasures. The two organizations are partners in protecting and securing GSA buildings, but disagree over how much of the information in the B SA should be share. practice in October 2008, GSA security officials said that these briefings mostly focused on crime statistics and did not constitute comprehensive threat analyses. FPS is only required to meet formally with GSA property managers and tenant agencies as part of the BSA process. We identified information sharing gaps at several level III and IV sites that we visited, and found that in some cases these deficiencies led to decreased security awareness and increased risk. At one location, we observed during our interview with the FPS employee that the employee had not been aware of the information sharing gap. summary saying, for example, that it does not contain enough contextual information on threats and vulnerabilities to support FPS’s countermeasure recommendations. GSA security officials told us that FPS does not consistently share BSA executive summaries across all regions. Instead, GSA wants to receive BSAs in their entirety so that it can better protect GSA buildings and the tenants who occupy them. According to GSA, building protection functions are an integral part of its property preservation, operation, and management responsibilities.

ROUGE-1: 81.32, ROUGE-2: 73.18, ROUGE-L: 28.27
BERTScore: 60.27

==============================================
==================== [100/100] ====================
Summary:
been taken to eliminate or consolidate mandates. Member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review and lack the capacity to carry out the review. Consultations among member states on how to move forward on the issue will continue into the 62nd session. New parameters for the continuation of the mandate review process have been proposed, but progress remains to be seen. Several factors have slowed the UN’s efforts to improve the management of the Secretariat. Many remaining UN management reforms cannot move forward until these factors are addressed. The Secretariat has not issued a comprehensive report on public access to UN documentation. The General Assembly requested the report be submitted during the 61st session. The Secretariat developed a detailed policy proposal that includes resource requirements, financing mechanisms, and proposal of a fee structure. However, according to Secretariat officials, the Secretary-General intends to discuss the proposal with member states before formally submitting it. Member states agreed to continue a review of UN programs and activities in 2007, but no actions have been taken to eliminate or consolidate mandates. 15 of the 17 delegations told us that the number one challenge to continued progress on management reform efforts is member state disagreements on the priorities and importance of the remaining reform efforts. For example, member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review of UN mandates. Some member states are concerned that mandates important to them will be eliminated. For that reason, no mandates have been eliminated or consolidated as a result of the reform efforts, the delegates said. The reform efforts are still ongoing, they said. mandates have been eliminated or consolidated as a result of the reviews. Four member states have launched the Four Nations Initiative in an effort to provide new ideas and perspectives on governance and management of the UN Secretariat. A State official told us the process appears to be a “credible effort” by member states that complements the UN. The U.S. and G-77 countries have repeatedly stated a clear need for more constructive engagement on reform efforts, particularly between the United States andG-77. efforts because of the recentness of their implementation. Little or no progress: There is evidence that few or no steps have been taken on the reform effort. Substantial progress: The reform effort has been mostly or fully implemented. To identify factors slowing the progress of the UN reforms we examined, we reviewed reports and documentation of the reforms. The GAO determined which category of progress to assign to each reform effort based on documents we collected and discussions we had with State, UN, and other officials. evaluation methodology. State and the UN Secretariat provided technical comments that we have incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the Secretary of State, and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations. We will also make copies available to others upon request. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601. February 2004, we reported that 60 percent of the 88 reform initiatives in the 1997 agenda were in place. In September 2005, world leaders gathered at the UN World Summit in New York to discuss global issues such as UN reform, development, and human rights. Successful management reform requires that its components are ultimately effective in modernizing the management functions of the United Nations. We recommend that, as management reforms are implemented over time, the Secretary of State and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the UN include an assessment of the effectiveness of the reforms. Completion of the reform agenda will require overcoming several factors, particularly disagreements among member states. Some past reform efforts remain incomplete because they did not get sustained and broad support. The current effort faces this same risk. While implementation is a necessary element in meeting the goals of the 2005 World Summit outcome document, it is not in itself sufficient. It is important to ensure that the reforms are implemented in a way that meets the needs of the world. The reform agenda should be completed by the end of the year or early 2015. The UN has not developed comprehensive long-term implementation plans for some management reform proposals. Establishing implementation plans is a practice that increases the transparency and accountability of the reform process. Since October 2006, a “credible effort” by member states that complements the UN management reform process has been underway. However, other member states’ views on this initiative and the potential of the initiative to overcome disagreements among member states are unclear, the authors say. The UN should encourage the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to include cost estimates and expected time frames for implementation and completion of each proposal. reforms: (1) disagreements among member states on UN management reform efforts. (2) lack of comprehensive implementation plans for some management reform proposals. (3) administrative policies and procedures that continue to complicate the process of implementing certain complex human resource initiatives. (4) competing UN priorities, such as the proposal to reorganize the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, that limit the capacity of General Assembly members to address management reform issues. The UN is composed of 192 diverse member states that have differing views on a wide array of issues. the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. The UN currently has no formal plan to evaluate the effectiveness of its management reform efforts to determine whether they have achieved the goals set out in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. Administrative policies and procedures, such as staff regulations and rules that are directed by the General Assembly, continue to complicate and sometimes restrict the process of implementing certain human resources initiatives. Such guidance, some of which has been in existence for decades, is part of the UN's existing resource management framework. Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN into an efficient organization focused on achieving results as it carried out its mandates. In May 2000, we reported that while the Secretary-General had substantially reorganized the Secretariat’s leadership and structure, he had not yet completed reforms in human resource management and planning and budgeting. In September 2002, to encourage the full implementation of the 1997 reforms, he released a second set of reform initiatives, some expanding on those introduced in 1997 and others reflecting new priorities. GAO staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. We obtained and reviewed official reports of the Secretariat and the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We also interviewed senior officials from UN departments in New York City. We discussed the status of UN management reforms with officials from the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the UN in NYC. We met with representatives from 17 of 192 member states representing various geographic regions, including Africa, Asia, Europe, and Africa. State endorsed the main findings and conclusions of our report and noted that our assessment of UN progress on management reform efforts was accurate and balanced. State agreed fully with the need to keep Congress informed of the effectiveness of management reforms, adding that the department will continue to monitor and inform Congress, as we recommended. We selected management reform issues in the key areas of ethics, oversight, management operations of the Secretariat, and review of programs and activities (known as mandates) to examine in more detail. We focused our work on management reforms that began in 2005. Calls to reform the UN began soon after its creation in 1945. Despite cycles of reform, UN member states continue to have concerns about inefficient management operations. The United States, through the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New York, continues to advocate reform of UN management processes. In July 1997, the Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN. The UN is the largest contributor of 192 member states. has issued several reports with proposals that, if implemented, could improve some human resource functions. The proposals are, in large part, still awaiting General Assembly review. In late September 2006, the Secretary-General released a report entitled Investing in People that included a human resources management framework aimed at strengthening the UN’s human resources goals. The report included discussions of several human resources issues and specifically stated that staff mobility is essential to creating a more-versatile, more agile workforce. The UN has not completed reviews and analyses of other human resource reform proposals. UN’s existing resource management framework that, according to the Secretary-General, still lacks flexibility and is largely headquarters-based. Although the Secretariat has made progress on some administrative reform initiatives relating to human resources and information technology, it has not addressed several other administrative policies and procedures issues, including conducting a one-time staff buyout and outsourcing and telecommuting for certain administrative services. As we discussed in our October 2006 report, the overall restrictiveness of these policies and policies and stated that staff mobility is essential to creating a more-versatile, multiskilled, experienced staff. A one-time staff buyout could enable the Secretary-General to realign staff to meet the UN’s changing priorities, while facilitating retirement or separation of staff who can no longer meet the needs of the UN. An effective career development policy serves both the UN and its staff members by building and maintaining an international civil service capable of meeting the UN's needs, as well as meeting the development needs and aspirations of the staff. Reforms Progressing Slowly with Many Awaiting General Assembly Review. United Nations: Lessons Learned from Oil for Food Program Indicate the Need to Strengthen UN Internal Controls and Oversight. U.N.: Sustained Oversight Is Needed for Reforms to achieve Lasting Results. United. Nations: Procurement Internal Controls Are Weak. United UN: Funding Arrangements Impede Independence of Internal Auditors. United Nation: Oil for. Food Program Provides Lessons for Future Sanctions and Ongoing Reform. The outcome document from the World Summit, endorsed by all members of the UN, outlines broad UN reform efforts in areas such as oversight and accountability and human rights. The document also called for the Secretary-General to submit proposals for implementing reforms to improve management functions of the Secretariat. In April 2006, we reported on weaknesses in the UN’s oversight and procurement systems, both of which have been identified as important areas for reform. Numerous reform proposals were either awaiting General Assembly review or had been recently approved. UN reforms we examined, we reviewed reports and documentation of the Secretariat, General Assembly, OIOS, and the ethics office. We also met with representatives from several member states and spoke with U.S. officials in Washington, D.C., and New York. Many cost estimates for the proposed reform initiatives are preliminary, and detailed longer-term cost estimates are being developed;. We interviewed outside observers of the UN system, including nongovernmental organizations and members of academia. are preliminary, and detailed longer-term cost estimates are being developed. We did not analyze the assumptions underlying these estimates to determine whether they are reasonable and reliable. We believe that the cost estimates and the associated funds that the General Assembly has appropriated to date for reform efforts are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. We conducted our work from March to November 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. During our review, we found that UN and nongovernmental organization staff had concerns about weaknesses in the UN internal justice system. little or no progress has been made in reforming the UN’s internal justice system, reforming certain budgetary and financial management functions, and improving the delivery of certain services. Since our October 2006 report, the Secretariat has issued several reports on management operations that the General Assembly is expected to consider during the current (62nd) session. Progress on reforming management operations of the UN Secretariat is shown in figure 4. The UN has made some progress in improving human resource functions. If implemented, if implemented, these proposals could have a positive impact. The UN’s internal justice system was outdated, ineffective, and compromised. An independent external panel of experts concluded that effective reform of the UN is not possible without an efficient, independent, and well-resourced internal justice System. The General Assembly agreed in April 2007 to establish a newinternal justice system. Many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of theUN are still being worked out, the UN says. The UN says it is committed to working with the international community on issues of human rights. Mandate review has not advanced due to the lack of capacity among member states to evaluate the mandates in a substantive matter, according to State.of the organization. Phase I of mandate review, which covered all mandates 5 years old or older and not renewed that originated from the General Assembly, was completed in November 2006. Member states agreed to carry out a Phase II review of mandates to include mandates both renewed and not renew. The planned approach was to review mandates by thematic cluster. The initial goal for beginning Phase II was January 2007. I review, member states disagreed on which mandates to include in the review and what to do with any savings generated by the potential elimination or consolidation of mandates. Members of the G-77 contended that the scope of the review should include only those mandates 5 years old or older that have not been reviewed since they were adopted. Phase I thus consisted of a review of 626 mandates originating from the General Assembly. As a result of Phase I, memberStates agreed to set aside 74 completed mandates and requested more information. Working Group on Mandate Review from January 2007 to April 2007 and again from July to October 2007. In October 2007, the process was far from complete, with only one of the nine clusters addressed. The General Assembly adopted an oral decision to continue consultations among member states on how to proceed with mandate review in the 62nd session. State officials told us that a new approach is necessary for the review and that it would be meaningless to proceed unless member states identify a new way of doing things. process for several years, and, according to Secretariat officials, implementation of the system is expected to start in 2008. As of October 2007, the Secretariat had not selected the firm that will implement the new system. The Secretary-General did not submit a comprehensive report on information management, including cost estimates, to the UN Secretariat in 2007. According to UN officials, thesecretary-general will announce a decision on the new information management system by the end of 2008. The new system will support the global functions of the UN. In May 2006, the General Assembly asked the Secretary-General to conduct several cost-benefit analyses to determine whether certain UN services could be improved. Among the services are internal printing and publishing processes; medical insurance plan administration; information technology support; payables, receivables, and payroll processes. Subsequently, the Secretariat initiated several projects to address these reform proposals but has not completed its analyses. The Secretariat is currently collecting data from staff participants in the UN medical plan and reviewing alternative delivery methods for payroll and other functions. program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data into one process. The goal is to enable the Secretariat to act more transparently and efficiently in managing staff and procuring goods and services. The UN has made little or no progress in reforming its internal information system. The Secretariat plans to present reports on information technology to the General Assembly during the 62nd session, on topics such as the implementation of the ERP and governance of information and communications technology. The CITO is especially important at the present time because the UN is in the process of developing a new organizationwide information system known as the Enterprise Resource Planning. The UN has made some progress in improving information technology. The position of chief information technology officer (CITO), created by the General Assembly in August 2006, was filled in July 2007. The leadership of a CITO is necessary to help ensure greater integration of the Secretariat’s workflow and knowledge management by allowing program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data. Of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with, reforming these and other human resource functions is likely to continue to be difficult because of long-standing disagreements. The General Assembly did not consider several procurement reform issues during the recently completed 61st session. Issues that are currently unclear include operational procedures, such as establishing lines of accountability, delegation of authority. The UN has taken actions to improve some of the management operations of the Secretariat, but many reform proposals still have not moved forward. Some progress has been made on issues involving human resources and information technology, while little or no progress on reforming the address these issues. The U.S. government has been a priority of the United Nations for many years, as long-standing weaknesses and inefficiencies have persisted. From March to May 2007, the Secretariat submitted reports to the General Assembly, as requested, on human resource issues. The General Assembly’s focus on the reorganization of the DPKO and other issues during that time frame did not consider these issues, which are currently rescheduled for consideration during the 62nd session. According to U.S. and UN officials and most of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with, reforming the UN Secretariat is a priority for the United Nations. responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General Assembly concerning any administrative and budgetary matters referred to it. Figure 6 depicts the typical management reform decision-making process at the UN for issues requiring General Assembly approval. In October 2006, the Secretariat’s estimated costs for implementing certain management reform initiatives were approximately $40 million. Since then, due to additional actions taken during the 61st session, the revised cost estimate, as of October 2007, had risen by about $13 million to approximately $53 million. and expected time frames for implementation and completion of each reform effort as it is approved. During our current review, we found little evidence that time frames, completion dates, and cost and savings estimates for completing the long- term implementation of specific management reforms had been established. Most of the approximately 20 cost-benefit analyses and other assessments of management reform issues have not yet been submitted to the General Assembly. As a result, the total long-term costs of the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. retirement or separation of staff who can no longer meet their career aspirations. The General Assembly considered the report during the 61st session and, in large part, postponed making decisions on key issues. For example, in a January 2007 resolution, the General Assembly postponed decisions regarding streamlining contractual arrangements and harmonizing conditions of service. Also, since its May 2006 rejection of the concept of a one-time staff buyout, the Assembly has not taken steps to redefine the role of the Deputy Secretary-General. October 2006 report, the overall restrictiveness of these policies and procedures continues to complicate the management reform process. In February 2007, several procurement-related reform issues, such as clear lines of responsibility and accountability, were not taken into consideration by the General Assembly during the spring 2007 session. The General Assembly did not address these issues because the new Secretary-General concurrently proposed a new procurement program. The new procurement plan was not presented to the general assembly in time for the spring session, as planned. General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no action on others. For example, to improve cash management and operational flexibility, the Secretary-General proposed that peacekeeping accounts be consolidated. In July 2007, the General Assembly rejected this proposal. The Secretary-general also proposed to improve strategic budgetary planning and implementation by reducing the number of sections in the budget from 35 sections to 13. However, as of October 2007,  the General Assembly had not taken action on the proposal. Other financial management reform proposals that have not been adopted include financial management reform proposals that have not been adopted. The Secretariat has prepared a number of reports that the General Assembly is scheduled to review during the current (62nd) session. The UN has made little or no progress in improving the delivery of certain services, says the UN Secretariat. In May 2006, the UN General Assembly voted in favour of a proposal to create a separate account to cover certain unanticipated expenditures arising from exchange rate fluctuations and inflation. The General Assembly also voted in favor of a plan to charge interest on arrears of member states’ assessed contributions. many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of the new system are still unclear. As of October 2007, the General Assembly had yet to decide who would be covered by a new system. According to the Secretariat, member states aim to implement the newSystem by January 2009. Since our October 2006 report, the UN has made little or no progress in improving certain budgetary and financial management functions. The General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no steps to implement them. The UN has also taken no further steps to improve its financial management.  Steps have been taken to improve UN oversight capabilities. Independent Audit Advisory Committee (IAAC) established in June 2007. UN funding arrangements continue to constrain OIOS’s ability to audit high-risk areas. General Assembly has not authorized OI OS’S financial and operational independence. The UN has made some progress in creating IAAC, but the committee is not expected to be operational until January 2008. The guidelines and requirements represent a compromise among the member states, according to member state representatives and State. IAAC will focus primarily on the work of OIOS while taking into account the work plans of the other UN oversight bodies. State Department officials told us they were satisfied overall with the creation of IAAC despite the various compromises. The five members of the newly created IAAC were elected in November 2007, and the committee is expected to be operational in January 2008. The UN has made some progress in strengthening the Office of Internal Oversight Services. The office has made a number of improvements to its operations. private sector as well as the experiences of other international institutions. membership of 5 individuals, preferably from a pool of at least 10 candidates proposed by member states. An evaluation process for candidates through consultations with an external relevant institution, such as the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. membership appointment for a term of 3 years, with the possibility of a second term of three years. The General Assembly also established the committee’s terms of reference. These terms include the following guidelines and requirements. the member states, according to member state representatives and State Department officials. Member states disagreed on some of the initially proposed responsibilities of IAAC. The United States and several other countries had originally favored that candidates for membership be referred by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions and that members not be eligible for re-election. Other member states disagreed. State wanted IAAC to be responsible for assessing the work of all UN oversight bodies, including the UN Board of Auditors and the UN Joint Inspection Unit. 16 complaints warranted a preliminary review. Of these 16, the ethics office referred two cases to OIOS for further investigation. Of the remaining 36 complaints, 19 fell outside the scope of its responsibilities and/or referred them to other offices. The ethics office provided advice and guidance on more appropriate actions to address 11 complaints. In addition, the office was copied on six complaints that were primarily addressed to other office or departments in the UN. In these instances, the UN ethics office keeps track of these complaints. activities remain. The OIOS Procurement Task Force reported in October 2007 that it had found multiple instances of fraud, waste, and mismanagement. The task force reported that a number of cases have been referred to national authorities for criminal prosecution or to the UN for consideration of subsequent legal action. It has also recommended civil recovery of monetary damages. As of October 2007, an estimated $1.2 billion in waste and fraud remains in the U.S. government's procurement system. OIOS has strengthened the capacity of its internal audit, investigation, and evaluations and inspections sections. However, OIOS funding arrangements continue to hinder its operational independence. For example, the office has combined two previously separated internal audit divisions in New York and Geneva within a single division. The office has established a professional practices section—fully staffed with six regular staff and three general services staff—that is fully-staffed. The Office of Internal Oversight Services has also created nine new audit posts for its internal Audit division. with six regular staff and three general services staff. OIOS also established an information and communication technology section, which has developed an audit strategy and conducted risk assessments. Member states decided to keep investigations in OI OS rather than move it to the Secretariat’s Office of Legal Affairs, despite a July 2006 decision to do so. The group is responsible for developing a quality assurance program, devising productivity tools, and improving performance reporting to management. It also conducts risk assessments for the information andcommunication technology functions of various departments at headquarters. progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the capacity of its evaluations and inspections sections. In 2006, the evaluation section was strengthened by the addition of two posts to increase the number of evaluations that can be undertaken. Funding arrangements at OIOS continue to impede the independence of internal auditors. OI OS is designed to be an operationally independent entity. OiOS is designed to be an Operationally Independent Office (OIOS) and has no direct links to the UN. OIOS argued that such a shift would significantly diminish the UN’s oversight functions. Since 2006, about 16 new posts have been created for the investigations division. OIOS has established a separate special investigations task force for sexual exploitation and abuse. The UN has made progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the quality of its investigations, says the report. The report was based on an external evaluation of the UN Office of Legal Affairs, which is part of the Secretariat. OIOS must negotiate funding for nearly two-thirds of its budget with the entities it is chartered to audit. Without operational independence, OIOS is constrained in its ability to prevent or mitigate risks to the UN’s resources and personnel. These risks include fraud, waste, abuse, inefficiencies, and mismanagement. Serious deficiencies in internal controls have left the UN susceptible to mismanagement and fraud, particularly regarding procurement activities in Sudan and Congo, the report says. The U.S. State and OIos generally agreed with our overall findings and recommendations.  Discussion of the revision of OIOS’s funding arrangements was deferred from the 61st to the 62nd session of the General Assembly due to a lack of consensus on funding issues. The UN does not yet have a formal and structural internal control framework that would provide reasonable assurance to management that its financial resources are being handled effectively and that its objectives are being achieved. OIos pointed out that serious deficiencies in internal controls have been identified. The U.N. General Assembly is scheduled to meet in New York on September 14 and 15. The General Assembly’s approval of the creation of an independent bid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing transparency in the UN's procurement award process. But there was evidence that few or no steps had been taken towards actual implementation of the system. State said it understood that this assessment was consistent with our evaluation methodology. These weaknesses on the implementation of a successful whistleblower protection policy. We agree with these concerns. As State notes in its comments, our assessment that the UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independentbid protest system for. The lack of an independent bid protest system limits the transparency of the procurement process. Such a system would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. It would also help alert senior UN management to situations involving questions about UN compliance. According to the UN Procurement Division, a draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices, is currently being drawn up. The draft process is expected to be completed by the end of the year and will be released to the public for comment. no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system for UN procurements is consistent with our evaluation methodology. The management reform decision-making process at the UN involves multiple entities. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly, consists of 16 members appointed by the assembly in their individual capacity. The functions and responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General assembly. The committee's role is to advise the UN General Assembly on issues that affect the organisation's finances. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in developing a comprehensive training program. The program is not expected to be formally in place until early 2008. The training is part of a development plan to provide a career path for procurement staff. Those who complete the training will be eligible to be certified by internationally recognized procurement institutions. In addition, according to UN procurement officials, all procurement staff will be trained in contracting, acquisition, and other specialized subjects. It is expected that the training program will be completed by the end of the year. UN expects to have provided the training to all field staff by the end of March 2008. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in its efforts to develop a risk management framework. In July 2007, a Planning, Compliance, and Monitoring Section was established and a chief was appointed to establish tools to detect potential transaction problems and minimize risks. Also, a proposal has been put forward for the creation of a UN Security Council resolution on ethics in the procurement industry. In 2007, all procurement staff in headquarters received ethics training in 2007. OIOS concluded that its dependence on extra- budgetary funding significantly affects its independence. The UN Secretariat has improved the UN procurement process, but a number of reform issues have not moved forward since our October 2006 report. Some progress has been made in strengthening the procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers, developing a comprehensive training program for procurement staff, and developing a risk management framework. However, the UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid to host a climate change conference. The UN Department of Management is in the initial planning stages of establishing a UN-wide risk management framework. As of September 2007, the concept is still in the planning stages, time frames and costs for its implementation have not been established. The concept of best-value-for-money is under development and expected to be put into practice by the Procurement Division in March 2008. For example, the OIOS procurement Task Force reported that the U.S. government was using the concept to identify potential transaction problems and minimize risks. The UN has made little or no progress in establishing a lead agency concept. Draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices from public- and private-sector procurements, is expected to be finalized by the first quarter of 2008. In the meantime, they have enhanced communications with vendors, including developing a more systematic debriefing procedure for vendors whose bids were unsuccessful. For example, the World Food Program might be best suited to procure items for air transport needs, while the UN Inter-Agency Procurement Services Office may be best at procuring certain vehicles. made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system and creating a lead agency concept for procurements. The UN Secretariat has made some progress in strengthening the operating procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment. In addition, since our October 2006 report, other organizational issues have arisen that may affect the UN’s procurement reform efforts. The progress on UN procurement reform is shown in figure 3. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment restrictions for former UN staff involved in procurement. The bulletin was issued following several incidents in recent years in which UN officials and former officials were involved in unethical and improper procurement activities. Former UN staff members, for 1 year following UN employment, are prohibited from accepting employment or compensation from any UN contractor. For 2 years, they are prohibited. from acting on behalf of others in procurement- related matters. In May, the UN also issued, in May, a measure to strengthen its procedures. The UN issued a revised supplier code of conduct in May 2007. The code requires that suppliers are responsible for adhering to the postemployment restrictions by not employing former UN staff members for at least 1 year. A proposal to increase the minimum threshold for contracts required to be reviewed by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts from $200,000 to $500,000 has not been approved. OIOS previously recommended that the threshold be increased, and, according to Procurement Division officials, increasing the threshold would assist in expediting procurements. UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. The primary purpose of the financial disclosure program is to identify potential conflicts of interest arising from staff members’ financial holdings. About 1,700 staff members were required to file financial disclosure or declaration of interest statements for 2005. About 98 percent of staff complied, and the remaining 2 percent were referred to the Office of Human Resources Management for disciplinary action. The current UN Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary- General voluntarily made their recent financial disclosure Forms public. a private contractor and analyzed to determine any potential conflicts of interest between the staff members’ confidentially disclosed private interests and their official duties and responsibilities. In May 2007, the contractor identified potential conflicts. of interest in 17 of the cases reviewed, or about 1 percent. Of these cases, 14 staff members accepted the advice of the private contractor to address the potential conflict and 3 cases were referred to the ethics office for final resolution. The 2006 review is not yet complete. The deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May. Deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May 31, 2007. Private contractor developed an online e-filing system to simplify and expedite filing requirements. The ethics office plans to review the online financial disclosure form and accompanying guidelines in consultation with other agencies. The director of the ethics office told us that the process for the 2006 review was ongoing, and, as a result, the compliance rate was not finalized as of September 2007. The deadline for filing 2006 forms was May 31. had sufficient staff to carry out its responsibilities. As of October 2007, the UN ethics office had made some progress in developing and circulating ethics standards and guidance. The office has also developed new ethics standards, such as postemployment restrictions standards. The ethics office has begun to develop a systemwide code of ethics for all UN personnel, including those of UN bodies and agencies other than the Secretariat as requested by the General Assembly in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. The director of the ethics office told us the development of a system Wide Code of Ethics was a priority. progress in staffing its ethics office by hiring a permanent director and additional permanent staff. In the fall of 2006, we reported concerns of UN experts that the newly created UN ethics office was insufficiently staffed with a temporary director and four professional and two administrative staff members. In May 2007, a new director of the ethicsOffice was appointed to a 3-year term. As of October 2007, the ethics office had six professional and three administrative staff. At that time, the office told us the office had sufficient staff to carry out its responsibilities. The UN has taken steps to improve organizational ethics since the fall of 2006. The UN has made substantial progress in enforcing a whistleblower protection policy. The development of a systemwide code of ethics was one of his top priorities and would be undertaken in the near future, in consultation with staff and management from multiple UN entities. In the past year, the ethics office has hired a permanent director and additional staff and has developed and provided ethics standards, training, and guidance. Between August 1, 2006, and July 31, 2007, the Ethics Office received 52 complaints of whistleblower retaliation. UN has begun to enforce a whistleblower protection policy. Concerns have been raised about the policy’s lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. The UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. The Government Accountability Project has criticized the effectiveness of the current UN whistleblower Protection policy. It has recommended that the jurisdiction of the ethics office be extended to UN funds, programs and possibly to specialized agencies. The Secretary-General has recommended the General Assembly consider broadening the jurisdiction to cover all UN entities. policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. In August 2007, after initially reviewing a whistleblower retaliation case of an employee at the UN Development Program, the ethics office and the Office of Legal and Procurement Services concluded that the UN’s whistleblower protection policy applies only to employees directly under the Secretary-General. UN and State officials told us that the whistleblower protection. policy is limited in its effectiveness if it is not applied to the entire. of the United Nations, including the Development Program. Congress, as we recommended. In addition, State agreed with us that more could be done to ensure credible oversight at the UN. State did not agree with our statement that successful whistleblower protections cannot be established without substantial reform of the UN’s internal justice program. Without a fair and impartial justice system that effectively executes corrective action in cases of retaliation or threatened retaliation, staff may not submit cases to the ethics office. Also, the annual activities report of the ethicsOffice states that protection against retaliation is linked to the internal justice system. current system to be fair or impartial and, consequently, might not come forward with claims of retaliation. In its August 2007 annual activities report, the ethics office expressed a concern that it had not had an opportunity to provide input into its role in the proposed new internal justice system. UN and State officials told us another concern about the whistleblower protection policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and other funds. The office expressed the importance of its inclusion in the justice reform process and said it was looking forward to working with the new system.

ROUGE-1: 81.50, ROUGE-2: 73.08, ROUGE-L: 24.39
BERTScore: 60.46

==============================================
