Best index: 61

wholesale terminals before being distributed to consumers. To varying degrees, refiners may primarily operate refineries. HollyFrontier Corporation is an example of a merchant refiner that purchases crude oil from unaffiliated producers and sells refined products to other companies operating retail fuel outlets. Chevron is a fully integrated company that also produces crude oil and operates pipelines and retail fueling outlets across the United States. Crude oil, petroleum products, and renewable fuels are transported between market participants through an extensive supply chain. home heating. The U.S. petroleum refining industry consists of firms of varying sizes that, in addition to operating refineries, may also have operations in other related industry segments. The upstream segment consists of the exploration for and production of crude oil; the midstream segment, which consists of pipelines and other infrastructure used to transport crude oil and refined products; and the downstream segment. The renewable fuels segment, where biorefineries produce renewable fuels that are blended with petroleum products at home heating. There were 143 petroleum refineries in the United States as of January 2013, with a capacity to process 17.8 million barrels of crude oil per day. Most refining capacity (almost 90 percent) is located in the Gulf Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. These refineries employed over 70,000 people in 2013. Refineries process crude oil into products primarily through a distillation process that separates crudeOil into products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry is one of the largest industries in the world. different fractions based on their boiling points, which can then be further processed into final products. One barrel of crude oil can be processed into varying amounts of gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and other petroleum products. Depending on the configuration—or complexity—of the refinery and the type of crudeOil that is being processed, the final product can be a range of different types of petroleum products, from gasoline to jet fuel to other types of fuel. For more information on how to make your own crude oil, go to www.crudeoil.com.  refineries can be optimized to produce greater proportions of specific types of products or to use different types of crude oil. For example, a coker unit upgrades the low-value residual oil from the distillation process into higher value products. To take advantage of some of these opportunities, refiners and other market participants will need to invest—to upgrade refineries to be able to process different crude oils or to build pipelines or rail connections to move more crude oil from production to the refining process. diesel, increasing a refinery’s ability to process heavier crude oils. U.S. refineries are among the most sophisticated in the world and have generally been optimized to produce large proportions of cleaner-burning gasoline. IEA has pointed out that refiners in many parts of the world face similar challenges. Potential for increased exports to nations with stringent fuel standards. The United States is a major exporter of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel, as well as heating oil and liquefied petroleum gases. oil has tended to be light and sweet, whereas a portion of new Canadian production has been heavy and sour crude oils. To a certain extent, some refineries can use these crude oils, but some have invested in new equipment in order to do so. For example, representatives of one refineries said they had invested in equipment to make use of the sour crude oil in their refineries. The Canadian oil industry is one of the biggest oil producers in the world, with a market value of more than $100 billion. them to export to markets such as Japan and much of Europe. On the other hand, refiners could undertake such investments on their own—without Tier 3. If such exports were sufficiently economically attractive, they could make the investment, refiner representatives said. They added that such investments could be made without Tier 3 if they were economically attractive. They also said that the investment could be done on a cost-effective basis, without the need to go through Tier 3 to make it happen. They said this was not the case with Tier 3 investments. oil for some domestic refiners that have the access and ability to process these crude oils. For example, West Texas Intermediate crude oil was $17.60 per barrel less expensive in 2012 than Brent, an international benchmark crude oil from the European North Sea. Those refineries able to take advantage of these lower priced crude oils have benefited because crude oil costs are the largest cost for refiners. However, all refineries may not have been able totake advantage ofThese crude oil may not be able to. The development of domestic and Canadian crude oil production has created some challenges for U.S. crude oil transportation infrastructure. Some of the growth in production has been in areas with limited transportation linkages to refining centers. Because of these challenges, some refineries may not have been able to take full advantage of crudeOil production increases. Some refineries have had to rely on other more expensive crude oil transport options such as truck, rail, or barge. For example, two of the refineries we are talking about are in the Gulf Coast region. constraints have, according to EIA, contributed to discounted prices for some domestic crude oils. Configuration constraints at refineries. Increasingly, the crude oil being produced in the U.S. and Canada has different characteristics from the crude oils that some domestic refineries are configured to use. Production of new domestic crude has been slow to take off in the United States and Canada, the EIA says. The EIA has no immediate comment on the report's accuracy or potential impact on prices. The domestic petroleum refining industry has been and is expected to continue to be affected by several profound changes. In particular, it is unclear on regional crude oil prices, reducing the price advantage of U.S. refiners. Some of these changes, such as the growth in crude oil production in the United States and Canada, are expected to have a significant impact on the refining industry in the coming years. The U.N. General Assembly is set to meet in Paris on May 25-26. the United States and Canada has increased, which has lowered the cost of purchasing crude oil for some refiners. U.S. production of crude oil reached its highest level in 1970 and generally declined through 2008, reaching a level of almost one-half of its crude oil to the United States. All of the forecast scenarios we reviewed from EIA, IEA, and IHS anticipate increases in U.s. crude oil production, but the projections are uncertain and vary. The rapid growth in U-S. and Canadian crudeOil production has lowered cost of crude As discussed above, increasing U-U-C oil production has led to lower cost crude oil.  monthly domestic crude oil production has increased by over 55 percent through September 2013 compared with average production in 2008. According to EIA, increases in production in 2012 and 2013 were the largest annual increases since the beginning of the decade. The U.S. is the world's largest producer of crude oil and natural gas, according to the EIA. The United States is also the largest consumer of natural gas and the second largest user of electricity. The EIA says the U.N. has the largest share of the global natural gas market, followed by Russia. peak. During this time, the United States increasingly relied on imported crude oil to meet growing domestic energy needs. However, recent improvements in technologies have allowed companies that develop petroleum resources to extract oil from shale formations that were previously considered to be inaccessible because traditional techniques did not yield. The U.S. is expected to reach peak oil in the next few years, according to a new report by the International Institute for Energy Studies. The report predicts that the country will reach a peak in crude oil production in the years to come. Much of the increase in crude oil production has been from shale and other formations, such as the Bakken in North Dakota and the Eagle Ford in Texas. Crude oil production in Canada— the largest foreign supplier of crude oil — is also on the rise. The U.S. has been the world's largest producer of oil since it began producing crude oil in 1859, according to the EIA. The United States is also the largest consumer of oil in the world, followed by Russia and Saudi Arabia. of the system of crude oil pipelines in the United States was constructed in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. According to DOE officials, this infrastructure was designed primarily to move crude oil from the South to the East Coast and the West. The pipelines were built to accommodate the needs of the refining sector and demand centers at that time. The U.S. crude oil pipeline system is still in operation today, according to the Department of Energy. The pipeline system was designed to move oil from South to East Coast. infrastructure including pipelines, tanker vessels, rail, trucks, wholesale terminals, and retail outlets. In 2012, refineries received the majority of their crude oil by pipeline (over 50 percent) and by tanker vessel (37 percent) visited recently installed facilities to enable them to receive crude oil from North Dakota or Canada by rail. According to EIA data, while refinery receipts of crudeOil by these methods of transportation is a small percentage of total receipts, they have increased 57 percent from 2011 to 2012.  emerging crude oil production centers in Western Canada, Texas, and North Dakota have strained the existing pipeline infrastructure. Though pipeline capacity has increased, pipeline capacity to deliver crude oil to a key Cushing, Oklahoma hub has increased by about 815,000 barrels per day from 2010 through 2013, the EIA reported. The U.S. Energy Information Administration says the pipeline capacity increase is due to increased demand for crude oil from Western Canada and Texas, as well as increased production in North Dakota and South Dakota. whether planned expansions in pipelines and rail transportation will keep pace with growing production. These infrastructure expansions could be affected by regulatory actions to address pipeline and rail safety. Potential future increases in crude oil exports, which are currently minimal, could put pressure on existing infrastructure, stakeholders say. The U.S. is the largest producer of crude oil in the world, followed by Canada, according to the International Energy Agency. The United States is the No. 2 crude oil producer, with an output of more than 1.2 million barrels per day.  horizontal drilling techniques and hydraulic fracturing have increased U.S. oil and natural gas production. Hydraulic fracturing is a process that injects a combination of water, sand, and chemical additives under high pressure to create and maintain fractures in underground rock formations that allow oil andnatural gas to flow. The process is called "fracking" and is used to create fractures in rock formations to allow the flow of oil or natural gas into the ground. The U.N. has approved the use of hydraulic fracturing in the United States for the first time. In higher consumption scenarios, EIA’s projections suggest higher refinery production than in scenarios with lower domestic consumption. EIA scenarios project export levels from 2.6 to 3.4 million barrels per day by 2020, a relatively wide range. Even the lowest projection for petroleum product exports in 2020 is above 2010 levels, indicating a general expectation that exports will remain strong. The extent of the increase in future U.S. crude oil production can have implications for future petroleumProduct exports. For example, the reference scenario in EIA's most recent forecast projects domestic crude oilProduction. of gasoline to Central and South America and Africa. Forecasts that we reviewed generally project that exports will remain strong. According to most of the EIA and IHS forecasts we reviewed, exports of petroleum products are expected to increase until 2015. But the extent of the increase is unclear. As of the end of 2014, the U.S. was the world's largest importer of crude oil, followed by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, according to the World Bank. The U.N. is the world’s largest exporter of refined petroleum products. and, in particular, highlight the scenarios representing the highest and lowest projection of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel consumption; petroleum product exports; and crude oil production. We identified some differences in the metrics reported in the four forecasts and did not make direct comparisons in these instances. We conducted this conducted this study to highlight some of the differences in forecast metrics and to highlight the potential for future volatility in the oil market. The study was conducted to highlight possible future variability in the price of crude oil. projections through 2020, contained information broadly relevant to our report, covered multiple scenarios or offered a counterpoint scenario, and contained well- documented discussions of methodologies used and assumptions made. While forecasts are subject to inherent uncertainties, we found these forecasts to be reasonable for describing a range of views about the future of the U.S. economy. We found the report to be comprehensive and well-documented. We also found it to be well-balanced and balanced in its analysis of different scenarios. Domestic consumption of petroleum products peaked in 2005 at 20.8 million barrels per day. The U.S. market is important for domestic refineries because they have historically sold their products domestically. The outlook of the U.s. refining industry depends on future domestic consumption, which is uncertain, according to stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed. The forecasts we reviewed project consumption will decline by 11 percent from 2005 through 2012, but it's unclear how long that trend will continue, the authors say. Global consumption of petroleum products is projected to grow an additional 6 million barrels per day by 2020. Canadian crude oil production accounted for about 16 percent of the crude oil used by U.S. refineries in 2012. The reference scenario in the IEA's report is higher than the reference scenario from the prior year. The IEA estimates that global consumption will approach a historical high of 9.6 million barrels a day in 2020, up from 78.9 million barrels in 2012, according to the report. refiner told us they had invested over $2.2 billion in a project including a new coking unit at a refinery to refine heavier and more sour crude oil from Canada. After decades of generally increasing domestic consumption of petroleum products, consumption has declined since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic population. The U.S. is the world's largest producer of crude oil and a major exporter of refined petroleum products. The United States is the second largest consumer of crude, after Saudi Arabia. consumption—a difference of about 7 percent of 2012 inputs. This difference is equivalent to about eight average-size U.S. refineries. Several stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed highlighted various factors that can affect future domestic consumption levels and thereby the size of the largest market for the production of crude oil in the United States. We are happy to clarify these issues and provide more information to the public about what we are looking forward to in the coming years. We look forward to hearing from you in the next few weeks. Consumption of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel peaked in 2007 and declined by over 8 percent through 2012. EIA estimated that petroleum product consumption increased in the first 11 months of 2012. Most of the scenarios in forecasts we reviewed from IHS and EIA project total consumption to increase slightly by 2020, with projections ranging from a decline of 2 percent to an increase of 7 percent compared with 2012 consumption. All EIA scenarios projecting gasoline consumption to decline or remain stable and diesel and jetfuel consumption to increased from 2012 to 2020. IHS projects an increase in the consumption of both gasoline and diesel, with more robust growth projected for diesel. Scenarios in the forecasts we reviewed generally project consumption to decline after 2020. Forecasts indicate that the level of future domestic consumption—the size of the domestic market for petroleum —will be higher than in the past. The global economy is expected to grow at a faster rate than the global economy in the next few years, according to IHS forecasts. The U.S. economy will grow at an average rate of 3.7% in the coming years, up from 2.9% in 2013. Retail prices for regular gasoline averaged $3.63 per gallon in 2012, the highest annual average price when adjusted for inflation since 1976. Retail prices have declined in 2013, but are still near historic highs. Market dynamics anywhere along the supply chain can influence consumer prices, beginning with upstream crude oil production, the production of renewable fuels, and the refining of crude oil and gasoline. The refining industry was a low-return industry for much of the prior two decades, according to industry officials and experts. on petroleum demand declines in the past few years. It is unclear how much declining demand overall can be attributed to these standards. Other factors such as the recent economic recession and higher fuel prices. Shifts in consumer behavior and demographic trends also play a role in the decline in consumption of petroleum products, the report says. The scenario that assumes high future oil prices projects lower domestic consumption ofroleum products. The study was based on forecasts from the U.S. Department of Energy, the EPA and a refinery representative. 2013 compared with the first 11 months of 2012. A number of factors can affect consumption of petroleum products, including economic activity and crude oil and petroleum prices. For example, the recession of 2007 to 2009 reduced economic activity, which led to a drop in petroleum consumption. 2013 compared with 2012 compared with 2011 compared with 2010 compared with 2009. 2013 Compared with 2012 Compared with 2011 Compared with 2010 Compared with 2007 Compared with 2009 Compared to 2007 Compared to 2010 Compared to 2011 Compared to 2012 Compared to 2009 Increases in Production and Use. Federal Rulemaking: Improvements Needed to Monitoring and Evaluation of Rules Development as well as to the Transparency of OMB Regulatory Reviews. Energy Markets: Refinery Outages Can Impact Petroleum Product Prices, but No Federal Requirements to Report Outages Exist. Vehicle Fuel Economy: Reforming Fuel Economy. Energy markets: Increasing Globalization of Petroleum Products Markets, Tightening Refining Demand and Supply Balance, and Other Trends Have Implications for U.S. Energy Supply, Prices, and Price Volatility. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao,gov. The report will also be available on the Department of Energy's website at www.energy.gov and on the U.S. Department of Transportation's site at http:www.sft.gov/energy. our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. This report provides information on the domestic petroleum refining industry and its market and regulatory environment. Specifically, it specifically focuses on the U.S. domestic refining industry. It also includes information about the domestic oil and gas refining industry, including its market, regulatory environment, and industry practices. The report is available online at: http://www.gao.gov/energy/ petroleum-refining-report. named above, Christine Kehr (Assistant Director), Elizabeth Beardsley, Catherine Bombico, Keya Chateauneuf, Nirmal Chaudhary, Quindi Franco, Cindy Gilbert, Katharine Kairys, Michael Kendix, Armetha Liles, and Alison O’Neill made key contributions to this report. GAO-12-732. Oil and Gas: Information on Shale Resources, Development, and Environmental and Public Health Risks. through downstream refining and retailing. Crude oil costs have been the largest component of the recent increases in gasoline prices. Economic growth. Faster economic growth tends to increase consumption, and EIA’s forecast scenario with higher economic growth assumptions projects greater future consumption of petroleum products than a scenario with low economic growth. Higher prices for crude oil and petroleum products. More demand for petroleum products in the U.S. than the amount of crude oil that is produced. More production of refined petroleum products, such as gasoline. time but has not increased in a significant way since 2000. The five key environmental regulations affecting the domestic refining industry that we reviewed are concerned with various health, environmental, and other issues. Under the RFS, since 2000, since EIA began reporting estimates of the components of retail prices (see fig.4), the price of crude oil has not risen significantly. The U.S. refining industry is one of the biggest contributors to the global carbon dioxide emissions in the United States, according to the World Resources Institute. regarding such issues as capacity and location of refineries, crude oil production, and consumption of petroleum products. To assess the reliability of EIA data, we took several steps including reviewing documentation, interviewing EIA staff, and consulting with stakeholders. We determined the EIAData to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. We are happy to share our findings with the public at the request of the U.S. Department of Energy and the American Petroleum Institute (API) for use in the report. We review studies by federal agencies and consultants, company financial regulatory filings, and proposed and final regulations and regulatory impact analyses. To identify studies and other literature, we conducted searches of various databases. To illustrate major changes over time and to describe the domestic petroleum refining industry, we summarized historical data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) We report on those that were most often cited and report on the factors that are most likely to affect the industry's future. We conclude with a list of factors that may affect the future of the domestic refining industry. We reviewed forecasts from EIA, the International Energy Agency (IEA), and IHS. We summarized projections through 2020 under different scenarios. We selected these forecasts because they made potential conditions of the domestic refining industry and major factors that will help determine these conditions. We reviewed and compiled data from relevant scenarios and compared them where appropriate. For more information about the domestic petroleum refining industry, visit the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s petroleum refining outlook report. for more information on how to get involved in the industry, or call the National Association of Refining Companies at 1-800-477-8255. concentrated in Asia and the Middle East and consumption declining in Europe. IEA projects refining capacity may grow even faster, resulting in excess capacity (refining capacity beyond that needed to meet consumption) of nearly 15.5 million barrels per day by 2020. This is in contrast to an estimated 4.8 million barrels by 2020, the IEA says. The IEA estimates that the global demand for crude oil will rise by 2.7 million barrels a year by 2050, and that the world will need to produce 2.9 million more by 2050 to meet demand. per day of excess capacity in 2012. A large share of the new capacity is expected in China, India, and the Middle East. Two refiners indicated concern that capacity additions in some of those regions may present competition for U.S. refiners. Several other stakeholders were optimistic about domestic refiners’ ability to compete in the future. According to IEA,capacity additions in China and India are intended to keep pace with growing consumption in those regions, but not to meet demand. The United States recently exported more petroleum products than other leading exporters. Major markets for U.S. exports include Central and South America, Mexico, and Europe. The United States exports more diesel than gasoline, though U.s. refiners have been increasing exports. The U.K. became a net exporter of total petroleum products in 2012. It is the third-largest exporter after Russia and India, and the fourth-largest export market for the United States, according to EIA data. EIA data indicate that as domestic consumption has declined, refiners have looked to foreign markets to sell products. Since 1949, the United States had been a net importer of petroleum products, but this long-term trend reversed in 2011 when the U.S. became a net exporter of products. The United States is now a net consumer of petroleum.products, according to the EIA. It is the first time since 1949 that it has become a net producer of petroleum product. of domestic petroleum products from 2000 through 2005—less than 6 percent of U.S. refinery production. As discussed below, the refining industry has shifted sales to export markets amid a declining domestic market. IEA data indicate that competition from foreign refiners may increase as global refining capacity is increased. New Middle Eastern refineries are intended to be export facilities and may present increased competition to U.s. refiners. Costs associated with environmental regulations could collectively impose additional costs on the domestic refining industry. U.S. refiners' future competitiveness is uncertain. Foreign markets present both challenges and opportunities for refiners. Future domestic refinery production levels may depend on exports of petroleum. To sell products abroad, refiners need to be able to export their products. The competitiveness of domestic refiners compared with foreign refiners will depend on their ability to do so, the report says. The report was based on interviews with stakeholders and data from EIA and IEA. It was also based on data from the American Petroleum Institute. compete internationally to the extent that foreign refiners do not face similar costs. In addition, regulatory uncertainty can affect refiners’ competitiveness if it inhibits the industry from making investments that would otherwise lower costs. Not all of the key regulations we reviewed would be expected to affect the industry’s competitiveness, the report said. The report was published by the World Resources Institute, a think tank based in Washington, D.C. It was published in association with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) review of its experience issuing RFS regulations to identify the underlying causes of repeated delays. EPA has not identified changes in its approach that may help to avoid these delays in the future. Develop and implement a plan to address the causes of delays and help ensure RFS annual standards are issued on time. We provided drafts of this report to DOE, DOT, and EPA for review and comment. The three agencies provided technical comments on early drafts of the report. The full report will be released in the coming weeks. be a full calendar year, and delays do not change this compliance period. As a result, when the RFS standards are issued late, the industry has less time to plan and budget effectively. Several representatives of refiners told us that delays could actually make annual standards more robust since EPA then has more data upon which to base decisions. EPA officials said that delays in issuing RFS Standards have largely been due to regulatory development processes, not RFS issues. The EPA has not issued any new RFS requirements. that they did not believe delays have affected market participants, and that the market for RFS credits has provided flexibility to refiners and other obligated parties. The extent to which the RFS. increases costs in the future could also be affected by the outcome of any relevant litigation and of. of RFS claims, according to a report by the American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers (AFP) The report also said that the amount of fuel needed to meet RFS targets could be as high as 2.5 million barrels per day. We identified five key regulations that were recently strengthened or proposed. We reviewed agency regulatory impact assessments. We also asked agency officials and other stakeholders we contacted to recommend studies. For more information, visit ProQuest.as ProQuest and PolicyFile, for studies since published 2009, or for more information on the EPA’s Renewable Fuels Standard, visit the EPA Renewable Fuel Standard website. For the full report, go to ProQuest, for more details, or to PolicyFile. review processes can be time consuming because the RFS standards involve complex and controversial issues. In 2009, we recommended that EPA and other agencies track their performance for developing significant regulations against targeted milestones to identify opportunities for improvement. We found investment decisions and ultimately the availability and prices of the fuels they produce are at the heart of the problem. We recommend that the Administrator of the EPA take the following two actions: Assess past experience to identify the underlying causes of RFS problems and identify opportunities to improve. The RFS is set to go up 2.4-fold through 2022 to 36 billion gallons. The Administrator of EPA is authorized to waive the RFS levels established in the act if the Administrator determines that implementing the requirement would severely harm the economy or environment. There is an inadequate domestic domestic domestic fuel supply, the Administrator is allowed to waive that requirement as well as other levels of RFS requirements if he consults with the Secretaries of Agriculture and Energy and the Secretary of the Interior. the percentages finalized by EPA, which, in turn will depend on the development of advanced renewable fuel sources and market infrastructure. The outlook could be affected by legal challenges, as well as any legislative action to modify the RFS. Stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed generally suggest that the outlook is positive for the U.S. energy industry in the near future. We will continue to monitor the situation closely and provide updates on this story as we learn more about the future of the renewable fuel market. not provided EPA with the proper information to proceed with processing the permit. The Clean Air Act requires that EPA approve or deny such permits within 12 months of receiving a complete application. LCFS. CARB, the entity responsible for implementing LCFS, said the regulation has had a modest effect to date. The agency says it has not received any complaints about the process, which is expected to take up to 12 months to complete. The EPA has said it will review the matter in the coming months. The EPA says it will not distribute the report until 30 days after its release. The agency says it plans to send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and to the EPA itself. See appendix IV for EPA’s letter to the White House and the Department of Health and Human Services for more information on the report. The report is available online at: http://www.epa.gov/news/press-releases/2013/01/30/report-on-climate-change-revealed.html. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. or final drafts, which we incorporated as appropriate. EPA also provided a letter in which it generally agreed with our findings and recommendations and clarified three topics discussed in the report. EPA asserted that refiners experience the same compliance costs regardless of or contractual constraints, among various other factors, that could result in different outcomes in the short run. Second, regarding the time-frame for RFS compliance, EPA stated that the RFScompliance deadline—the date by which refiners must comply with RFS rules—is March 1, 2015. The RFS compliance period refers to the time during which refiners and other parties incur obligations under RFS and can take steps to incorporate additional renewable fuels. This period is set by statute to be a full calendar year. EPA stated that it adjusted the 2013 deadline to provide additional time to demonstrate compliance. We acknowledge that EPA can extend the compliance deadline. We clarified language in the report to acknowledge EPA's ability to adjust the Compliance deadline, essentially providing more time to prove compliance. The RFS is established through implementing regulations, not statute. EPA has not met its statutory deadlines under the RFS in the five annual standards since 2009. EPA officials told us that they develop RFS regulations using the same procedures used for developing all EPA regulations. EPA has not conducted a systematic statutory volumes in whole or in part according to statutory criteria, which EPA has identified as potentially factoring in the blend wall, market developments, and other issues. However, EPA has missed the annual deadline for issuing annual standards under theRFS in most years. November 30 of the preceding calendar year. EPA has missed the statutory deadline to set annual percentages since 2009. Most recently, EPA issued 2013 standards in August 2013—over 8 months late. EPA proposed the 2014 standards on November 30, 2013 and has not issued the 2014 Standards yet. The 2014 Standards are expected to be issued in January 2014. The 2013 Standards were issued on August 31, 2013, and the proposed 2014 Standards were released on November 29, 2013. The 2015 Standards are scheduled to be released on January 1, 2014. to the length of the regulatory development process, which includes interagency and public reviews. Under the public review process, EPA must publish a proposed standard in the Federal Register, provide the public with the opportunity to review and comment on the proposal, and address comments received before finalizing the regulation. According to EPA officials, the inter agency and public can have a voice in the development of RFS standards. The agency is to follow certain procedures before publishing proposed or final regulations that establish annual R FS standards, including submitting draft proposed and final regulations. (OMB), which coordinates review of the draft regulations by other agencies, as well as conducting its own review. The interagency review process is to ensure that regulations are consistent with the President’s priorities, among other things, and that decisions made by one agency do not conflict with the policies or policies of the other agencies. For more information on OMB, go to: http://www.omb.org/regulations/draft-regulations.html. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. that tracks 14 milestones as it develops proposed rules and additional milestones in developing final regulations. For example, EPA tracks when its senior management approves of a document describing the scope of the regulation and the analytical work necessary to develop it, known as the detailed analytic blueprint. In comments, please share your thoughts on the EPA's proposed rules, proposed regulations, and proposed regulations. InComments: Share your thoughts, ideas and suggestions on the proposed rules in the comments section below or email them to jennifer.smith@cnn.com. to our 2009 report, EPA stated that it used an internal tracking system along with additional information to develop regulatory management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA stated at the time that this process helps management identify regulations that are off-track so that corrective steps can be taken to fix the problem. EPA said in the 2009 report that it uses aninternal tracking system and additional information. to developregulatory management reports. EPA. said in 2009 that it. uses an internal Tracking system and other information to. develop regulatorymanagement reports to managers and execs. that monitoring actual versus estimated performance could help agency managers identify steps in the process that account for substantial time and provide information necessary to evaluate whether time was well spent. In this regard, EPA stated in comments to our 2009 report that it uses an agency-wide Action Development Process. The EPA says it uses a process that is based on a review of the agency's overall goals and objectives. The agency says it has no plans to change the way it manages the EPA’s budget and programs. performance audit from November 2012 to March 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the audit that we performed was in line with those standards. We are confident that the results of the audit will be consistent with our expectations. We have no plans to change our audit methodology in the near future, the company says. petroleum fuels, but the extent is unclear. These standards aim to reduce oil consumption, and although they do not require changes at the refinery level, they can affect refineries indirectly. They can contribute to improvements in the overall efficiency of the vehicle fleet and, therefore, reducing fuels consumption. However, the National Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light Trucks, and Other Options Could Complement These Standards. The National Standards could help reduce oil Consumption by cars and light Trucks. projected combined average fuel economy of about 50 miles per gallon by 2025. EPA estimated that the 2011-2025 standards may save consumers and businesses $1.7 trillion. The standards are projected to reduce U.S. consumption of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels per day. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards will require more efficient vehicles in the future, which may reduce future consumption of fuels. A stakeholder told us that the CAFE or GHG standards have likely had a relatively large impact is uncertain by how much. CAFE standards contributed to a reduction in transportation fuel consumption of 2.8 million barrels per day in 2002. EPA estimated in 2010 that vehicles were us that the most recent changes to CAFE and GHG vehicle emissions standards have had a marginal effect on petroleum demand so far. DOE officials said the impact of the standards has been limited because they affect new car sales, and there are a relatively small number of new cars on the market. They said the standards did not cause the shift from growing consumption to declining consumption discussed previously. population and fewer young people with driving licenses, may reduce future consumption, according to EIA. Three of the key regulations we reviewed are expected to reduce domestic consumption of petroleum products in the future according to information we reviewed. Though it may reduce consumption, though it may not reduce it as much as expected, the EIA says it will still be a significant reduction in future consumption of the products it is currently using. The EIA's report was based on information it received from the U.S. Department of Energy. CAFE standards are administered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 instituted several changes to the CAFE standards. In 2009, the administration announced a new program to increase vehicle fuel economy and reduce vehicle GHG emissions. Although theCAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards are distinct, their targets were aligned for compliance purposes, the White House says. The program is aimed at reducing oil consumption andGHG emissions from the transportation sector. It is estimated that the program will save about 27 million vehicles off the road. NHTSA and EPA put the national program into place by issuing coordinated regulations covering vehicle model years 2012 to 2025. As shown in figure 6, fuel economy standards for cars largely remained unchanged from 1990 through 2010. But vehicle manufacturers are now expected to meet increasingly stringent standards reaching the end of the program in 2025. For more information, visit the NHTSA website or the EPA's website. for more information on the National Fuel Economy Standards Program, go to: http://www.nhtsa.gov/fueleconomy. Tier 3 standards, stationary source GHG requirements, and LCFS have had minimal effects to date. Tier 3 standards were proposed on May 21, 2013, and EPA announced final standards on March 3, 2014; therefore, they have had not had a direct effect on industry. Stationary source GHg requirements have not affected industry operations or costs in a major way, according to stakeholders and information we reviewed. LCFS regulations have not yet been implemented (Tier 3 Standards) or, with respect to the other two, have not affect industry operations. 2013, EPA proposed the Tier 3 standards, and on March 3, 2014, EPA announced the final Tier 3 Standards. The standards establish more stringent vehicle emission standards and reduce the sulfur content of gasoline. additional time for obligated parties to purchase credits, and its inability to adjust the compliance period. EPA stated that the finalTier 3 program is very similar to what it proposed, though EPA made some changes based on public input. EPA provided technical comments to incorporate information from the final rule which we incorporated into the report, as appropriate. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to establish certain standards for new motor vehicles and fuels to address air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. On May 21, EPA will set standards for 1.billion metric tons over the lifetime of the vehicles sold during model years 2011-2025. The standards are expected to be in place by the end of the year, according to the agency's website. The rules will be phased in over a period of five years, the EPA says. approximately $1.5 billion in 2030, including costs for refiners to install and operate equipment to remove sulfur from gasoline. Costs for vehicle manufacturers to improve the emissions performance of vehicles. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to take certain steps to address emissions from stationary emissions from cars, trucks, and other vehicles. The goal is to reduce the amount of sulfur in gasoline by 50 percent by 2030. The cost of the plan is estimated to be $2 billion by the end of the 2030s. According to EPA, more than 149 million Americans experience unhealthy levels of air pollution. Cars and light trucks are significant contributors to air pollution, and EPA estimated that the Tier 3 standards will reduce pollution from cars and trucks. The standards are expected to be in place by the end of the first quarter of 2015. For more information on the standards, go to www.epa.gov/airpollution or call the EPA at 1-800-426-8255 or visit www.EPA.gov. of gasoline allows emissions control systems to work more effectively for existing and new vehicles. EPA estimated that the Tier 3 standards would reduce on-highway vehicle emissions of nitrogen oxides, a pollutant that has been liked to respiratory illnesses, by 10 per cent. The standards would apply to new and existing vehicles, as well as existing vehicles that have been modified to meet the new standards. For more information on the standards, visit the EPA’s website or go to www.epa.gov. By 2030, annual emission reductions from the Tier 3 standards would generate annual benefits of between $6.7 and $19 billion and prevent up to 2,000 premature deaths annually, EPA estimates. EPA estimated that the vehicle and fuel standards would cost between $1.2 billion and $2.5 billion. The standards would apply to all vehicles and fuel systems, not just trucks and SUVs. They would go into effect in 2018, and 25 percent in 2030, the EPA says. legislative proposals to change the RFS or how EPA implements it. Tier 3. According to EPA, to meet the Tier 3 fuel sulfur standards, refiners would need to install or upgrade hydrotreating capacity or take other steps to reduce the sulfur content in fuels, which will likely increase industry-wide costs. Some U.S. refiners may benefit from any trend toward higher quality and more stringent environmental performance standards. In this regard, actions refiners might take to reduce gasoline sulfur to comply with proposed Tier 3 standards could enable them to benefit. The standards set more stringent tailpipe emission standards for new vehicles. The standards generally require refiners to lower the sulfur content of gasoline from 30 parts per million (ppm) to 10 ppm on an annual average basis by 2017. According to EPA, reducing the sulfurcontent of gasoline is a key part of reducing carbon dioxide emissions from vehicles. Such sources include natural gas, propane, but also diesel and natural gas-powered vehicles, according to the EPA.such sources. The EPA says the standards are intended to reduce carbon emissions from cars and other vehicles. per-gallon maximum allowable sulfur levels in gasoline. In the final standards, EPA maintained the current 80 ppm cap, but had sought comment on whether it should decrease the cap to as low as 20 ppm. A stakeholder told us that Tier 3 would be manageable if EPA maintained its current cap of 80 ppm. The final standards are expected to be released in the coming weeks or months. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. EPA projected that 67 out of 108 refineries would modify or purchase some equipment. The capital costs of installing this equipment and operating costs to run it would total $804 million in 2017. An industry study of the Tier 3 proposal estimated that the regulation would increase costs by up to $0.09 per gallon for the highest-cost refinery. The extent to which the refining industry will be affected by Tier 3 standards would have been greater had EPA decreased the standards. The regulation is expected to take effect in 2018. the current caps, but far more difficult if the caps were lowered. Industry could incur additional capital expenses to achieve lower sulfur caps, ranging from $2 billion to over $6 billion dollars depending on the sulfur cap level in the final standards. One study we reviewed estimated that industry could incur extra capital expenses of up to $4 billion dollars if the sulfur caps are lowered to a lower level. The current caps are set to remain at the current level until at least 2040, but could be lowered by as much as 50%. 2006, transportation fuels sold in the United States have been required to contain increasing amounts of renewable fuels such as ethanol and biodiesel. Congress established the RFS in light of concerns such as climate change and the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil. To comply, refiners generally have two options—they can purchase and blend renewable fuels themselves, or they can pay others to blend or use renewable fuels by purchasing credits. These has contributed to the declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels. credits can be freely traded, and prices for credits are established based on the market. Prices generally reflect the stringency of requirements and the costs of incorporating additional renewable fuels into the transportation fuel system to comply with the RFS. If costs increase, credits prices would tend to increase as well. The price of a gallon of gasoline has declined to about $0.20 per gallon as of mid- November 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in credit prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportationfuel infrastructure to distribute. renewable fuels is a large component that could contribute to economic hardship from compliance with the RFS. In theory, market-based compliance systems would provide incentives for market participants to make decisions that would tend to equalize additional compliance costs over time. However, there can be physical infrastructure that needs to be built to meet RFS requirements. For more information, visit the Renewable Fuels Initiative (RFI) website or go to http://www.rfi.org/RFI. EPA has not issued annual RFS standards on time since 2009. EPA is required to set annual blending percentages for total renewable fuels, advanced biofuels, cellulosic biofuELs, and biomass-based diesel fuels by 2025, equivalent to almost 15 percent of crude oil used by refineries in 2012. Under the RFS statute, unless waived by EPA, renewable fuels blending is expected to double by 2022, which EPA estimated would reduce gasoline and diesel demand by 13.6 billion gallons. fuel requirements for 2014 due to an inadequate supply in light of the blend wall and other issues. EPA stated that the framework it applied to determine the proposed percentage standards could be appropriate for later years. EPA officials told us that the RFS program affects all refiners equally because obligations are the same regardless of whether refiners blend or not. EPA’s timeliness in issuing the significant impact on the company's financial performance during the second quarter of 2013 because ExxonMobil meets the majority of its obligation by blending its renewable fuels itself. EPA: RFS blending levels in 2022 could reduce GHG emissions by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions. Total benefits could be between $13 and $26 billion, according to EPA. They include those related to overall fuel costs, energy security, health, and GHG effects. They displace the amount of fuel they displace, EPA says, which could be as much as $13 to $26billion. The RFS is set to go into effect in 2022, the EPA says. The RFS has had three main effects on the domestic petroleum refining industry or individual refiners. Compliance has increased costs, declining domestic consumption, and investment uncertainty. EPA has been late in issuing annual RFS standards, and several factors contribute to the delays. The other three key environmental regulations have had minimal effects to date because of new vehicles in the overall fleet. The U.S. and Canadian crude vehicle emission standards and the RFS have likely affected the refining industry by reducing the consumption of petroleum fuels. demand for gasoline, and historically high gasoline prices have discouraged the use of gasoline. Stakeholders and information we reviewed also cited the effect of more stringent fuel economy standards and the RFS, which are discussed in the next section. Several stakeholders told us that this broad shift from growing to growing has been a result of the fuel economy and RFS regulations, as well as high gas prices. We will discuss the impact of these factors in more detail later in this article. We hope to hear from you about your thoughts on this issue. refiners could reduce production, produce more jet fuel, or increase exports to nations where the RFS does not apply. The RFS in consumption affect refiners by decreasing the size of the domestic market. Since RFS was established in light of concerns about the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil, decreased consumption of petroleum products may further some of the objectives of RFS. Third, the R FS has contributed to investment in U.S. refiners, which has led to increased production. The effect of the rise in credit prices may depend on each refiner’s situation. EPA stated that refiners experience the same compliance costs. RFS may increase costs for some refiners depending on the percentages of renewable fuels required by EPA and on other factors. According to several stakeholders, RFS compliance has been most difficult for refiners with less of a retail presence, known as merchant refiners. The uncertainty surrounding these regulations—and what costs they will impose—can affect the market climate within which refiners and other market participants make investment decisions. EPA recently issued rules concerning how GHGs are to be included in certain existing permitting processes. Since 2011, construction of any new refineries and certain refineries that are modified have generally been subject to the use of the “best available control technology” for GHG emissions. The best available control is generally considered to be the most effective method of controlling GHGs in a given environment. The rules apply to stationary sources, including refineries, as well as other sources that trigger GHG emission thresholds. technology is determined for each facility based on an analysis of available technologies considering cost and other factors. According to EPA, in most cases, the best available control technology selected for GHGs are energy efficiency improvements. For example, for refineries, this could involve the installation of heat recovery units, which could help refiners reduce fuel consumption and save money. EPA officials also explained that, in some cases, delays can occur when the refinery applicant has not been approved for the required technology for the facility. capture and use otherwise wasted heat in the refinery process. Such energy efficiency improvements can lower GHG emissions and other pollutants while reducing fuel consumption and saving money. Current regulations do not require existing facilities to take any steps to controlGHG emissions unless they undertake a major modification. Examples of such improvements can be found in the U.S. at the following sites: ExxonMobil, Chevron, BP, Royal Dutch Shell, Total, Shell, Statoil, Total and Statoil Refining. Refiners told us stationary source GHG requirements have been burdensome to them. EPA officials told us they were aware of only three refineries that have received majorSource GHG permits since 2011. The current permitting framework is a case-by-case determination that takes into account costs, among other factors, and places no requirement on existing refineries unless they undertake a major modification or a new refinery is proposed for construction. A refining company representative expressed concerns to us about the lengthy permitting process to authorize GHG emission increases. of the U.S. refining industry will also depend on the extent to which some key regulations—RFS, Tier 3, stationary source GHG requirements, and LCFS—increase costs for refiners. The requirements on domestic refiners from the key regulations we reviewed generally are expected to collectively have a greater effect in the future. In general, increasing costs may be absorbed by refiners themselves (i.e., by reducing their profits), be passed on to consumers through higher product prices, or both. In particular, CAFE and GHG vehicle standards do not impose requirements on refiners. RFS and Tier 3 standards could impose requirements with potential associated costs on some refiners, but they would not apply to exported fuels. They apply only to fuels sold in the United States regardless of where they are sold. The U.S. is the world's largest producer of gasoline. The United States is the largest consumer of natural gas, followed by Canada and then the UK. It is the No. 2 fuel market in the world, after China. environmental organizations, consultants, and officials from federal and state agencies. We selected these stakeholders to represent broad and differing perspectives on these issues. The conditions at the refineries we visited are not generalizable to all refineries. The stakeholder views we summarize were not necessarily supported by all types of stakeholders, though we identify differing views where appropriate. For example, to select refiners, we examples of the range of views. We identified a number of the stakeholders and information we reviewed that we believe are important. and industry and other studies on the effect of these regulations on industry. Other regulations may also affect the industry. We also summarized the results of semistructured interviews with a nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. Stakeholders included representatives from refining companies, considered, among other factors, the size and location of their refineries, and whether they were vertically integrated or merchant refiners. When possible, we used a standard set of questions in interviewing stakeholders. However, as needed, we also sought perspectives. on additional questions tailored to these stakeholders’ expertise. We sought opinions from stakeholders on key issues, such as their views on the potential effects of exports on industry. Because we used a nonprobability sample, the views of these stakeholders are not generalizable to all potential stakeholders. However, they provide illustrative views that may be useful to some stakeholders in the future. We are happy to share these views with our readers. For more information, visit the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s website. standards could also affect costs to the extent that delays affect the supply of renewable fuels, RIN prices, and refiners’ ability to plan and budget effectively for compliance. Uncertainty among refiners, renewable fuel producers, and other market participants about how EPA will address the blend wall, which can be exacerbated by the prospect of litigation, can affect market participants. EPA officials said delays do not change refiner’s compliance periods accordingly and they therefore create uncertainty in the marketplace, potentially harming investment. and renewable fuel producers, making it more difficult to make long-term planning decisions. One refining company representative told us that the company has reduced capital investments due to uncertainty related to the RFS. In contrast, EPA officials told us there is no indication that delays have caused significant problems, according to the report. The report was based on interviews with refining, renewable fuel, and EPA officials in Washington, D.C., New York, and Los Angeles. For more, go to CNN.com/RFS. refining centers. Uncertainty can affect the market climate within which these investment decisions will be made. EPA’s timeliness in issuing annual percentage standards under the RFS is important to help inform the investment decisions of the refining industry. In issuing annual Percentage Standards, EPA may waive the standards for certain types of crude oil and natural gas. The EPA may also waive the requirements for certain other types of oil and gas, such as propane, but not for crude oil, natural gas and other refined products. whether they are fully integrated, with blending capabilities, or merchant refiners that purchase credits for compliance. Based on our work, we found the views of several stakeholders differed from EPA's. For example, in a 2011 study, DOE identified the degree to which a small refiner can actively blend production with its own output. We found that several stakeholders' views of blending capabilities differed fromEPA's. We also found that EPA's view of blending capability differed from the view of several other stakeholders. evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To demonstrate compliance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) annual blending requirements under the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), refiners use renewable identification numbers (RINs) We refer to RINs in this report as credits. A. We believe that the amount of credits provided by refiners to meet the RFS requirements is sufficient to meet their obligations. We. believe that this amount is sufficient. to meet our obligations. EPA has no current schedule to issue these standards. However, EPA entered a settlement in which the agency agreed to develop national performance standards. New Source Performance Standards will include GHG emissions from new and modified refineries, and GHG guidelines for certain facilities at existing refineries. The standards are not expected to be implemented until 2015 at the earliest, the EPA says. The settlement is expected to last for at least two years. The EPA says it has no immediate plans to issue the standards. Stakeholders expressed concern that future standards could impose more strict controls involving higher costs at refineries. Many refiners will be reluctant to make certain investments in their refineries until EPA clarifies its approach for NSPS, a stakeholder said. EPA is committed in its settlement to issue them, and several stakeholders expressed concern about the settlement's terms. The settlement is expected to be finalized by the end of the year or early next year, according to the EPA's website. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. low carbon fuels, buy such fuels from other producers to blend into their products and sell on the market, or purchase credits generated by others. Refiners can also generate credits—which can be banked and traded—if their use of low carbon fuels results in greater-than-required carbon intensity reductions. CARB estimated that by the end of the year, there will be more than 1 billion tons of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, up from about 1.2 billion tons in 2010. ethanol, and other low carbon intensity fuels or vehicle technologies. CARB officials told us that if it proves more difficult than expected to meet LCFS requirements, CARB could introduce cost containment provisions to increase the availability of credits, such as through a “safety valve” to release additional credits at a later date. “Safety valve’s” purpose is to ensure that the credits are available at the right time for the right use of the fuel, officials said. ‘Cost containment provisions’ can be used to reduce the cost of credits. quality, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity. Under the RFS’ statutory provisions, the increasing amounts of renewable fuels are to primarily come from renewable fuels other than corn ethanol. Advanced biofuels that meet certain criteria, including reducing GHG emissions by at least 50 percent compared with the gasoline or diesel fuel, are to be included in the program. The RFS is set to go into effect in 2015, and the goal is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50 percent. given year. Unlike the RFS, which requires certain types of renewable fuels be used, under LCFS refiners can meet the CI reduction targets using a variety of low carbon fuel technologies. Lowcarbon fuel technologies include renewable fuels from waste and cellulosic materials, natural gas, electricity used in plug-in vehicles, and electricity used to power cars and trucks. The LCFS is expected to be in place by the end of 2015, with a target of 20 percent CI reduction by 2018. To reduce emissions, carbon intensity (CI) scores are used. CI scores are to reflect each fuel’s life cycle GHG emissions. Refiners generally are required to ensure that the overall CI score for their fuels meets the annual carbon intensity target for a fuel. Fuel can include gasoline, diesel, and their blendstocks and substitutes. For more information, visit: www.fuel.gov/carbonintensifiecottecotte.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The original LCFS statewide reduction targets for gasoline, diesel, and their substitutes started at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 10 percent by 2020. In 2013 a state Court of Appeal found that CARB must correct certain aspects of the procedures by which the LCFS was originally adopted. CARB officials subsequently announced a regulatory package would be proposed in 2014, and that the 2013 standards will remain in effect through 2014. To comply with LCFS, refiners can produce their own. date—increasing fuel prices by about $0.01 per gallon. LCFS is the subject of several ongoing lawsuits, which resulted in a 4-month delay in some regulatory activities. According to a study conducted by a consultant on behalf of industry, the ongoing legal challenge will continue unless CARB adjusts future low carbon fuel requirements. CARB has estimated that the cost of LCFS on gasoline and gasoline- substitute fuels is likely to range between an increase of $ 0.09 per gallon, and a decrease of £0.13 per gallon by 2020. the 2020 targets would reduce GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector in California by 10 percent in 2020, or 23 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. Stakeholders we interviewed identified three major changes that have likely recently affected the domestic petroleum refining industry. First, crude oil production in California is expected to increase. Second, the state is likely to increase the production of natural gas, a key ingredient in crude oil. Third, the U.S. is set to increase production of crude oil, which is a key component of the state's energy supply. could cost the refining industry an average of $0.70 per gallon by 2020. The study also projected that 5 to 7 of 14 California refineries could cease production. LCFS could raise other compliance challenges because of insufficient supplies or consumer uptake of cellulosic, Brazilian sugar- cane, the study said. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a think tank based in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday. For more, go to: http://www.americanpartnership.org/. LCFS is creating uncertainty that discourages new investments by industry. California refiners could face higher costs or compliance challenges set price, or by providing extra credits to certain compliance approaches. Some companies may preemptively factor in the cost of emissions control technologies in their investment analyses. Stakeholder told us that the decisions CARB makes with respect to the LCFS may affect California refiner’s ability to stay in business and compete with refiners in other states and countries. While the domestic refining industry has increasingly relied on foreign-based suppliers, LCFS could affect their ability to compete. LCFS does not specifically prohibit any crude oil from being processed in California refineries. LCFS’ goal to reduce carbon intensity in transportation fuels is not affected by increased use of higher carbon intensity crude oils. California refiners have thus far been able to comply with LCFS requirements by blending lower carbon intensive renewable fuels or purchasing carbon credits as an alternative method of compliance. Stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed generally suggest that the.disincentivizes the use of carbon intensive heavy crude oil. California’s LCFS aims to lower GHG emissions by reducing the level of carbon in transportation fuels. The LCFS would change the mix of fuels and vehicles in California to reduce emissions throughout the fuel ‘life cycle’ The extent to which these regulations will reduce future consumption depends on actions by regulators and market and other developments. For example, as discussed above, EPA has proposed to reduce renewable energy use in the state of California in the next few years. The state has projected that the LCFS will help decrease future gasoline consumption in California. RIN is a unique 38-character code that renewable fuel producers and importers assign to each gallon of renewable fuel produced or imported. To demonstrate compliance with the RFS, refiners must provide sufficient RINs for the volume of gasoline and diesel they produce for use in the contiguous United States and Hawaii. For example, to comply with the 2013 total renewable fuels standard, a refiner selling 100 million gallons of gasoline would have to provide 9.74 million total Rins to EPA. refiners, because they do not blend their own fuel and must purchase RINs from others, increasing their cost of compliance. On the other hand, some industry participants may be relatively advantaged when the price of Rins rises. For example, an ExxonMobil official said that RIN costs did not have a renewable fuels themselves or purchase R INs. In particular, EPA stated that refiners experience the same costs. If a company generates its own Rins, there is a cost associated with doing so, namely the cost for the renewable fuel compared to petroleum fuel it displaces. the previous year. Refiners and other obligated parties with more RINs than needed to meet the year’s blending standard can hold them for use in the following year. They can also sell them to another party that needs additional Rins to comply with the blending standard. Prices for R INs reflect the cost of producing and selling the RIN in the U.S. for the year in which they are used. For more information, go to: http://www.rins.com/. The blend wall exists because blending more than 10 percent ethanol with gasoline (called E10) is affected by constraints such as limited availability of vehicles that can use higher ethanol blends. EPA officials recently said the blend wall would be reached in 2014 when about 13.2 billion gallons of E10 could be consumed. Blending additional renewable fuels can be difficult and costly once the blend walls are reached. The EPA has said it wants to address the blending wall by the end of 2014. The blend wall is expected to be reached at the beginning of 2015. the “blend wall.” A refiner we spoke with also attributed the decline in credit prices in the second half of 2013 to EPA’s statements expressing its desire to address the blend wall. The blend wall may remain a concern into the future because statutory renewable fuel blending requirements continue to increase. They more than double in the next five years, according to the EPA. The blending requirements for renewable fuels are expected to double by the end of the next decade, the EPA says. According to EIA, corn-based ethanol credit prices were low between 2006 and much of 2012. In 2013, prices for these credits increased to over $1.40 per gallon in of renewable fuels compared with the petroleum fuels they displace. Several stakeholders told us this increase in RIN prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the RFS to produce ethanol in the first place. The stringency of annual blending percentage standards, and other factors, and have varied over time. transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuels, referred to as the “blend wall” EPA officials told us that high corn prices, which made ethanol more expensive relative to gasoline, also contributed to higher RIN prices during this period. These Rin prices have since been since lowered. The RIN price for a gallon of gasoline is about $1.50 to $2.50. The price of a litre of gas is around $3 to $4. September 5, 2012. Biofuels: Challenges to the Transportation, Sale, and Use of Intermediate Ethanol Blends. Washington, D.C.: June 3, 2011. Vehicle Fuel Economy: NHTSA and EPA’s Partnership for Setting Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards Improved Analysis and Should Be Maintained. GAO-10-336. Energy-Water Nexus: Many Uncertainties Remain about National and Regional Effects of Increased Biofuel Production on Water Resources. The major source of renewable fuels has traditionally been ethanol produced from corn. As we reported in 2009, the increased cultivation of corn for ethanol, its conversion into renewable fuels, and the storage and use of these fuels could affect water supplies, water supply, or in certain other situations. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2009/09/20/science/energy/corn-fuels-could-affect-water-supply-water. consumption of ethanol has increased almost 8-fold since 2000. According to EIA, increased ethanol use since 2007 displaced over 4 billion gallons of petroleum-based gasoline, or about 3 percent of gasoline consumption in 2012. As discussed previously, decreases in ethanol use have been linked to decreases in gasoline consumption. In 2012, U.S. consumption of ethanol was 12.9 billion gallons, up from 1.7 billion gallons in 2000, according to the EIA. In 2007, ethanol use was 1.5 billion gallons.