Theory goes back to Roth and Whiteley, 1981-- good year. If you can find a stress that is nonzero on every particular strut or cable, then all of those things are effectively bars. Every infinitesimal motion holds the length of that edge fixed. This will actually always be true-- the corresponding linkage is rigid-- because I put in every edge is in there. If I turn them all into bars, this thing's not moving at all. Strut can have zero stress-- the weight is zero. A spiderweb is something where every edge is basically a cable. All of the edges can have a positive stress, and it will be in equilibrium. In spiderwebs, in fact, this is the same-- these two-- rigidity and positive stresses are the same thing. This is a brand-new result from this summer at [? OSMI ?] by Robert Lang and Alex Bateman. Here is an example of that-- a spiderweb, so to speak, but drawn visually. And you turn it into a crease pattern, fold it flat and it works. Theorem: All pairwise distances between vertices increase or stay the same. Key to proving it is by making the theorem stronger. Tensegrities will force things to be expansive. So if initially you're non-crossing, you will be non-Crossing forever. That really makes life easier, because crossings are hard to think about. This lets you not worry about crossings. How do I worry about distances increasing? Tensegrity. You compute an equilibrium stress, which is easy to do by linear programming, and draw-- you can directly construct from that the 3D lifting. still buy them at the hardware store. That's it. You can't buy them online. You have to buy them from the store. They are not available online. They can be bought at the store, but you have to pay for them in cash. They're not available on the internet. You must buy them in the store to get them. You cannot buy them on the Internet. They must be bought from the hardware stores. That is it. They have to be bought in the stores. Rigidity is really about the lack of motion. In infinitesimal motion, you can think about this in the absence of a motion. You need some smoothness. If there's a way to get started moving, that doesn't actually mean you could actually move. So we're going to need some linear algebra. That's one thing that's useful. So the idea is we think about rigidity-- does a linkage move or not-- to the first order. First order means first derivative.