LocusLink is a repository of information about genes, and it collects everything that is known about the genes. No LocusLink assigns a name to each gene, and if you stick to that name, then you're sure that everybody knows what you're talking about. Other resources that we'll mention later use a different way of naming genes. This makes things very difficult when you're trying to build programs to integrate information from different places. It's very, very hard to know exactly how to reconcile different ways of naming gene. We need to be able to reliably identify which transcription factors bind to a given gene, and where, exactly, in the promoter region of the gene they bind. The ways that people have been using to do this are usually based on pattern matching. The binding site, as I said, is a small stretch of DNA, usually goes from five to about 20 or 25 base pairs. So they're really short. And they're characterized by [? concentric ?] sequences-- in general, they are not very precise. is a challenging task, because as we saw, biomedical data covers the whole spectrum of knowledge representation and management techniques that we know about. We are trying to make the most of the data we have, and we hope that it will help us understand more about the human condition. We hope that this article will be of interest to people around the world who are interested in biomedical data and data management techniques. For more information, go to: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-and-biomedical-data/bio-data-measurement-mechanical-data. Alberto Riva: How is all this information represented? What are the different ways that we can store and describe this information? Where does it come from, where is it stored, how do we find retrieve and use it? He says there are some very deep differences between the kind of information you find when you're talking about the genotype, and when we'retalking about phenotypes. He says each one has its own specific nature and function, and needs to be treated with different tools.