"Unlockable" is ambiguous because there are two "un-"s. "Un-" can combine with either a verb or an adjective. " unlockable" consists of three morphemes, a prefix, a stem, and a suffix. It's not a complete description of what's happened either, but it is also those trees, or those trees represent something, namely the order in which you did things. "John walked up the stairs," "Mary looked up the stairwell," "John" and "Mary" are sentences. In many languages, including Latin, you have to say, "About what are you talking?" In English, you always bring it along with the question word to the beginning of the sentence. "Who" is supposed to be the direct object of "you are talking to" this person, so it's like, "to whom are youtalking"? "To whom areyou talking?" sounds fancy and snobbish, but still right, according to the linguist, who says it's not his go-to way to say this. will find the red book" for example, we'll see that syntax treats that string, "The red book," as a unit. It's OK to take a substring like that and put it together with another similar substring conjoined with the word "and" so you can say things like, "I will find thered book and the blue pencils" But "find the red I will book, leave the blue I will pencils." No. Can't do this with just any random three-word string. the fact that it contains a noun. So when we put together "red" and "book," what we get has properties that are determined by the fact that they contain a noun, if there were no noun, it wouldn't have those properties. Similarly, with "the red book," the things that can go in that slot, there are various kinds ofThings that can be larger or smaller. What they all contain is a noun; we're going to name that thing after those kinds of units. We'll give it the label "noun" Kind of like when we added "un-" to "lock" and got "unlock" kind of example that I was exploiting in the first slides I was showing you about syntax. Notice, for example, that if I say I will wake up the cats and you're astonished as you might well be, you can't say "Up the cats?" You cannot say, "I will walk the stairs up," I think. So "up the cats" is not a prepositional phrase. We need different structures for these verb phrases, and we will develop them. I was a way, waking the cats up, it's a little bit like painting the cats red. construct syntactic trees for strings of words. It's often the case that we get ambiguities like the "unlockable" ambiguity. There is more than one way to combine things. And what we'll do is develop tests that allow us to see which way we've combined words in different ways. And we'll find cases where, depending on in what order you combine things, you get different meanings, and our tests will combine with that. All right. We will do this again on Tuesday. "Apparently This Matters" is CNN Radio's weekly, offbeat look at stories you saw on CNN.com. This week, Jarrett ponders the meaning of the word "unlockable" "Unlockable," means either it's possible to unlock it, or it is not possible to lock it," Jarrett says. "Un-" combines with verbs and makes adjectives that mean more or less "not (adjective) " " Unfortunate" means not the adjective, whatever it is.