Sparta was the first state to be in command, or in control, or to be the leaders of a coalition of states. The Spartans gained a reputation of being--because they often fight against tyrants--they gain a reputation for being hostile to tyranny. The Spartan alliance most of the time was not clear how it came to exist, but perhaps the place to start is around 570C. The Peloponnesus suffered a defeat in the region of Arcadia to the north of Laconia in the seventh century. The average Spartan did not ever speak in the assembly, it appears. So it's not a democratic assembly, even though every single citizen is there, if he wants to be. Let me turn now to the ephors. These, according to Spartan tradition, were invented somewhat late in the development of the Spartan constitution. Although we don't have a clear picture of the way in which they were chosen, it is clear that there's a strong element of chance involved in selecting who was going to be an ephor. Athens is located in the southeastern portion of the Greek peninsula. The city is Athens; the region in which they live is Attica. The people are Athenians and that's an important point I think I made too. Everybody who is a citizen who lives in Attica is an Athenian, no matter if he lives sixty five or seventy miles away from the city. He's still an Athensian. So the rich-born, because they are pretty much the same in the early days of the polis, run the state in this official way. that there are the kinds of discontents that we have been talking about which find the leader in the form of a man who is an outstanding figure for some reason, who is willing to try to establish a tyranny. That it fails, I think, is an indication that the same forces haven't reached the power in Athens that they had reached in Megara, Corinth, Sicyon, and places like that. It's a warning about troubles ahead and I'll turn to those troubles in the next hour. All adult male Spartans were participants in the assembly. When a question was put to the Spartans, the way they responded was by shouting and banging on their shields. When it involved something fundamental like war and peace or alliances, then they would have to go to the assembly to get their approval. The Spartans got into this war with Tegea and they gained control of it. They claimed to have discovered the bones of the great Homeric hero, Orestes, and taken it away from Tegean.