Ti-silicide has a tendency to agglomerate when it's very thin at higher annealing temperature. Cobalt bisilicide does not have that narrow line effect, but it gives you a slightly higher resistivity. The modern silicide that I mentioned here is this nickel silicide, NiSi. It's formed at very low temperatures, 450 or 500. And it's a little bit less than the case of titanium. It consumes 2.2 or 2.3 or so nanometers of silicon per every nanometer of metal. silicide sheet resistance in ohms per square, it needs to be in this range of 6 to 10 ohmsper square. That's not a problem. None of that-- that's all in white, which means people know how to do that. The real problem is making these really good low resistivity contacts to the silicon. I just want to show an example of how-- so you get a feel for how the numbers work of how one does a contact resistance calculation. This is for a MOSFET. depletion of the polysilicon at very high gate biases. So people are concerned. They want to get rid of poly as the gate material. But poly is an extremely easy material to integrate. People know how to etch it. It's not reactive with SiO2. That's not the case for metals. So it here, what they had to do is put a metal and maybe some other harder material-- no, sorry, sorry. They had to put, yeah, contact material, and then maybe a dielectric. Slide 26 shows you some of the different uses of silicide in silicon technology. Silicide are used, as you can see, to strap the poly. It also forms a barrier layer, as we mentioned. And finally, it can be used as a gate material. And here's an example of nickel silicide, fully silicided gate that was published about six months ago by annealing at 450 degrees and using a thick enough layer of nickel. And you get a silicide all the way down to the gate interface. about your oral report or whatever, please get back to me. OK, thanks. About your oralReport.com. About. Your oral report. About Your Oral Report. Please get. back tome. about your oralreport or whatever. about. your oral Report or whatever,. please getback to me about.your oral Report. about Your OralReport.org. OK. Thanks, thanks, thanks for your report. You can send it to me via e-mail at jennifer@dailymail.co.uk. JUDY HOYT: Hopefully everybody's recovered from their Thanksgiving feast. What I'm showing up here is the schedule to orient us. This is lecture 22. We'll talk about silicides, device contacts, and I've added in a new material this year on novel gate materials. And then next week we have two class periods scheduled. There'll be four speakers in each. And those will be the oral reports and the student reports given on Tuesday and Thursday. And I just want to remind people, if you're doing an oral report, you're expected to provide handouts.