Psychologist David Frum: What matters most for the moral blame that we assign is not what happened, but what Grace thought she was doing. He says that in scenarios like the one he gave you, what matters most is not how bad the outcome was, but how much blame Grace deserves. Frum says the scenario isolates one important feature of our moral judgment and also an important feature. of a lot of the rest of our social cognition. He asks: How much blame does Grace deserve for putting the powder in the coffee? And how much do you think she deserves? How do we think about other people as containing internal mental lives, mental representations? I'm going to talk about just fMRI, although I do use other methods to study this problem. I think fMRI has been both an incredible gift to our ability to understand the human mind and also imposes a huge number of limitations on what we can discover. And so what I want to tell you about is just a tiny bit of my phase one investigations using the early strategies that fMRI allowed us. And then a more in-depth look at how I'm using more modern techniques in fMRI to try to get further. mind is that, with respect to the representation of other people's thoughts, that doesn't tell us anything about how our brain does it. So the things that would make something a theory of mind-- a representation of who thinks what, why, and with what consequences-- we can't see in the univariate signal. What I think we're starting to make progress on using MVPA, is getting beyond that this brain region is involved in theory ofMind and trying to ask something about what is represented in this brain area. more general way of thinking about fMRI data. This particular method, using spatial correlations, is very stable and robust. But it's a special case of a much more general set. It's a very stable, robust method, but it's not a very general way to look at fMRI. It doesn't work for all fMRI patients, but for some, it could be a very useful tool. It could be used in the future to help people understand their brain's responses to stress. Rebecca Saeger: Social intelligence should pervade our thinking about the mind and brain. She says the ability to think about other people's thoughts or internal states is very large. We're using our ability to make sense of others' minds, she says, to understand complex ideas. Saeber: The debate about whether this capacity for thinking about others' thoughts is not shared with other animals has not been resolved on the origin of this problem for psychology, which has been going on since the '70s.