it doesn't work so let's kind of look at them in the atas model right we have this Keynesian view. We have our kind of a classical view and we have our what would be called supply-side view. There's more views than that obviously but we're just gonna look at these these three stir them the three main ones. We're at some full employment level of output YF and here we are initially we're in some recession right we're at output level say y1 and some price level just call it P l1. F and basically this guy says look we know eventually the short-run aggregate supply curve will increase and we go to the full employment level of output if you guys engage in this type of policy over here. The deficit today means that at some point in time in the future you're going to have to increase taxes so you can kind of think of it as the budget deficit over two different time periods. In fact thanks to interest it won't be 20 that you have to borrow or in raise taxes for it'll actually be like say 30 all right. doesn't make any sense I'm not gonna do that I'm gonna goof off. I don't want it because they're facing a marginal tax rate that's really really high so which view is Keynesian new classical supply? I'll write the paper and win the Nobel Prize and I can go to Sweden and get the nice little bitty gold medallion that I couldn't wear around my neck for the rest of life at such a such recession. alright this is the end of test three material I will. CNN's John Defterios takes a look at three different views of fiscal policy. Keynes says we can change aggregate demand in such a way that we can make. Defterio: Once you actually start spending money it becomes difficult to take money away. He says once you start giving people something taking out money now becomes very very difficult. The crowding out problem and the crowded out problem are real, he says, and they're going to get worse as we go along. The problem is that people are borrowing money to go to school and you're now taking money out of your savings.