Glycogen phosphor is U an enzyme that's regulated in several ways. It exists in two forms it exists in the glycogenosphor a form which is the form that has the phosphate on that people describe as the more active and it has the form without the phosphate known as the glycogens phosphor B that is less active. Def phosphorilation involves a kise or phosphatase right the r&t involve allosteric affectors okay all right okay so that's uh where we start now um. has to itself be regulated just like everything else has to be regulated because if we don't regulate it then everything's going to be def phosphorated all the time and cells aren't going to have energy like they need okay so we need to think about that Def phosphorilation and that's the wrong slide okay here's what we're after okay now what you see on the screen is a um a scheme that shows the regulation of phosphoprotein phosphatase that's pp1. 5m I'll have my car pack with information so I don't have to memorize it and I'll feel like aart with my party just one to go and then ho I'll be all right I think you got it thank you. [Applause] oh yes thank you thank you [Music] sh if if if you're too crowded for the final and I don’t get a chance to say it I hope you have a great holiday and I will see you next time thank you indeed you too study hard. okay folks let's get started how's everybody doing pretty good Santa Claus has come to town and you know Santa does with naughty kids Hees them finals he gives them finals. He gives them very evil finals is what he does okay so look out for Santa Claus he's really a really a bad guy uh let's see let's think about a couple of things in terms of announcements. We have a review session tonight at 6:30 in ALS 401 so I will videotape that and I will uh get it posted uh maybe later this evening but most likely sometime tomorrow. For those of you who had regrades on exams um they are available for pickup in the BB office and you can pick them up there so that's um available to you.