We'll find the Heisenberg equations of motion and solve them for a particular case today. We start with the time evolution. We found that, whenever we declare that states evolve in time in that way, they satisfy a first order time differential equation of the Schrodinger form. We discussed that in recitation on Thursday. This unitary operator you've been seeing that from the beginning of the course in some sense, that you evolve energy eigenstate. It's an interesting thing, and really that will be good enough. The Schrodinger equation is there. OK so now let's solve this. We'll go through three cases. Case one, h is time independent. So H of t is really H like that. So what do we have? ih bar. Let's write dU dt is equal H times whole thing is the same. So this is something very useful and we'll need it. One more comment, expectation values. We just say the expectation value of As is equal to the Heisenberg expectation value. the Schrodinger operator? PROFESSOR: You have to speak louder. OK, comments. At t equals 0 A Heisenberg becomes identical to A Schrodingers. When t is equal to 0, U of t-- of 0 0 is the operator propagates no state, so it's equal to the identity. So if this is happening, the two Hamiltonians are identical. And we'll have the chance to check this today in a nice example. And this goes Hs of t1 and t2 commute with each other. Solving for the time dependent Heisenberg operators is the same as finding the time evolution of all states. So you have this. And then you write Xh is equal to A cosine omega. t plus B sine omega t where A and B are some time independent operators. At time equals 0, the Heisenburg operators are identical they to the Schrodinger operators. So any expectation value of any power of X and P that you will want to find its time dependence, just put those Heisen Berg operators, and you will calculate things with states at time equals0. variables in, it just becomes identical to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian. All right, so that's all for today. I hope to see in office hours in the coming days. Be here Wednesday 12:30, maybe 12:25 would be better, and we'll see you then. [APPLAUSE] We'll be back at 12:50 on Wednesday, and be here at 1:30 on Thursday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Professor: We're going to look at this unitary time evolution and calculate this operator u, given the Hamiltonian. Then we will look at the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Professor: If you have a time dependent Hamiltonian that actually commutes with itself, the fact that it's time independent doesn't make it fail to commute at different times. And you will discuss later on as we do the nuclear magnetic resonance, which is more interesting in which it rotates and therefore it's not that time dependent.