Fluorescence is the absorption of light energy by a molecule. Luminescence is the emission of light in the absence of heat. There are different types of luminescence. And you'll get to see some of those varieties of luminecence in the next couple of slides. And it's not the last time that you're going to see them, so let's take a look at fluorescent dyes at the end of the electromagnetic spectrum in thenext couple of slide. The next few slides will show you how fluorescent proteins come from. The adaptive immune system is an amazing system where you can do combinatorial biology and basically recognize any target entity you're interested in. So we're going to focus exclusively on the B cells and the way that they mature to produce soluble antibodies. When you get a population of B cells that produce antibodies to a particular target, these may be what are known as polyclonal-- sorry, I should have written that up here-- A polyclona antibody, as might be suggested by the name, is an antibody that recognizes a molecular entity. The way you make antibodies is by injecting. the foreign agent or antigen that you want to make an antibody to. The organisms are adapted not to recognize their own proteins unless there's some disorder like an autoimmune disease. So you would inject the rabbit with a human epitope, so for example human actin, generate antibodies with a specificity for actin. Alternatively, you might want to made a different antibody for tubulin. You've really got two types of macromolecule that can be interacted with a fixed cell. DNA microarrays exploit the complementarity of DNA sequences. They can be used for profiling genetic material or for profiling not just DNA, but RNA. Fluorescence is a magnificent tool. We can use fluorophores as attached to antibodies. And the DNA microarray experiments show you how you can usefluorophores attached to DNA sequences, OK. And I'll see you in the next class. Technology. Technology is known as a DNA micro array has anybody heard of these? Yeah. DNA microarray experiments and how you can use it to profile disease states and cells versus healthy cells. And then at the beginning of the next class, I'll describe how you get information out of DNA microarrays. But at the end of the day, you're always using the fluorophores as the probes for where certain things are, OK. Fluorescence is a magnificent tool. We can use fluorophore on their own, or we can use them as attached to antibodies. Lambda Lambda: Fluorescence is a type of luminescence. He says it's used to illuminate life, to understand details of cellular activity. Lambda says fluorescence can also be used as reagents in diagnostics in all kinds of imaging modalities. He gives three lectures on fluorescence, including one that has even more imaging in it. Llamda: I like fluorescence so much because the images are so captivating. I'm going to redefine all these terms properly in a moment.