Deuteronomy contains northern traditions from before the fall of Israel, which was in 722. There are many passages that make it clear that it's written from an exilic perspective. The most salient feature of the Deuteronomistic School is the conviction that Israel's residence in the land is a function of its means for us today that it did happen. Another theme that we see in these books is the emphasis on what we call the Yahwist prophets -- prophets like Elijah and Elisha. They are held up as heroes and champions of religious purity. According to the Book of Joshua, Israel's tribal structure assumed its classical form at this time. The formation of the nation state, Israel, was much more complicated than the picture that's presented in Joshua 2 through 12. Scholars have proposed three possible models to explain the formation of Israel. The Yahweh cult may have been introduced by people escaping slavery from Egypt. Some elements within this group may have brought with them the story of a miraculous escape from Egypt to become the group that accepted the national god. The Hebrews at this stage were probably not a united people. in exile in Babylon. They are trying to make sense of the tragedy that has befallen them, the loss of their land. Consider how a text like Joshua 23 and Joshua 24 would go a long way towards explaining their fate while retaining faith in Yahweh. We're going to return to this when we reach the conclusion of the Deuteronomistic history in 2 Kings. It would be interesting to see how they would have reacted to the events of the time in which they were living. Christine Hayes: God's choice of Israel as the chosen one occurs for the first time in the Book of Deuteronomy. She says it is by no special virtue or merit that Israel was the one chosen. Hayes: The privilege of having been chosen or singled out entails obligations and responsibility. Deuteronomistic historian in general will get to the idea of God's providential concern for Israel, she says. in a moment we will see how important that is, or in a few lectures,how important that idea is for the Deuteronomic historian ingeneral.