here-- in other words, at a certain distance r away, how much does the area of this sphere-- does this detector take up? And a simple formula for the solid angle is just the surface area of whatever you've got over r squared. This approximate formula-- the blue curve-- is a pretty good approximation of the red curve until you get really, really close to 5 centimeters away, or about this distance right here. But this is actually not that good of an approximation when you put a source very, very up close to a detector. If you were to take this detector and bring the radius down to 0, if that solid angle went to, well, infinity , then the count the sphere or how much tin foil you had to use. Michael Shorter: Counting for longer can decrease your standard deviation. He asks, how long do you have to count in the smoke shop to be 95% percent sure? Shorter says the more error you allow, the shorter time you've got to count for. He says sometimes, do you necessarily have to be95% confident of your result? Depends on what you're doing, he says. But if you can't get within 5% error, there's always some trade-offs you can make. using a regular rod to move the reactor power up. You want to be careful when you raise reactor power. When you get to about 80% of the power level you're going to-- since we're going up to 1 megawatt, that's about 800 kilowatts. You'll drive the regulating rod inwards. It'll slow until it actually starts to go down again. Once it reaches that value and you see it going down, you now know that you could control the reactor and keep it from going away. where it started, the 13.42 inches out of the bottom of the core. It might not make it all the way back up to [INAUDIBLE]. FRANK WARMSLEY: It'll be close. Compensate with the reg rod if you need to. 30.8. OK. And that's the end of the exercise. We'll be back in a few minutes with the results of the test. We hope to see you on "Larry King Live" next week. Michael Short: How do you know what, let's say, your dose distance relationship is? And how do you calculate all this stuff? Short: So I've actually laser-cut out a little Geiger counter jig from a previous class. And you guys can all do this too. And we'll take a look at the solid angle subtended by this detector right here. And what we notice is that except for extremely short distances, this approximate formula for theSolid angle does not compute.