scoring function is independent of the protected attribute. So that allows a little more wiggle room because it says that the protected. attribute can still predict something about the outcome, it's just that you. can't use it in the scoring function given the category of which outcome category that individual. belongs to. It says that given the scoring. function, the outcome isIndependent of theprotected attribute. And usually, there are knobs in these learning algorithms, and depending on how you turn the knob, you can affect whether you're going to get a better classifier that's more discriminatory. work here and embarrassing myself. So this is modeling mistrust in end-of-life care, and it's based on Willie's master's thesis and on some papers that came as a result of that. If you look at African-American patients, and these are patients in the MIMIC data set, what you find is that for mechanical ventilation, blacks are on mechanical ventilation a lot longer than whites on average. Now, of course, we don't know exactly why, but that's the case. fairness popping up at different universities. University of Pennsylvania has the science of Data ethics, and I've mentioned already this fairness in machine learning class at Berkeley. This is, in fact, one of the topics we've talked about. I'm on a committee that is planning the activities of the new Schwarzman College of Computing. The college obviously hasn't started yet, so we don't have anything other than this lecture and a few other things like that in the works, but the plan is there to expand more in this area. Peter Solovits: I got a call from a committee of the National Academy of Science, Engineering, and Medicine. He says they convened a meeting to talk about the set of topics that I've listed here. Solovitsch: They talked about AI and decision making, privacy and informed consent in an era of big data, science curricula for law schools, emerging issues, and science, technology, and law. The issue of using litigation to target scientists who have opinions that you don't like was also discussed.