you as well. We write the budget constraint as saying that your resources, your income Y, can be spent on either pizza or cookies. You can essentially devote your income to some combination of pizza and cookies, but you have to consider how much they actually cost in doing that. Now this class is not alchemy. We are not literally transforming pizza into cookies. That would be kind of cool, but we're not doing that, OK? But it's effectively doing the same thing. Be used to purchase food. So here's the question. Why go through this rigmarole? Why not just give people cash? This fancy thing, if we want to give poor people money, why don't you just give them money? And we're going to-- I don't want the answer yet, OK? What I want to do is show you graphically how we think about the trade-off. So hold your thoughts. Let's go to figure 3-5A. And let's start with a cash transfer. constrained optimization. Jonathan Gruber: People always get to the point that makes them happiest. He says if you force them to spend $500 on food, they must be less happy. GRUBER: Do people-- I don't want-- I just want to know if people understand the graphics here and the conclusions I drew. "This is not normative economics. It's positive. The positive thing is, given their utility function, they move from point y1 to y2," he says. stop there. We will come back on Monday, and we'll talk about how we actually go from this stuff to the demand curves we started the class with. Back to the page you came from. back to CNN.com home. Follow us on Twitter @cnnireport and @CNNOpinion. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more, go to www.cnn.com/lifestyle and www.dailymail.co.uk/lpin. Jonathon Gubler: What stops people from bingeing on everything? It's their budget constraint. Gubber: Weight Watchers sets up a budget constraint and asks you to follow it. He says they essentially assign point values to every good you might consume. GUBER: They say, if you want to achieve a weight loss of x over y days, then you've got to limit yourself to z points. The point system is better than dieting, he says, because people like to have choices.