The goal is to understand solar cell conversion efficiency, which is the ratio of output to input energy. For most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. After we get through the fundamentals, we'll be in a good position to understand the different technologies and finally the cross-cutting themes. The lecture will focus on charge separation, incorporating elements of either side but mostly focused on Charge separation. The final lecture will be on the diode under illumination. Solar cell researchers often do is they say, OK, let's normalize the current by the area to get a current density. At the y-intercept, there is maximum current a lot of it, right? That's the maximum power point. This is the point at which the solar cell is producing the maximum amount of power output. It's where this blue curve reaches a maximum. That is where the solarcell is outputting the maximum Amount of Power. The maximum power is truth in advertising. point divided by the solar insulation, fill factor being defined as the ratio of Vmp Imp product divided by Voc Ioc product. These parameters right here are fairly easy to measure using the solar simulator that you just put together. And so from an engineering point of view, when we break the solar cell output down into these three parameters so that we can better understand what's going wrong with our solar cell, we can get a better idea of what's wrong with the device, the professor says. pay more for a high-efficiency cell because I'm using less area, you can use this type of calculation to get to the answer quickly. This is a really back-of-the-envelope envelope engineering approach to estimating costs of a solar system. So I think this is a great place to stop. And if anybody has an idea, a fun idea, for a class project, I'd invite you to give a pitch up here at the front of class, or you're welcome to send it on an email to the class listserv. The total system efficiency is the product of each individual component going on here. When we reverse bias our device, notice the separation of the quasi-Fermi energies. As the barrier height decreases, we have a decrease of the built-in electric field. That's why the depletion width decreases. And the opposite happens here under reverse bias. So getting to the point where you can set up a pn-junction dark, this is the only case in which we have carriers traveling from right to left. And it's happening because we're using that battery in the dark to change the chemical potential.