In 1951, the first nuclear reactor to produce electricity was the experimental breeder reactor, the EDR1. In 1953, President Eisenhower, he created something called atoms for peace. The first nuclear powered submarine, the USS Nautilus, was launched in 1954. The real heyday of nuclear was between 1960 to 1975, when there was a huge commercial energy boom. Today, China, India, and South Korea, they are the main players in this game. The main players are still, you would imagine, coal. About what I've mentioned? Awesome. So now we'll talk a little bit about reactor types. I'll just tell you guys about some of the main ones and how they work. How people like to divide up the reactor types is in generations. So boiling water reactors, or BWRs, comprise about 21% of the reactors that are located and working in the United States. PWRs are actually more important, if you will, than B WRs. But they are functionally essentially the same, and it's just slightly more complicated. These accidents. like you probably know that they exist, but like what happened during them? So if you do know, sorry, but if you don't know, you're about to know. So Three Mile Island, which is the first one, it happened in 1979 on March 28. So the core melted down, the reactor wasn't able to operate anymore. The next reactor accident that we were alive for, which was cool, was Fukushima Daiichi. So these reactors, I think these are pressurized water reactors. The main way of disposing of the spent fuel is putting it into spent fuel pools. This is an OK solution, except for the fact that we just have way too much spent fuel to be able to do this. Dry cask storage is a way to keep this spent fuel surrounded by an inert gas. repurposing is one other way of dealing with nuclear waste, which I think is the coolest option out of the bunch. is CNN Tech's weekly, offbeat look at what's happening in the world of nuclear power. NRC.gov with less grains of salt than usual. Or if one of these things really piqued your interest, you guys can take 22.04, which is really cool class that's offered here I think this spring, and if not next spring. But basically it's called nuclear power society. It's taught by a guy named Scott Kemp. He talks about all these things and in a lot of detail and slower. So yeah, cool. So thank you guys so much for coming. I know you guys could have slept an extra hour. Ka-Yen: "I walked into MIT not knowing a single thing about nuclear energy" "Nuclear creates 75 times less carbon emission than coal does, and 35 times less than natural gas" "You get 3.5 million times more energy than burning one kilogram of coal" "It can serve as a good baseload source of energy." "It might be better for the environment, but it's not really able to replace all coal and all the other forms of energy"