eigenvalue equation. This is the result of acting on phi with the energy operator, and this is the energy eigenvalue. Cool? So, the upside here is that when we have a central. potential, when the system is rotationally. invariant, the potential energy is invariant under rotations. Then the energy commutes with the angular momentum squared. And so, we can find common eigenfunctions. When we use separation of variable, the resulting energy eigenevalue equation becomes nothing but a 1D energy eigs equation. would've got the same equation. And that means that the energy eigenvalue can depend on l, but it can't depend on m, right? So, that means for each m in the allowed possible values, l, l minus 1, [? i ?] minus l-- and this is 2l plus 1 possible values-- for each of these m's, the energy is the same. And so, here we have a degeneracy. And this degeneracy isn't fixed by rotational invariance. And why is this the right thing? Rotational symmetry? The form of this differential equation is, OK, it's not different in any deep way, but it's a little bit easier. As rho goes to infinity, which terms dominate? Well, this is not terribly important. That term is gonna dominate. If l is equal to 0, then this is the only term that survives, so we'd better make sure that that behaves gracefully. So, this tells us, having done this in analysis, we should write that rho to the l plus 1 times e to the minus root epsilon rho times some remaining remaining terms. nice bit of experimental data, but we've discovered the energy is, in fact, not just independent of m, but it's independent of l, too. Why? What symmetry is explaining this extra degeneracy? We'll pick that up next time. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to reads the rest. Back into the pageYou can now read the full article on this site. Professor: Imagine take a magnet, a little, tiny bar magnet. If you have a gradient of a magnetic field, then one end a dipole-- one end of your magnet-- can feel a stronger effective torque then the other guy. So, you can get a net force. And that force is going to be proportional to how big your magnet is. And if the force is proportional to the strength ofyour magnet, then how far-- if you send this magnet through a region, it'll get deflected in one direction or the other.