Professor: If we start out with all 0, 0, and then one mutation [INAUDIBLE]? And if that mutation-- are we assuming that that mutation is 0, 1 and then figuring out how to fix it? Professor: You have to keep track of lots of different things, and which regime we're in and so forth. If you had one copy of each of these two mutant individuals in the population, that's the answer to what is the probability that this0, 1 mutant would fix in thePopulation. syllabus that I mentioned. I think the most important thing to stress when thinking about evolutionary game theory is just that this point that we don't need to assume anything about rationality. Instead, you simply have mutations that sample different strategies. And then you have differences in fitness that just lead to evolution towards the same solutions of the game. So it's evolution to the game solutions, so the Nash equilibrium, for example. And the more fit individuals spread in the population. And somehow, you evolve to the same or similar solutions. is indeed the Nash equilibrium. It's to do this strategy D that we're saying here. All right, now the question is why? And part of the challenge here is just understanding how to read these charts. Now, if you look at this chart, you say, well, gee, that is a shame. Because 1 is just not the biggest number you see here. And indeed, the important point to note here is that if both players had followed this strategy C for cooperate, D for defect, then both individuals would be getting fitness 3. So the problem here is, it's always better to play D. are lines. But you can imagine that the only thing that's important are how these lines cross each other. So for example, there are only a few different things that can happen. You can have one strategy that dominates, which is what occurred here. And surprisingly, that does not mean that that strategy is higher fitness, in the sense that you may evolve to a state of low fitness. That's what's weird. YouCan have coexistence, or you can have bi-stability. not the definition of that. But this thing is true, which means that it's a Nash equilibrium. And if you have questions about this, I'm happy to answer it. It's explained in the book as well. We are out of time, so I should let you go. But good luck on the exam next Thursday. If you have Questions and you want to meet with me, I am available on Tuesday. So please let me know. I'll be happy to talk to you. Professor: "We're going to start with a short review problem on rugged landscapes" "Then we'll get into the core topic of the class, which is evolutionary game theory" "We'll discuss why it is that you don't need to invoke any notion of rationality," he says. "And we'll say something about the evolution of cooperation and experiments that one can do with microbial populations in the laboratory" "And then we'll discuss the situations when we have to worry about that, and when we don't, and so forth"