The average value of a squared is equal to the sum over all possible ages of a times the ratio of Na to N. The average of the square of ages is the same thing. The expected value of some function of a is equal-- and this is something you don't usually do-- to the value of f of a, times the probability that you measure that value in the first place. It's a very useful relation. And so, again, does the average have to be measurable? No, it certainly doesn't. average value of a squared is not equal to 0. And that's because the squared has everything positive. So how do we characterize-- this gives us a useful tool for characterizing the width of a distribution? So here we have a distribution where its average value is 0, but its width is non-zero. And then the expectation value of the squared, the expected value of an a squared, isNon-Zero. This is going to be like our uncertainty. Well, I'm not sure. How unsure are you? Well, that should give us a precise measure. In quantum mechanics, the uncertainty is the square root of the standard deviations squared. Different probability distributions are going to give me different delta a's. When you write delta a, there's nothing in the notation that says which distribution you were talking about. In a physical system, the expected value of x depends on what the state of the system is, what the wave function is. So there are a quantum mechanics. And this has a different flavor. It carries different implications, and we'll see what that is later. The probability of having that momentum times momentum, right? Everyone cool with that? This is what you mean by probability. But we need to know if we have a quantum mechanical system described by state psi of x, how do we get the probability that you measure p? Do I want to do this now? Yeah, OK I do. And we need a guess. We made a guess at the end of last lecture that, in quantum mechanics, this should be dp minus infinity to infinity of the Fourier transform. This is what we're after. We want some good definition of p given that we're working with a wave function which is a function of x. If I take a state, psi of x, which is equal to e to the ikx, this is a state that has definite momentum h bar k. A state with a definite momentum has the property that, when you hit it with the operation associated with momentum, you get back the same function times a constant, and that constant is exactly the momentum we ascribe to that plane wave. your memory. Gainst death and all oblivious enmity shall you pace forth. Your praise shall still find room, even in the eyes of all posterity. So no judgment arise till you yourself judgment arise. You live in this and dwell in lover's eyes. May your day be filled with love and poetry. Whatever state you're in, we will always love you. Signed, Jack Florian, James [INAUDIBLE]. [LAUGHTER] PROFESSOR: Thank you, sir. The configuration of a particle is given by, or described by, a wave function psi of x. In 3D, the wave function would be a function of all three positions x, y and z. If there are two possible configurations the system can be in, it's possible to find the system in a superposition of those two psi is equal to some arbitrary linear combination alpha psi 1 plus beta psi 2 of X. The superposition principle is an important challenge for us in the next couple of lectures.